Story_ID: 169499
Speaker 1: Okay, we're ready to start.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Helen Newberry McDowell, spelled, H-E-L-E-N, N-E-W-B-E-R-R-Y, M-C-D-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 28th, 1903, Abingdon, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, Abingdon, Virginia, okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) my occupation was teaching school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're retired now, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, been retired since '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today date?  July 30th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home at 1915 - 16th Street, Northwest, Apartment 302.
Story_ID: 169500
Speaker 1: Ma'am, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  And they just require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite what?
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say.  I guess bread.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: September 28th (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, Los Angeles (unclear) Los Angeles or California, anywhere in California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is, "If a task is once begun, never leave it until it's done.  Be the labor great or small, do it well or not at all."
Story_ID: 169501
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother and your father, but I'm gonna start with your mother.  So can you give us her full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lucy Caroline Ellison.  And Lucy, L-U-C-Y, C-A-R-O-L-I-N-E, E-L-L-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what was her birthdate and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Cleveland, Tennessee.  Her date of birth, June 13th, eighteen--now, wait a minute.  I'm gon' have to think a minute.  I know she married and (unclear) when she was twenty-two.  And she married in '99 [1899], so she had to be seventy-seven, seventy-seven--let me see, September--nineties.  Now, wait a minute now.  She must have been seventy--wait just a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She married in '99 [1899].  She was twenty-two when she married.  She was born 1877.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Eighteen seventy-seven [1877].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now, ma'am, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know very little.  She was an orphan.  There were thirteen children in her family.  And her mother died when she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: Other than Grandma Caroline, the one--she reared my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was she like?
Speaker 2: I don't, I didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You didn't know her?
Speaker 2: I didn't know her.  I just know of her.  I don't know--I never knew her personally.  I never knew any of her people other than a great niece.  Her name was Gladys Osman.  She lived in Cleveland, Tennessee.  And Gladys visited me here in Washington [D.C.] back in, I think it was 1950-something, when I met her.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, ma'am, did your mother tell you any stories about your family history at all?  Did she tell you stories about her grandmother or any of your other relatives back then?
Speaker 2: She, no, not necessarily.  She was--her grandmother died, when her grandmother died, one of her uncles took her in.  He was a minister.  His name was Frank Donahue.  And he passed in Abingdon, Virginia.  That's how I (unclear) to live in Abingdon, Virginia.  And he sent her to school at Boys Town, Tennessee.  And that was Morristown Normal Industrial Institute at that time, and became Morristown College [Morristown, Tennessee] later [later renamed Knoxville College-Morristown Campus and closed in 1994].  And he kept her in boarding school.  She was--and they had, the school went from elementary through high school.  And that's why he sent her down there.  And his wife, all I ever knew about her, her name was--she was a, my mother would call her Aunt MT.  I don't know what her real name was.  But she didn't care for my mother.  And that's why she spent her time in boarding school.  And she'd go home during the summer, but it wasn't a pleasant vacation for her at all.  And she worked all during the summers as a little girl even and just to be with, out of the house.  Her life wasn't a happy one at all.  Uncle Frank kept her until she finished high school at, down at Morristown and, in '98 [1898].  No, it wasn't, the spring of ninety--yes, she finished in '98 [1898].  And she started teaching school in September of '98 [1898].  And her school closed because of snow, (unclear) she taught in--I can't think of that.  It wasn't Galax, Virginia.  [pause] Tazewell, Virginia (laughter).  She taught in Tazewell, Virginia.  And there was a snowstorm in February of '99 [1899], and she went home 'cause the school was closed.
Story_ID: 169502
Speaker 1: What--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And she [Lucy Ellison Newberry] had met my father [Samuel Newberry] in the meantime.  And, but she was engaged to be married to a fellow she met at Morristown [College, Morristown, Tennessee].  His name was Will Young.  He lived in Knoxville, Tennessee.  And she was engaged to Will Young.  But while she was at home--my father had four sisters.  And two of them went to Morristown.  She knew them very well.  And through them, she met my father, who was their brother.  And my father insisted on my mother marrying him while she was home during that snowstorm.  And she didn't want to marry because she wanted to go back to school.  And he told her that wouldn't interfere with her going back to school.  And she broke her engagement and married my father.  And when the school opened, and they sent for her to come back, my father wouldn't let her go.  And she never got over it.  I think that's the reason I became a teacher (laughter).  I filled out my mother's dream.  And she married in February the 23rd of 1899.  And 1900, February the 5th, her first child was born.  And June the 2nd, 1901, the second child was born, and September the 29th, 1902, the third child was born.  They were boys.  And because she didn't have any girls, she gave up.  She was hoping the second one was gonna be a girl and was sure the third one was gonna be a girl.  And for the fourth one, she didn't care what it was as long as it was a healthy child.  And that's when I was born, September 28th, 1903.  My brother lacks a day of being a year older than I (laughter).  And she had fourteen children.  The last one was born in 1917.  She had eight boys and six girls.  And I never thought about it until the other day I was reminiscing.  She had three boys and a girl.  Then she had three girls and then three boys (laughter).  It just (unclear) that they came like that, and then two boys.  The last two were boys.  And all of us, it was a great family.  My mother was a teacher, and she taught all of us.  We didn't go to school to learn anything that you learn in first, second or third grades 'cause all of were reading, writing.  And everything she taught us, she would see to it that we learned it forward and backwards (laughter).  I've been knowing the alphabets forward and backwards all my life.  I've been knowing multiplication tables, one through twelve, forward and backwards all my life.  She just, she always kept us busy, teaching us something.  She'd take a word, and always giving you a prize.  She used to make gingerbread.  And whoever could make the largest number of words out of one word, got the largest piece of gingerbread.  And, you know, I've been thinking, that was good discipline.  That kept us in her sight, doing something constructive.  She didn't have to worry about where we were, what we were doing or anything else.  I mean we were big children.  But she never had to wonder where we were.  We were always somewhere around her, and she was always teaching us.  You memorized everything coming and going.  But I was, I guess it was, not more than--no, I was in Sunday school.  But I memorized, "I live for those who love me, whose hearts are kind and true, for the Heaven that smiles above me, at the good that I can do."  Everything she taught us had something good in it that, you could live by from day to day.  I've been thinking about those things all my life.  They meant so much to me.  I have never got away from her training, and I can't get away from her training to save my soul.  My father was a Methodist minister.  And we grew up in a religious situation.
Story_ID: 169503
Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Samuel Fletcher Ellison, S-A-M-U-E-L, F-L-E-T-C-H-E-R, E-L-L-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His place of birth was Abingdon, Virginia.  His date of birth was February the--I think the 8th.  Now, wait a minute.  They married the twenty-third.  His date of birth was the twenty-seventh.  Now, I got to figure his--he was seven years older than my mother.  He must have married in eighteen--he must have been in 1870.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay, now, what about his side of the family?  How much do you know about his side?
Speaker 2: Very little.  I knew his father.  I saw his mother just one time as far as I could remember, and I was in his arms then.  He carried--we called that "down home".  That's where he was born.  And we always call it down home.  He carried me down home one Sunday afternoon.  And his mother came out to the gate with us as we were leaving.  I know I wasn't maybe two years old.  I doubt that I was two years old.  But she was more Indian.  I don't know, she was, I started to say half Indian.  But it seems that her--Grandma Claire, let me see.  I don't know whether--one of her parents was full-blooded Indian.  And the other one, I don't know now whether it was her mother or father.  And the other one was half Indian, had a--her mother was a white woman and her father--her grandmother, my great grandmother was a white woman.  And my great grandfather was an Indian.  My grandmother was--my grandfather was a black man.  And my grandmother was a woman of Indian accent--I mean descent.  But she was more than half Indian because she was more than, her parents were both--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --half Indian.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean one of 'em was half Indian.  But at any rate, I remember this pretty round face and she had beautiful long hair.  That's all I can remember about her.  And, about my grandfather, I was about eight years old when he died.  I knew him well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew--he had three sisters.  I knew them.  And he had, he had (laughter), that seems like a way--'cause I lived in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  And she used to come to visit during the summer.  And my Aunt Serena was part Indian.  She was married to a white man.  They lived in Abingdon way out on West Palace [ph.] Street.  And I remember her well.  She was my grandfather's sister.  She--I don't' know what--they called it Rheumatism then.  We call it arthritis now (laughter).  But she couldn't sit down.  She stood up on crutches most all the time.  And she had a high chair she would lean over.  And there was another one, Aunt Adeline, that's my grandfather's sister, lived in Abingdon.  And she had three daughters.  And one of them was my fourth grade school teacher.  And when I went to school, I could read and write, and I knew my multiplication tables.  I knew arithmetic, adding and subtracting and even the long division.  And she put me in the fifth grade math class.  And they were doing long division.  And I, I knew long division.  And with--my school didn't go any further than sixth grade.  And we didn't go to school but six months.  And after that, there was no more schooling, and the children--not any more school, had to go off to school.  And I just couldn't bear the idea of not going to school anymore.
Story_ID: 169504
Speaker 1: And my aunt, when I was nine years old, they moved to--that was in 1912, not my aunt, my cousin.  She was my second cousin.  She was my father's first cousin.  That's my great aunt's daughter.  They moved to California.  And her brother moved first.  He went in 1911.  And then he sent for his sisters.  And two of the sisters went, and one of them stayed at home with her mother.  And then the other sister and her mother went.  And they never did go back home.  And I missed them so much.  I--they wanted to take me with them, and mama said I was too young to leave home.  I was nine years old.  And she wouldn't let me go.  And, but I kept in touch with them.  And when I married--I married in 1925, in 1934, my husband and I went on a vacation.  And we went to Los Angeles [California], and I saw my cousins (laughter), happiest day of my life.  And I loved Los Angeles ever since.
Story_ID: 169505
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Did they tell any stories about, about the past?  And did they have any stories about slavery or the Civil War or any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No, I never lived around my father's people.  My father [Samuel Newberry] went off to school.  He went to Hampton Institute [later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And he finished there.  And, but he never talked, he never talked about his childhood.  I've never thought about that.  I know nothing about his childhood.  I know there were eight children in his family.  I knew all of his brothers and sisters.  And one of his sisters was my teacher.  She was hold back.  She had two daughters who were not interested in school, and I was interested in school.  And not any of my father's sisters and brothers had large families.  They had one or two children.  One brother had three children.  One sister had one child and one sister had two girls.  And one sister had one girl.  But my father had, was the only one who had a big family.  And we were poor, poor (laughter).  We were the poorest people in the world (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did your father do for a living when he graduated from Hampton--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He, he was a cook on the, section hand for a railroad, Southern Railroad [Southern Railway].  You know, the fellow that take care of the tracks.  They had, they lived in a, it was like a freight car, but it was fixed up like a dormitory place, you know.  And they would be stationed at different places and those people would work on the tracks (unclear).  And he cooked for them for a long time.  Well, the most attention--in the earlier days of my life, the most he did was cooking for--I knew he went to Florida with a white family he worked for there in Abingdon.  The man was, his name was Bell.  He was a baker, I mean a banker.  And my father cooked for that family.  They had a great big, brick house (laughter).  And poor Ms. Bell.  We lived down there in one of Mr. Bell's houses.  And he had a lot of horses.  He had one horse named Gimp who was a good horse.  He had another horse named Frank, who was mean horse (laughter).  And my oldest brother [Clarence Newberry] one day went in the stable, and took the feed (unclear) out of Frank's stall and put it over in Gimp's stall.  And Frank got mad, and he caught my brother by the shoulder, his teeth, pressed his teeth remained in his shoulder, and threw him back over in the stall.  I guess would have killed him, but Clarence managed to crawl up between that horse's feet.  And he couldn't kick him.  That's all that saved him.  But we were forbidden to go in those stables and around those horses.  But that's what Clarence did, and we didn't tell our father about it until we were grown (laughter).
Story_ID: 169506
Speaker 1: Now, what was it like to grow up?  What did the place look like?  And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  What do you remember from your childhood?
Speaker 2: I know we lived in a four-room--in Bell's place, we called it.  It was a four-room house.  There was a hydrant, the water--there was a hydrant out there on the, I think that hydrant was on the front porch, right by the step.  There was one step up to the front porch.  And one night the house caught on fire (laughter).  Somebody put--there was lamp sitting on the sewing machine.  And there was a cover out on the sewing machine.  And we were going to bed.  We always had family prayer before going to bed.  It was Monday night.  My father was at a lodge meeting.  When mama [Lucy Ellison Newberry] got through with the prayer, we always had a little verse we'd say.  I had one brother who never could get enough to eat.  And mama always said he had a tapeworm.  And, but we got ready to go to bed, mama had a little verse she used to say, "To bed, to bed said sleepyhead".  And she'd point out the one, whoever said, "I'm sleepy, let's go to bed."  Mama said, "To bed, to bed, said sleepyhead".  That'd be that one.  "No, no, said, slow.  Put on the pot said, greedy gut"--that's Carl.  "Let's eat before we go."  Every night, we'd go off to bed saying that.  And on our way to bed that night, somebody pulled--that cover on the machine had tassels on it.  And somebody pulled one of the tassels and pulled the lamp off of the sewing machine.  That's the only reason I have that lamp today.  There's a lamp on that commode, over there by the window.  That's what we used to see, but I keep that for old time's sake (laughter).  They pulled the lamp off of the machine, and the oil exploded and set the lamp on fire--I mean set the cover on that machine on fire.  And it went up and burnt the curtains.  And one of the boys pulled the curtain down, and he pulled it down.  Instead of throwing it out the door, he threw it on the floor, and that caught the rug on fire.  And (unclear) then the older brothers got the, went out there to this faucet (laughter), and got water and put the fire out.  And they wet the floor all over.  My father [Samuel Newberry] was at a lodge meeting.  And when he came home, he smelled something burning and said, "What's burning?"  Mama never did tell him.  She never did tell him what happened--
Story_ID: 169471
Speaker 1: One of your brothers or sisters caught the place on fire, and you were talking about--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, when papa [Samuel Newbery] came home, he smelled something.  But mama [Lucy Ellison Newberry] never did tell him what had happened.  And (laughter) that wet rug was on the floor.  Mama said she didn't know whether to take the rug up or take a chance on Papa not discovering that the rug was wet (laughter).  But when we got [unclear], mama was sick.  My mother died in April of 1931.  And during that spring, when we're sitting around there talking, and we talk about old times, you know (laughter).  And Papa said, I--and we mentioned the horse biting Clarence [Newberry] and about the fire and everything.  Papa said, yeah, I guess many things happened I never did know (laughter).  Mama said, well, it won't hurt now (laughter).  But we had a happy--we were a happy family.  And I look back on it now.  If people brought up children like we were brought up, you know, always doing something.  My mother did not allow us to be idle.  She'd say "Idle brain is the devil's workshop.  Get to doing something."  Everybody had a chore, and when we got through, we gathered around the table.  We had a round table.  And all of us would sit around that table.  We had a kitchen, didn't have a dining room.  And we were always learning.  We used to have to get--we'd get a prize for whoever (laughter) could guess [unclear] write down the largest number of words beginning and ending with the same letters.  Like "that", spelling "that", and just go, "noon".  And you couldn't use a book unless you used the dictionary 'cause then you'd be getting new words.  And my brother, who's a day older than I, had one word more than I had.  And my father was very prouder than me.  You know, he worshiped me.  He didn't want anybody ever to be ahead of me (laughter) in anything.  And he was going around the table checking the words.  And he said, "Ole honeybunch is coming up."  Now, he gave me a word. "Honeybunch" begins "h" (laughter) and put me in a tie with my brother.  Then for me to find another one, you know, in order to get ahead of my brother (laughter).  [unclear] thought about "honeybunch" (laughter), but we had a good time growing up.  When I started teaching school, that's one of things I used to have my students do, take a word and make as many words out of it as they could.  We take a word like "Constantinople".  First, we'd have to learn about Constantinople, learn everything you could about Constantinople.  Any word he mentioned, you'd have to learn all you could about that word.  That kept us busy.  Everybody had to--wasn't one person.  All of us, and I take a word like "Constantinople" and if I had slow learners, I'd use that as one of their exercises or take "immediately" and make all the words you can out of it.  And I let 'em use the dictionary 'cause that acquaint 'em with the dictionary.
Story_ID: 169472
Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, what was the name of the school that you attended, the grade school?  Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: My grade school, it was just called Abingdon Public School, Kings Mountain.  In Abingdon [Virginia], Abingdon was divided into two sections.  We had Kings Mountain [a neighborhood in Abingdon, Virginia].  The railroad tracks separated them, and Taylor's Hill [a neighborhood in Abingdon, Virginia].  I lived on Kings Mountain and went to the Kings Mountain School [Abingdon, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They just tore that building down recently, and I, and I have sister who has a picture of that school.  I wish I had it.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: You see you'd say I'm bragging if I say, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But I loved to learn.  That's all you went to school for.  My mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry]--that's what mother'd tell us all the time.  "You go to school to learn."  And when you come back home, she'd wanna know, what did you learn today.  I mean you had to say what you had learned.  And if you hadn't learned anything, something's wrong with somebody.  And I always went back home with knowing more than I did when I went, left home to go to school.  And that's what I, in teaching, I'd tell my students, "If you don't know more when you go out of this room than you did when you came in here, something's wrong with one of us, and we need to get together."  And I meant that.  They thought I was hard (laughter).  You go to school to learn.  Yeah, I was a good student.  I learned everything they teach and [unclear].  I don't care it was.
Speaker 1: Now, who were your favorite teachers in grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question.  Ms.--why did her name leave me?  Umph, umph, umph.  As well, as I know, Cousin Valerene [ph.] was my favorite teacher 'cause she--I was her favorite.  But she kept me moving so fast.  She--I was in the sixth grade, when I should have been in the second.  But I knew all that stuff those children were learning.  But they were learning, "Come on [unclear] the leaves said the wind one day, come along with me and play [unclear]?"  I learned that long before I went to school.  All those little ole things they, children learn down there, you know, mama had taught us.  Ms. Ellen Wiley (laughter), Ms. Ellen Wiley was my favorite [unclear].  She was just a good, a good person to be around.  I just loved Ms. Ellen.  And she has some grandchildren here now.  I'm inviting her third generation, great, great, great granddaughter to my 100th anniversary celebration.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's really [unclear].
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite, and, of course, Cousin Valerene was my favorite because she worked with me all the time, in and out of school.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Any of 'em (laughter).  I liked math.  Of course, English turned out to be my major.  But I--when I was in school, I liked math because you could go to the board and show off what you knew (laughter).  I loved math.  But I liked all the subjects.  But I went to English [unclear].  I had planned to get a Master's--I mean doctor's [doctorate] degree in education.  And so I got a Master's [degree] in Ed [Education].  But after my mother died in '31 [1931], well, no, I'll have to go back from there.  I went to, after I finished elementary school in Abingdon--I'm in the sixth grade, I went to Morristown [College, Morristown, Tennessee, formerly Morristown Normal and Industrial College].  And I went to Morristown because that's where my mother went.  And that's the only school she knew to send me.  She didn't want me to go to Hampton [Hampton Institute, Hampton Virginia].  My father wanted me to go there.  But my mother didn't.  So I went to Morristown.
Story_ID: 169473
Speaker 1: Now, there's an interesting story about my going to Morristown [College, Morristown, Tennessee].  I started to write a book in 1927, and I started with the time I was planning in my mind to go off to school.  I knew I was never gonna get to go off to school 'cause we didn't have any money.  But it didn't cost but $9.00 a month for a room, board, tuition, all of it at Morristown.  But we didn't have the $9.00.  And I had two brothers who were working in a salt mill up in Saltville, Virginia, which is about twenty-seven miles from Abingdon [Virginia].  And they knew that I wanted to go to school.  All the girls in Abingdon who were going to Morristown in September--I wanted to go, but it was no way for me to even think about it.  They were getting their trunks packed, get their clothes in it.  That's all they were talking about.  And in my head, that's all I was thinking about.  But I knew I wasn't gon' get to go.  So these two brothers who were working in that salt mill came home.  It must have been around the last week in August, sometime near the end of August.  They had $13.00 between 'em.  They walked from Saltville to Abingdon, 27 miles.  And they gave me that, they gave me their money.  It amounted to $13.00 from both of 'em.  And I got to go off to school.  I have been eternally grateful.  I can't get that out of my head.  I could never do too much for anybody in my family 'cause I always think about what they did for me.  I don't know where I would have been or what would have become of me if it hadn't been that they gave me that money.  And when the other girls went, I went too.  And the other girls had trunks, and the--I had a valise, a valise and so my brother had gone to, my oldest brother went to Knoxville [College, Knoxville, Tennessee] to live with my aunt and learn the printer trade.  My uncle was a printer.  That's Uncle Frank's brother.  Uncle Frank had three brothers who--he had--they weren't his brothers.  They were his nephews.  Now, wait a minute.  I've got these people mixed up in my mind.  Nah, this was Uncle Frank's brother.  Uncle Frank's brother whose name was Leonard, and, went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He finished in 1907.  Nah, he married in 1907.  Anyway, he, he worked at [the U.S.] Government Printing Office [later Government Publishing Office, Washington, D.C.], and when he--while he was in school at Howard.  And when he finished Howard, he lived in Knoxville, Tennessee.  And he went to Knoxville, and he and his brother opened up a printing office in Knoxville in 1913.  My brother was born in 1900.  When he was 13 years old, he had finished elementary school in Abingdon.  And my uncle sent for him to come to Knoxville and live with him and learn the printer's trade.  And he had a valise.  Mama [Lucy Ellison Newberry] packed his clothes in a valise.  And a valise was nothing [unclear].  I called it a box with a top over it, and it had two straps around it.  At any rate, when he went off, that's what he carried his things in.  And, when he came home one summer, he brought that valise back 'cause he had a suitcase.  And he brought mama's valise back.  When I went to Morristown--and mama carried that valise when she went off to school.  When I went to Morristown in 1917, I packed what I had in the valise (laughter).  And all the other children had trunks, you know.  They would [unclear], but my brothers carried my valise to the station.  And I carried it when I got to Morristown, from the station up to the school 'cause it wasn't that big and nothing in it.  But I got to go off to school.  And during that time--I was there the whole year.  I didn't go home at Christmastime.  I didn't write home for anything 'cause I knew my parent had nothing to send me.  And once a month, my mother would send me a box of goodies (laughter).  And she was a good cook, and my father [Samuel Newberry] was a good cook.  But other than that, I was no problem while I was in school.
Story_ID: 169474
Speaker 1: And I worked for one of the teachers.  I used to go down there and clean up her room, and did her ironing, and made a little extra money and bought my books.  And I always had a little change to do whatever I--they didn't give me but twenty cents or maybe fifty cents.  They give me fifty cents, I had a whole lot of money.  But at any rate, when time to go home when school closed, I had my railroad fare.  It wasn't but $2.00 and something.  But I had it.  And mama [Lucy Ellison Newberry] didn't have to send it to me, and I worked then that summer.  And I went back to Morristown [College, Morristown, Tennessee] that next fall.  And then the next year, I went to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] because during the summer, every time the mailman passed, I'd get a letter, and it'd always be from some little ole boy who was in school down at Bennett.  And mama said, she thought I was thinking more about boys than I was about books.  Mama said, "Your mind is on the wrong 'b' (laughter).  So she wouldn't let me go back to Bennett--I meant to Morristown.  And she sent me to Bennett.  And it was $12.00 a month to go to school at Bennett, but Bennett was in Greensboro, North Carolina.  But I went to Bennett and I worked for the president's wife in her home.  And I got along fine at Bennett.  And I finished high school from Bennett and then because I was--anybody who had a average above "B" in the junior year could take two courses in teacher training.  I meant, to take two years in teacher's training.  So I took those years of teacher training in my junior and senior high school years.  And when I got my high school diploma, I got a teacher certificate.  So in September of 1924 when I finished high school, I went to work at a teacher at Wilkesboro, North Carolina.  And I taught the third and fourth grades in a brand new Rosenwald school.  And Rosenwald was a rich, white anthropologist [Julius Rosenwald], who had gave his money to the development of the education for Negro children.  And we had a lot of the one-room school houses scattered all over everywhere, you know.  And in Wilkes County, they took all those one-room schoolhouses and made a central school in a central location.  And this school in Wilkesboro--I can't think of the name of that school.  But they had a, up at North Wilkesboro, they had a school, seemed like some church had a school in connection with the church.  And a lot children, the parents, didn't want their children to go down to this new school.  I don't know why I can't think of the name of that school.  But at any rate, we had twelve teachers.  It was a nice school.  And I taught the third and fourth grade.  And the children in my third-grade class couldn't read.  And I thought it was terrible.  They'd been the first and second grade and hadn't learned to read.  So I decided that I wasn't gonna teach.  I was going back to school and learn--get a degree so I could become a supervisor and go out there and put out all the teachers who weren't teaching children to read in the first and second grade (laughter).
Story_ID: 169475
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, ma'am, can we go back to college for a minute or to, now, you went to college at--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Now, where did you go to college again?  You went to--
Speaker 1: I didn't hear you.
Speaker 2: Where did you go to college?
Speaker 1: Oh, when I left Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --no, yeah.  The summer--
Speaker 2: You taught school after Bennett?  Is that what that is?
Speaker 1: After I left Bennett, finished at Bennett high school, before going up to Wilkesboro [North Carolina] in September, I went to Teachers College in Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College, later Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and took some courses in methods of teaching at Teachers College.  And I also took a course in the teaching of reading.  That was the subject that I used mostly in my meth--and the methods of teaching.  And that was, so I became orientated in the reading problem.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, what year was it that you finished Bennett College?
Speaker 1: I finished Bennett in '24 [1924].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In May of '24 [1924].
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: And I began teaching in September of '24 [1924].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, that's in Wilkesbury [ph.], right?
Speaker 1: In Wilkesboro.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: How do you spell Wilkesbury?
Speaker 1: W-I-L-K-E-S-B-O-R-O.
Speaker 2: Wilkesboro [North Carolina], okay.  All right, okay.  All right, so you decided after a year of teaching that you'd take some graduate courses in education--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1925, I taught in Bristol [ph.].  I didn't go back to Wilkesboro.  My mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry] wanted me to teach at home.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I taught third and fourth grade in the grammar school there in Bristol.  And then I got married in November of 1925.
Story_ID: 169476
Speaker 1: Now, when I went to--
Speaker 2: Now, well, where did you meet your husband?
Speaker 1: That's what I was fixing to say (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Here we go.
Speaker 1: When I left Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], I mean when I left Morristown [Morristown College, Morristown, Tennessee] and went to Bennett, I got in Greensboro [North Carolina] the 21st of September, 1920.  And they, they--I got there in the evening.  And the next day, we were going to lunch, and there was a group of boys standing back at the entrance to the dining hall, looking the girls over as they went in for lunch.  And there were five of us from my home.  And I was the last in the group of five.  And when I passed by, Newberry told a fellow standing next to him, he was gon' marry that little big-eyed one in the back one of these days.  He said, "One of these days, that little big-eyed one in the back is gon' be my wife."  And (laughter), when we got seated in the dining room, all five of us at the same table, and our roommate was at the table, one of the roommates was at the table with us.  They were there the year before.  And Newberry was there a year before I went there too.  And Newberry sat up at the head of the table.  And I sat over here on the side.  And the girl who introduced us was sitting over on the other side.  And she introduced all the girls around the table, and there was another boy sitting down at the other end of the table.  And when she introduced me to Newberry, he said, "Helen, do you like [unclear] scuppernongs [a type of muscadine grape]?"  That's the first word he uttered to me.  That's the first word I ever heard him say (laughter).  "Helen, do you like scuppernongs?"  I didn't any more know what scuppernongs was than the man in the moon.  Do you know what they are?  Well, how could I say yes or no, when I didn't know what they were?  And I said, "Seeing is believing," 'cause that fit anything (laughter).  He said, "I'm gon' send you some when I go home Sunday," said, "My father has a vineyard.  And scuppernongs are ripe now," and he asked Henry, the boy sitting down at the other end of the table if he would meet the train.  Newberry's brother worked on the trains.  And it ran from Greensboro to Raleigh [North Carolina].  And he said, "My brother will be through here Saturday on the"--the train was called the "Shoo Fly".  And he said, "Meet the Shoo Fly, and bring Helen, the package I'm gon' give you."  And it was a box of scuppernongs.  It's a form of grape but ten times better than any grape I ever at (laughter).  They were delicious.  And I fell in love with those scuppernongs, and as long as Newberry was bringing me, sending me scuppernongs, I would talk to him at the table 'cause it was something to talk about.  And he told me about his father and the vineyard and all.  And we became good friends, but he was more like a brother, you know.  I looked at, and I'd help him with his lessons (laughter) 'cause he wasn't the best student in the world.  I did all his math and all his English.  I did math for a whole lot of students 'cause the boys who worked in the dining room, the teachers' food was different from the students' food.  And the boys who worked in the dining room would always bring me some of the teachers' food if I helped them with their lessons.  So I always got good food (laughter) all the time I was in school at Bennett.
Story_ID: 169477
Speaker 1: But Newberry and I became real good friends, and for five years, we were good friends.  But when we finished, in our senior year, he asked me--no, no, no.  In our junior year, he asked me if I was planning to marry him when school closed.  No, what was I gon' do when school closed and we finished.  And I told him, I'm going to work as fast as I can 'cause I'm gon' save my money and go to college.  And he said, well, I wanna go to college too but he said--'cause I said, one of these days I'm gon' live on Easy Street.  He said, that's the same street I'm looking for.  And I turned around and looked at him (laughter).  I told him, I said, "You don't look like anybody that's looking for Easy Street", 'cause he didn't, to me, he didn't seem to be a thrifty person, you know.  If he'd get a nickel, he would spend it.  We had a social, and they sell ice cream.  Ice cream be five cents.  He wanna buy me some ice cream.  If I had a nickel, I wouldn't buy him any ice cream, and I wouldn't buy any ice cream for myself.  I saved my money.  But he always wanted to spend.  I could always tell if he had nickel.  And he was as poor as I was.  So I passed that off as nothing.  I, to myself, you'd be the last person I'd ever think about.  And he went to Bristol [ph.].  We moved to Bristol from Abingdon [Virginia] in 1922.  And Newberry went to Bristol to visit me in 1923.  And so that summer, and he asked my parents if he could marry me.  And my father [Samuel Newberry] said, "I don't know what you want with her?"  But said, you have my consent 'cause they liked Newberry.  He was a nice guy, he was, and my mama [Lucy Ellison Newberry] was crazy about him.  All my brothers and sisters loved him, everybody loved Newberry.  If you'd meet him, you'd love him too.  He was a nice guy.  And so, in '23 [1923] we were supposed to been engaged.  I wasn't thinking about getting married.  I had--marriage wasn't on my mind.  I was thinking about going to school.  And so in '25 [1925], I taught in--no, in--when school closed in Wilkesboro [North Carolina] in--that wasn't '25 [1925].  Yes, it was, in the spring of '25 [1925], Newberry was the college [unclear].  Bennett had two years of college, and Newberry stayed for the two years of college.  I left after high school.  And the college boys were giving a banquet, and Newberry invited me down for the banquet.  And he had planned to marry me at that time.  I think he had already asked my parents for me.  And they had consented.  And I said, no, no, no.  I said, my father gave his consent, but he said, whenever I walked and got married, he wanted to be a witness.  So Newberry had the license and everything ready for us to be married.  So that was no good.  So I told him, no, I said, I told him I had never disobeyed my father.  I wasn't gon' do it then.  So he came out in '25 [1925], and while he was there, he said, "Let's get married".  I said, no, let's wait until Christmas.  He said, I can't come back out here Christmas, and your father wants to be a witness (laughter).  And I forgot I had told that lie (laughter).  So I said, well, if we marry, we have to marry secretly 'cause I'm going to school, I'm going to college, and I'm not thinking about marriage until I finish college.  So we--the next day--that was November the 12th, Armistice Day, we got married.
Story_ID: 169478
Speaker 1: He married in my house at Bristol [ph].  Our pastor wouldn't ride in a car, and Newberry after--he, since we were married secretly, all my brothers and sisters, the younger ones, were at home.  The older boys went to a football banquet that night.  They got them out of the house.  We didn't marry till ten o'clock 'cause Newberry took all my younger brothers and sisters upstairs.  He told 'em my mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry] had a headache and wanted to be quiet and for them to go on upstairs and go to bed so they wouldn't disturb her.  And they obeyed him (laughter).  And when Reverend Forrest came, the house was quiet as a mouse.  And he came in, and he said, "Well, well, well, I am surprised."  I told him he wasn't half as surprised as I was.  I wasn't even thinking about getting married, but he came on in, and we married with my mother and father as witnesses.  And when he left, Newberry went with him back to the parsonage.  And he came back home.  And he said--my mother, oh, he rang the doorbell, and I went to the door.  I said, the door was open.  Why didn't you come on in?  You know, the people weren't locking doors then.  And he said, "I expected my wife to open the door for me when I came back."  And he said, I will be expecting her to do that from now as long as life last."  And, you know, he did not carry a key to the house for over twenty-five years.  Every time he came home, I opened the door and let him in.  And we lived together for fifty years.  We married in '25 [1925]; he died in '75 [1975].  Great life.  Everybody who met Newberry loved Newberry.  I miss him (laugher), hate to think about it.  But we--the first year we were married, we taught school together at his home in Liberty, North Carolina.  He was a principal.  I taught all the English (laughter) in all the grades.  They went to the eighth grade.  And my subjects were third--I mean I was supposed to be a teacher in third and fourth grade, but I taught English all the way through to the eighth grade--
Story_ID: 169479
Speaker 1: --and met his [Newberry, Helen McDowell's husband] mother and father.  Great people.  His mother was a white woman, and she had three white children, two girls and a boy.  And when the War [World War I, WWI] ended, and Newberry's daddy's mother was bedridden when the War ended.  And he needed somebody to take care of his sick mother.  And Newberry's mother needed somebody to take care of her three orphaned children.  Her husband was killed in the War.  And I think daddy was fifteen or sixteen years old, and somebody told him about this woman who was looking for somebody to take care of her children.  And they had a farm.  And they had a vineyard.  His mother started a vineyard in a shoe.  She planted a scuppernong vine in a shoe.  And from that scuppernong vine--that was in the forty-something [1840], they had 250 grape vines, and arbors and scuppernong arbors on the farm.  I think it was twenty-some acres.  And so daddy needed somebody to come up to take care of the farm, and he got, hitched up his buggy one Sunday and went down to Yadkins, Yadkinville, North Carolina, right on the river and found this lady with these three children, two girls, two little girls and a little boy.  And he brought her up to Liberty, North Carolina.  Now, I don't know where they ever married.  I never heard anything about that.  But at any rate, they married, and when and where, 'cause he wasn't of age, and I don't know how--that's strange.  Come to think about, seems like she was younger than he was from what I've heard.  But at any rate, he took care of these children, and they had five boys.  And when her boy was sixteen, I think he was sixteen or seventeen--he was old enough to work, I know that, he went to Akron, Ohio and got a job in the Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company].  Somebody from down there, from Randolph County was going to, was soliciting workers for Goodyear, and he was one of 'em.  They went.  And his sister married a preacher, one of his sisters married a preacher and moved to, went to live in, not Asheboro, yes, it is, Asheboro, Asheboro, North Carolina, which is just nineteen miles from where she was living.  And the other sister, Mary, married a farmer.  I think he was nineteen years old when he married her.  And they lived there in Liberty [North Carolina], about four miles from where his mother lived--her mother lived.  And they had (laughter), I think, seventeen children.  And they all worked up there on that farm.  He ended up with, I think he had 250 acre farm, and he supplied Greensboro [North Carolina] with eggs and milk, cream.  They started cream separators there.  He became a very prosperous farmer.  And he has grandchildren who live here.  One of 'em kind of helps take care of me now.  But Newberry's mother--Newberry's father was killed by a hit-and-run driver when he was eighty-four in 1930.  And his mother didn't try to live after he died.  She died of double pneumonia in 1931, April of 1931, one week before my mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry] died.  We went to his mother's funeral one week, and my mother's funeral the next week.
Story_ID: 169480
Speaker 1: So, and so, well, what happened next?  Now--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What happened next though?  You were teaching school together, and he was the principal of the school,
Speaker 2: Oh, we left--
Speaker 1: --Newberry [Helen McDowell's husband], and you were teaching--
Speaker 2: After, we just worked there that one year.  And during the, all the time he was a student in school, he was a waiter on B and O [Baltimore and Ohio Railroad], dining car.  So he longed to get back on the dining car.  So he went back to the dining car, and I came to Washington [D.C.].  That was in twenty--no, we taught school down there the fall of '26 [1926] and the spring of '27 [1927].  And in the fall of '27 [1927], he went back to the dining car, and I, I went to Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina].  It was a girls' school then.  And I went down there one year, and I stayed with his people down in Liberty [North Carolina] 'cause it was just 19 miles and I commuted.  And we, we had a Ford Model-T.  We brought a Model-T Ford in the spring of '27 [1927], paid $225.00 for it brand new.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I stayed with his parents and went to school up in Bennett [North Carolina].  It was Bennett College for Women [Bennett College, North Carolina] that one year and commuted.  And that's when I started my book.  That was the best year of my life (laughter) (unclear) down there, that winter with them was so rewarding.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: It was just good to be there.  He was, he was turning white, you know, he had that, what'd they call it?  Dry leprosy is what they called it--
Speaker 1: Vitiligo, I think--
Speaker 2: Whatever.
Speaker 1: --I think that's the name of it.
Speaker 2: And he--they had five boys.  All of 'em were married, but not any of the daughter-in-laws cared for the mother and father-in-law.  They didn't get along at all.  And they couldn't understand how I got along with 'em.  But Newberry's daddy was a good ole man.  He couldn't read and write, but he could spell any word you pronounced correctly.  And he used to get up at two o'clock in the morning.  They had a fireplace, and he'd roast peanuts in the ashes, and bake a sweet potato in the ashes.  And he'd sit there and sing.  His favorite song was "Oh Thou, Ever Presence My Soul, Thirsty Light".  And I used to get up and sit before that fireplace and sang with him.  And I'd read to him.  He just loved for me to read bible stories.  And I'd read to him, and he enjoyed it so much.  He was a good ole man, and I just enjoyed being around him.  And he would sell grapes and figs and apples and pears and scuppernong, and he fixed 'em--I used to help him bag them.  And we put 'em in the wagon and meet the buses and the trains.  And, oh, and he sold pecans.  He had two pecan trees.  (Laughter) he didn't like for you to pick the pecans up off of the ground 'cause every time, you know, when the frost falls, they would begin to fall.  And they had a burrow, and he would put 'em in a jar, in half a gallon jars, take it down to the spring house as they fall, until they all ripened.  And then he would shake 'em and bag 'em and sell 'em.  And he sold 'em for forty-five cents a pound.  I don't care if other people was selling 'em ten cents a pound.  His were forty-five cents.  He sold every one he bagged.  And he would, we would bag the grapes and put one great, big bunch, blue concords on the outside, and if they were white grapes, he put a big bunch of white grapes on the outside, sell every one, and meet the train and the bus stops.  We never went back home with a grape, never went back home (unclear).  And he'd hide that money.  I never could find where he was hiding it (laughter).  All winter long, he sold pears and apples, and they had cellars.  You know, a cellar was dug in the ground, and they had doors, you know, you open the doors up and some steps.  You'd go down there to 'em, and that's where he kept fruit and vegetables in the winter, keep 'em from freezing.  And he would have stuff to sell all winter.  And that winter I was down there with him, I helped him sell everything he had.  Good, best year of my life (laughter).
Story_ID: 169481
Speaker 1: But at any rate, after that I went, in the fall of '28 [1928], I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I started--no, I had to withdraw in '31 [1931] 'cause my mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry] died.  My mother was sick, and I went home and stayed until she died.  And I didn't get back to Howard until September.  But after she died, she left six minor children under me.  She didn't ask me to take care of those children, but I knew she knew I would because she had brought them up to obey me.  I was the oldest girl, and when I'd go home in the summer from school, even after I married and all, she would--anytime the children wanted to do anything, they'd go ask her.  She'd say, don't ask me.  Go ask Helen.  Whatever Helen says is all right.  And they had learned--I think about how God was in all of that all along.  They had learned to seek me for advice.  They had learned to obey me, and they just looked at me as if I was their mother.  So when mama died, I realized these are my children, and I've got to take care of 'em.  So I told Newberry--everybody was asking me was I gonna stay at home and take care of the children?  But I was located in Washington.  I was going to school in Washington, at Howard, and I didn't wanna stop that.  I was, I had already got my Bachelor's [degree] and I would have had, got my Master's [degree] in June of '31 [1931], but I had to withdraw.  So I came on back.  I told 'em, no, I was going back to school.  And they said, what about the children?  I told 'em I had to pray on it, and that's just what I did.  I went to God about those children.  And the only thought that came to me was, keep 'em with you.  So I told my brothers and my father, I've got to take the children to Washington.  I said railroad fare is $13.00 per person.  I don't have it.  I had a bank account, but I was in school, and I was trying to save my money 'cause I wanted to buy a house.  And I had $192.00 in the bank.  But they didn't know I had a nickel.  So I decided I was gonna rent an apartment.  I had to get a large apartment because it, been eight of us, six of them and two of us.  So I asked each one of 'em, I asked my older brother--three brothers and my father what help could they give me.  One brother, "I'm married, got my family to take care of."  Another brother was gon' stay in the home place with my father, and he had two children.  My oldest brother lived in Knoxville [Tennessee].  He didn't have but one child, but he said he had his family to take care of.  So there was no help coming from any of them.  But show you how God works.  I came up by--next to my youngest brother was my favorite brother.  And I took Marvin [Newberry], and I said, Marvin, we going to--and this was during the, July.  I said, we're going back to Washington and find a place so that I can take the children back in September.  They'll be there when school opens.  And we came on back and found a place, and my brother was gonna work--no, he was going back to Knoxville College, to Knoxville, Tennessee to attend Knoxville College.  And the brother older than he, Newberry was gonna get him a job on B and O [Baltimore and Ohio Railroad] so that he can work.  So that left me the three girls and one boy.  So we went back to Bristol [unable to verify] and packed those children up, and show you how God works, Arlington Hall, was called Arlington College [ph.] then, was just opening up.  And one of my brothers worked at Arlington.  And another fellow from my home worked over there.  And they were coming back up in the car.  And Wendell, the guy who, the fellow who owned the car, he said, "Helen, I'll take some of the children in the car, and you won't have to pay and take 'em on the train."  And I said, okay.  So my brother who was gonna come back in the car, he said, I'll go back on one of the trucks that's carrying a surprise up to school, and one I'm gonna have.  That'll be room for another one.  So all of us came back in Wendell's car, and I didn't have to pay a penny for transportation.  I, I gave money for gas, and Wendell brought all four of those children up here.  It didn't cost me a thing.  And Newberry wasn't making but $55.00 a month, but he said, Hele, you have that $55.  I was going to school and working for a lawyer, and he--the lawyer wasn't paying me but a dollar a day (laughter), $5.00 a week.  But with the Lord's help, all the children enrolled in school in September.  And we lived comfortably and happily for the four years and all of 'em finished high school.  I bought a house, and I started teaching night school and summer school.  I got my Master's and a job teaching in--I had an offer from my doctor's [doctorate] degree at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  And it wasn't gon' cost me a penny, but because I had the children, I didn't have anybody to take care of the children.  I couldn't go on to Ohio.  And I had to give up getting my doctorate [degree], but I started working over at Morgan College [later Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], but I had to commute.  It was all right as long as the weather's nice.  But I couldn't do it in the wintertime, all that snow.  My first class was at nine o'clock.  But I had to get up at five [o'clock] in order to be in Baltimore [Maryland] by the time for my class at nine [o'clock].
Story_ID: 169482
Speaker 1: Now, before we leave Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I just wanted to ask you about Howard.  Who were some of the teachers there, and some of the people that you met at Howard University when you were there (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, my teachers were--they're all dead now.  Dr. Townsend was the head of Education and my inspiration.  He's the one that inspired me to get my Master's [degree].  And he assisted me with my Master's.  He--I got a fellowship through him, and I--it didn't cost me anything for that year that I was working on my Master's.  And my, he assisted me.  I had to send out a questionnaire.  We sent out 250 questionnaires.  And his office did all the questionnaires for me, the typing up of 'em, and the mailing out and all that.  His office took care of all that for me, didn't cost me a penny.  And I still say God is good.  God has been with me all my life.  He was my advisor.  And I did my practice teaching in undergraduate school in educational psychology under Dr. Townsend's influence.  He, he just was with me all the way.  And Dr. Holmes, another excellent teacher who was very inspirational, who--it looked like they just wanted me to succeed, you know.  And Dr. Sumner was my psychology teacher.  And he was a great inspiration when I was taking the educational psychology.  And he was a great help when I was doing my Master's thesis because I was working on, in the field of educational psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that it?  Are those main ones that, for Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're the ones who gave me a lot of assistance, and I had another, Dr. Washington, a lady teacher.  She was, she was kind, you know.  She, she was inspirational, but not from an educational point of view, more from--she helped me to adjust to different situations, you know.  In those days, it really was a matter more of who you knew than what you knew.  And I didn't know anybody.  And anytime any of them showed any interest in me at all, it was a great inspiration for me.  And Dr. Washington was that type of person.  She looked for me every day.  I knew you'd be here if nobody else was here, she'd say; very inspirational.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I shall never forget those people, no.
Story_ID: 169483
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said you had an offer at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and you couldn't take that one because you couldn't take the kids [Helen McDowell's orphaned siblings] with you?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You had an offer to go to Ohio State, but you couldn't go there because of the children, right?
Speaker 2: I had no one to care for the children, yes.  That was a good offer too.  It wasn't gon' cost me a penny.  That's why I say God's been with me all along.  He knew I had no money.  I told you in the beginning, the poorest person that ever been born.  But all these opportunities have come because God has been with me (laughter).  He's been with me--he's still with me.  I couldn't live here by myself today if it wasn't for Him.  And I know it.  Some days this whole places brightens up.  I wish they would it happen while somebody's here.  But people don't believe it when I tell 'em that, you know, but it happens.  I can see everything in here.  And I know God--that's the way God--I tell God, I say, you know--I know you're here, God.  I just talk.  But after--where was I?  These children wasn't no problem whatsoever.  They all gave me, they went to Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.].  And I told them, school is out at three o'clock.  I gave them fifteen minutes to get from First [Street] and "O" [Street] to 1902 Vermont Avenue.  That was at 10th Street, 10th and "T" [Street], 10th and Vermont come out right there.  And "T" Street was a little between "T" and "U" [Street] on Vermont Avenue when it come down through there.  Those children would run (laughter), they'd fall in that door.  But they'd be there.  I never one time had to wonder where one of them was, out of those four, three girls and a boy.  And my brother, he liked music.  He was a real musician.  He never did marry.  He lived with me until he died.  He died in, I think it was '71 [1971].  My sisters, whatever I said--I told them when I brought 'em here, "As long as you obey me, and don't give me any trouble of any kind, you're not gonna have any luxuries, but you will have the necessities of life.  That's food, clothing and shelter, and an opportunity for any kind of education you want.  That's why I brought you to Washington [D.C.].  I said, Washington is full of colleges and universities.  You can get any kind of education that you want, and it'll be no problem as long as you do what's right and give me no problems.  And they lived beautiful lives.  I didn't have one minute worth of concern about a one of 'em.  They had a time for everything.  And everything I said do in that time was done.  They had--on Fridays, they could either have Friday or Saturday for socializing.  They just had that one day.  Now, if they wanted to go to a movie, they would have to take Saturday and go to a matinee from three to five [o'clock].  And, of course, we had plenty of theaters then on "U" Street.  They could go to any theater on "U" Street they wanted to.  There was Dunbar, Lathan, Republican [ph.].  We didn't go to Howard [Theater] 'cause Howard had vaudevilles, but they could go to a movie.  It wasn't but fifteen cents.  And the matinee, I think it was ten cents.  And in the evening, it was fifteen cents.  But at any rate, they could go to a movie.  When the movie--three o'clock, they go.  Five o'clock, the show was over.  They weren't but two blocks from home.  I expected them in that house not later than ten minutes after five.  There's nowhere for you to stop.  And I said, you don't have to run.  You can walk.  But I didn't have to wonder where anybody was at ten minutes after five.
Story_ID: 169484
Speaker 1: Tell us about the conclusion of your education at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and what you did next?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: What you did after Howard?
Speaker 2: Oh, I taught, I started teaching school.  I taught one year over at Morgan [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I taught English at Morgan, and I had to commute so I wasn't able to continue over there.  And I started teaching night school and summer school here in Washington [D.C.].  I took the exam.  You had to, you know, take the exam and, to get appointed in the public schools.  But as I said, then, in those days, you could take the exam, but if they told you you didn't pass it, then you didn't get appointed.  Or if you passed it, they might not have had an opening for you.  And it looked as if--I still said it was a matter of who you knew and not what you knew that got you a job as well as anything else.  And I just didn't know the right people (laughter) to put me on a job.  So I had to take what I could do, you know.  So I, I, in fact, I called myself building up a reputation for myself which I did by teaching summer school and night school.  And I gave it my best, and--well, I finally got a, I was subbing out at Phelps [formerly Phelps Trade School, later Phelps Architecture, Construction and Engineering High School, Washington, D.C.].  And, well, all the, everywhere I worked, they thought I was a good disciplinarian.  And so, Mr. Tanner, who was the principal of Phelps, thought that I was good for the boys.  So he offered me a permanent position, and I accepted it, and I stayed at Phelps twenty-three years.  But I continued, I taught summer school and night school for thirty-two years.  But before I became, well, nah, even after that, I got, I did coaching.  And I coached a lot of students in reading.  I taught a lot of people to read.  And I also worked in real estate.  I had, I was a real estate sales person for thirty years and knew selling real estate.  I became, I was more interested in buying.  I couldn't sell for buying.  I'll put it that way.  Anytime I'd see a house, I'd want it myself.  And I ended up buying six houses.  And I operated rooming houses for over thirty years, and I--the main house I bought was 1902 Vermont Avenue--no, no, no (laughter).  That's where I brought, the children lived.  But the main house I bought was 2405 First Street.  And that became known as the Newberry House because it turned into--operated a wedding salon from over there.  And many people married and had, for twenty-four years I operated that wedding salon.  And many people married and had wedding receptions too and parties at that house.  And that was a beautiful house.  I really should never have sold that house (laughter), but I did.  The Alpha [Phi Alpha] Fraternity owns it now.  I sold it to the Western Foundation, which is an organization in the Methodist Church.  And they used it for students who want to continue their religious education while they were students at Howard.  And Howard had a lot of houses over in here that they, I mean (laughter), I'm thinking I'm on First Street, over in that area, that they used for students.  They had, I think about two Catholic houses up above my houses and a Baptist house across the street and Presbyterian house, a Canterbury house was right across from the other corner from me.  And then the Newberry House.  I kept students from the School of Religion.  I had, I could house seventeen students, and it started off, I had all students in the--they call it the Divinity School now.  They called it the School of Religion then.  And many of those ministers, it's been a long, it's over fifty years.  I started in '49 [1949] and I operated until '73 [1973].
Story_ID: 169485
Speaker 1: I'm still in touch with many of those ministers.  And one of 'em is--I went to his celebration, his forty-second celebration in Gainesville, Florida last year.  And he's coming to my hundredth birthday celebration this year.  But he was celebrating forty-two years of religious and community service in Gainesville, Florida.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Dr. Thomas Wright.  He has written five books.  One he dedicated to me, and the book is all about his staying at my home in, at 2405 [First Street, Newberry House].  And he has said many times over, it's through his help that he was able to remain in Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I mean through my help that he was able to remain in Howard that year.  He's never forgotten, beautiful.
Story_ID: 169486
Speaker 1: Did you know Howard Thurman?
Speaker 2: Did I know Howard Thurman?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Strange that you should ask.  Very, very well.  He was--Howard Thurman's wife was at Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] in '27 [1927], the year I went back there and it was a women's school.  Yeah, I knew Howard Thurman very well, very, very well.  And I've read many of his sermons and heard him preach many, many times.  I know a lot of his jokes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of the jokes?
Speaker 2: Well, one he told about the Haley's comet, when it came over in 1913.  He was a little boy.  And they used to have, when I was a child, they had medicine men would go around selling--they had a wagon, a hack is what they called it.  It wasn't a wagon, drawn by horses.  And they would sell herb medicines.  They called 'em quack doctors (laughter), them quack doctors.  They'd be selling their herb medicines and all, you know.  And they had a pill.  When he was coming--he came around, [siren] and they were saying that the tail of that comet was gon' touch--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were telling us about the medicine men selling--
Speaker 2: They were selling, it wasn't--they were saying that Haley's, the tail Haley's Comet was gonna touch the earth and everybody would be burned up.  And these quack doctors was saying, had a pill.  And they said if you bought that pill, they would not, you wouldn't be burnt up, that the Comet wouldn't come near you or something to that effect.  And Dr. Thurman said, they wanted their mother to buy some pills, and their mother wouldn't buy 'em.  And they kept waiting for her to go down to where this hack was where the medicine was being sold.  And she would not go, and they were just worried to death.  And so they knew they were gon' be burnt up that night.  And the next day, they were all living.  And they said, "Mama, aren't you gonna buy some of, pills so we won't be burnt up when the tail of the Comet hits?"  She said, "No, son.  I'm not gonna buy any pills."  She said, "I'm gon' wait for God to take care of us."  And so the next day, they were all alive.  So he knew that God took care of them, and from then on, it doesn't take a pill (laughter) to save you.  It takes God to save you.  I've been thinking about that all my life.  You stick with God, he sticks with you.  I remembered that from Dr. Thurman.
Story_ID: 169487
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And another one we had was Dean Mays [Dr. Benjamin Mays].  You ever hear of Dr. Mays?
Speaker 1: Yes, Dr. Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: Dr. Mays, what I remember most from him, his story was, he preached a sermon one Sunday.  And then he quoted [Robert] Browning.  Browning said, "Reach must exceed the grasp or what are the Heavens for."  Whatever, everybody's supposed to have a goal.  And we're always in the process of becoming, but we never arrive.  There will always be something that's just ahead of you, that you're after.  And I (laughter), the one thing that's ahead of me now is Heaven.  I, when I get to that, that'll be the end of it."  I thought that was good.  Those things have just stayed with me.  That's why I like, great minds can give you great thoughts, you know, and they help you through life.  They keep you living.  They keep you making adjustments, and all of life is adjustments.  You make adjustments, every day you make adjustments for something.  And if you've got something good, that helps you make an adjustments, it makes life beautiful.  I tell everybody, life can be beautiful, but you just have to work at it.  It's a struggle, but it's--comes out okay in the end (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what-
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) if you work at it.
Story_ID: 169488
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about Dr. [William Leo] Hansberry?  You knew Dr. William Leo Hans--
Speaker 2: I don't hear you.
Speaker 1: You knew William Leo Hansberry too, right?
Speaker 2: I still, see, if I don't turn this up--
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I don't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You knew William Leo Hansberry too, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Dr. Hansberry, when you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I never, I never took courses under Dr. Hansberry.  He was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time I was up there.  That's where I used him for his lectures.  I knew about him.  I knew how wonderful he was, but that was in the '60s [1960s] where all this emphasis was on African history.  And everybody was African orientated.  And that's why I had, and the boys would always ask me about--that's one of, another thing I liked about them.  They'd come home from school.  Whatever had interested them and what they were doing over there that day, they'd come home, and they'd wanna talk about it.  And we used to gather in the kitchen, in the dining room and talk about whatever was of interest, you know.  And they mentioned Dr. Hansberry, and what he was saying about African history.  So somebody suggested one day that--they told me that he lectured from slides.  He said, Ms. Newberry, we can set up a assembly room and use the dining room and said, you can put a sheet across the wall, and he can be--my living room was up front.  And the dining room was at the back.  And it opened up into each other and we had slide doors there, you know.  And he said, we can make this into a assembly room, and you can have him come over and lecture to us some time.  That was a good idea.  So I asked him.  He gladly consented.  And he would come, with 200, 250 slides, and he had a boy to operate 'em.  And he'd stand back there and lecture.  He had the screen up front, two hours.  He talked just as fast as he could talk and showed pictures of everything he was talking about.  Beautiful, educational.  That's (unclear), and then when, during Negro History Week, I have a photo--I was teaching night school.  I'd have him come down to night school and lecture to my night school students.  Of course, we all went to the assembly, the whole school, went to the assembly and listened to the lecture.  Excellent, excellent.  Everybody wanted him to come back every year.  Of course, he didn't come every year, but when he had an opportunity, he would come.  He never said, no.  That's what I liked about him.  He was just into what he was doing.  And he just couldn't talk enough about it.  Great man, great man, full of knowledge.  I mean his was first-hand knowledge, 'cause he followed archeologists and he went into those places that they had opened up.  And he knew first-hand what he was talking about.  It really made him great.
Story_ID: 169489
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other people that you met in [Washington] D.C. in the educational field that you can tell us--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, there was Dr. [Ernest Everett] Just, and Just was a great philosopher (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is Dr. Ernest Everett Just [biologist]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Ernest Everest Just?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and he was a Rhodes Scholar, you know.  He was very scholarly.  He was--that was when I first began to hear about Rhodes Scholars and (unclear).  And he--and I'll tell you another one was--I know his name.
Speaker 1: Frazier [Dr. E. Franklin Frazier], are you talking about Dr. Frazier?
Speaker 2: I know Frazier and as of now, I've read several of Frazier's novels and had Frazier to, to review the--(laughter) review one of his--I went to, what was that we had?  A tea up at the library.  And Frazier reviewed, what's that, "The Other Tenth"?
Speaker 1: "The Talented Tenth"?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It was another one.  He just reviewed it there orally.  It wasn't "The Talented--but, and there was, oh, yes.  I'm trying to think of--I can't think of his name now.  The guy who started "Negro History Week".  What was his name?
Speaker 1: Dr. Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Couldn't think of Carter G. to save my soul (laughter).  I, (unclear), he was another good one, historian.  Very good, very inspirational, very knowledgeable.  I like to talk with people who have something to talk about and he was one of them.  He just talked, and you'd just sit and listen and just want him to keep on talking, you know, very inspirational, very knowledgeable.
Speaker 1: Now, you were member of--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --of the many organizations that you were a part of, you were a member of the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, right?
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I never was much of a joiner.  You know, everything you join, they want money.  And I never had any money.  It took all my money to live, and I stay clear of people begin to talk about this, that and the other.  I just--that has kept me out of, out of Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] Alumni.  It's too much money involved, you know.  They give affairs, and the ticket's $500.  I'm not gon' pay $500 for a ticket; give a breakfast, the tickets $250.  I'm not--(unclear).  I'd rather give my money to some poor family who's struggling like I had to struggle.  I've given a lot of money away.  But I don't, I give, I give to the [United] Negro College Fund.  I give to Habitat [for Humanity], I give, I give Habitat all the time.  I give Habitat at least $5,000 every year.  And I give Negro College Fund, I give to the [American] Red Cross, 'cause the Red Cross, I give (unclear) nothing, but I give a lot of money in those kind of organizations because they're helping people.  They're doing things for people, and in spite of they have overhead.  You know they're doing things for people.  But when it comes to some of these research organizations, I know they need money, and I know, you know, a lot of people are in 'em because that's their living and all.  Like cancer research, this long thing, the heart fund, all of those.  I don't give for them like I do to people who are housing people, feeding people, you know.  To me (laughter), and I say, "to each his own" because you may not agree with what I do, and I may not agree with what you do.  So I just say, "to each his own".  You do what you wanna do; I'll do what I wanna do, 'cause I see things from a different point of view from what you see.  It's all right for you to do what you're doing.  I don't knock that.  But don't knock what I'm doing 'cause I feel it's all right for me to do what I'm doing.  And for that reason, I'm not a joiner.  I don't join.
Story_ID: 169490
Speaker 1: Now, you know [HM] Dorothy Height, right?
Speaker 2: Dorothy?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Been knowing her for years, many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us any stories about Dorothy Height?
Speaker 2: Well, Dorothy is a good worker in the federation of negro women.  And when I lived in North--in Los Angeles [California], I used to go to her--I don't know what she calls that affair.  What is that?  That big thing she gives every year?  She gives 'em all over everywhere.  And I go to those kinds of things that she gives and support 'em, but I don't support the federation anymore because I'm with the National Council [of Negro Women, NCNW], and there's a great overlapping.  And I just think, you don't keep spreading.  I think when you--(laughter) you can't do but so much.  And it's no need in trying to be--some people just like for their names to be somewhere.  I like to do something wherever I am.  If I can make a contribution, I don't care whether you know my name or not.  If I can make a worthwhile contribution to an organization or to somebody, I don't care, but I just don't follow like some people, a whole lot of organizations.  I used to be in the federation, but when Mary McLeod Bethune was living, I worked with her, and I worked down at the [Mary McLeod Bethune] Council House [Washington, D.C.] when they got him, (unclear) Logan Circle [Washington, D.C.].  And I just stopped after so long 'cause I (unclear), just so much.  I got so involved in what I'm doing.  I just couldn't do but so much.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of Mrs. Bethune you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a whole lot of memories of Ms. Bethune 'cause I know a lot of things she's said and done.  And Ms. Bethune was, like I am.  She came along when times were hard.  But she worked in spite of it and succeeded.  And she became a great friend to Ms. Roosevelt [First lady, Eleanor Roosevelt].  I think that's one of the most inspiring phases of her life, was her connection with Ms. Roosevelt because it helped to put her in the spotlight.  Just like, I think if, of course, nobody ever mentions or thinks of him, but so far as I'm concerned, George Washington Carver stood out there by himself and but a greater man never lived.  But people don't know it.  They don't think about it.  I'd say next to Jesus.  Carver is the greatest man who ever lived on earth.  But people don't recognize him as such.  People at Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] didn't recognize him as such because he wasn't interested in money.  And yet, he could have been the richest man this world had ever known.  And if everything that Carver brought into being, that sold on the shelves in stores of all kinds, all over the world, gave credit to the originator, Carver's name would be on 'em.  There's--I don't know of anything you can think of that Carver didn't have something to do with.  All of your synthetic rubber and look what (unclear) Ford offered to do for him.  The greatest paints that ever been made, the people making millions of dollars off of it today, started with paint, Carver.  All your plastic materials, all of this fiber stuff, all of the polyester stuff, all these things.  You could--it's hard to think of anything that Carver didn't have something to do with.  And he had--and it was nothing that he couldn't make, that could be made by hand.  And one of his, a fellow named Glenn Clark [biographer of George Washington Carver] visited Dr. Carver once, and he wrote a little pamphlet of his visit.  And in there, he had a poem that was one of Dr. Carver's favorite sayings.  "Get a hold of yourself and say, I can."  Mary--let me see.  "You have two hands, two feet and two eyes and a brain to use if you would be wise.  Men who have risen great deeds to do, had no more when they made their spot than you.  You can be great and come skill.  You can conquer, if you only will.  God has given you all that you need, but he lets you decide what you want to be."  And that's true.  Everybody who has done anything at all has the same thing you have.  It's just what you do with it.  Great people.
Speaker 1: Now, anybody else you can think of that you remember that you wanna tell us about?
Speaker 2: They don't come to mind right off (unclear).
Story_ID: 169491
Speaker 1: What about your career with the Board of Education?  What's the highlight of your educational career?
Speaker 2: The highlight of my educational career?  (Laughter) Well, the twenty-three years I spent at Phelps [formerly Phelps Trade School, later Phelps Architecture, Construction and Engineering High School, Washington, D.C.].  The students at Phelps were sent there as a vocational school because they were told they were underachievers, underachievers.  You're not going to college, so learn a trade so you can go to work.  I did not find that to be true with many of the students who went to Phelps.  I used to tell my students, there's nothing wrong with your brain.  You can learn to do anything you want to do.  You have a million-dollar brain in your head.  You just don't know what do with it.  And some of 'em took me at my word.  And do you know, in this day, we had many students who took my advice and went to college.  They have doctors' degrees in various fields.  They have come back to Washington [D.C.].  They are principals of schools.  They're teaching in colleges.  They have high, government jobs.  They are doing wonderful things.  One of my students called me--that was, this year or last year.  He's an architect.  He had just finished a building up here on 14th Street.  He's in this building, sometime I want you to pass by and look in that building.  They're all over Washington, doing wonderful things.  Now, a whole lot of 'em didn't do.  I went (laughter), a whole lot of 'em went to jail.  I went down (laughter), I went down to the jail one time, and, as a witness for one of my students.
Story_ID: 169492
Speaker 1: Tell us about the jail story again?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went down to jail as a character witness for one of my students.  And while there, they had a group of prisoners waiting to come into court.  And I went by there, and I saw a lot of 'em put their hands up over their faces when they saw me.  And I said, you needn't hide your faces.  I know you by the shoes 'cause they had ole dirty tennis shoes all the time (laughter).  And they laughed.  They said, Ms. Newberry [Helen McDowell], I knew you would know who I was (laughter).  I didn't know them.  I didn't even know that--if they hadn't done that, I wouldn't have known if they (unclear), you know.  But I told 'em I knew 'em from--but that school, I never--every time I'd see anybody with some shoes untied, I'd make him stop and tie his shoes up.  And then those were days they were wearing plaits [braids].  I told 'em men didn't wear plaits on their heads.  And I'd make 'em go get those plaits off there.  I wouldn't let 'em in my classroom with plaits on their head.  And then when they started to wearing "bush" (laughter), I had a time fighting all that during the '60s [1960s] stuff that was coming in.  But, and then when my students were beginning to use dope, you know, dope was coming in at that time.  And I had one little boy--I can't think of that child's name.  At any rate, he had a name that could be pronounced two different ways.  If I call it one thing, then all the students would tell me to pronounce it another way, and--but at any rate, one morning I called his name.  I had my students seated in alphabetical order, and I didn't have to call the roll.  I'd just look at the seat, I'd know who would be absent.  And Montague, but, oh, yeah, I called him Montigue [ph.].  And they'd say Montague, Ms. Newberry.  If I'd say Montague, they'd say "Montigue".  Anyway, when I called his name one morning, they said, he won't be coming anymore, Ms. Newberry.  I said, why?  Said, he got killed last night.  He robbed a filling station down there at Fourth and Front Avenue [Washington, D.C.].  And he put his gun on the man, got $30.00, and he kept the gun on the man until he got back to his car.  And when he turned around to get in the car, the man shot him in the back.  And he died with the $30.00 in one hand and his gun in the other.  When they told me about that, I'm telling you all, I felt so badly.  I broke, I started crying.  I couldn't stop crying to save my soul.  That hurt my heart.  And all the rest of that day, I could not teach.  I couldn't do a thing.  And I think after that, the students, their attitude, their conduct and everything about them changed completely.  They were the most wonderful students, and when you hear about all this stuff going on, there's never one of my students involved.  And when they had the riot, I told all of 'em to go home.  I said, don't follow the crowds.  You follow the crowd, somebody's gon' get hurt.  And they--I said, go home.  One of my boys got burned up in the Five and Ten Cents store up on 14th Street [Washington, D.C.], one of the best boys in my class, in any of my classes, nice boy.  They said he went home and changed clothes and then followed a group of boys back into the streets.  I went to his funeral.  They just had his picture on the casket 'cause he was burnt up.  You know, those students have never forgotten me (laughter).  Those boys just, they just seemed like my children, and so I love every one of 'em.  And they loved me.  They call me.  They always want to do something for me.  They call every day.  I got some of 'em, I haven't turned loose since they were in the tenth grade.
Story_ID: 169493
Speaker 1: I've got one fella, Ridgeway, he lives up on Allison Street [Washington, D.C.].  When I met him in the tenth grade, he couldn't read, "I see a cat on a rug."  I taught him to read.  I have done everything for him from--he's sixty-three now.  He doesn't attempt to do anything without my advice.  He's in Los Angeles [California] in, in--that place right next to Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: Watts [California]?
Speaker 1: He's out there now for his, his daughter is getting her Master's degree, and he's gone for her graduation.  His daughter is my godchild.  I saw her through college, and I have worried her, and she finished from Syracuse University up in Syracuse, New York.  And she majored in (laughter), Communications.  And she's been working for Channel Five.  She worked in New York for two years, and then she came here and worked a year.  And then she transferred here from--to Los Angeles.  And by--she married in January, and she bought her home.  But I've been worrying her to get her Master's degree.  As I said, she got her Bachelor's [degree] and she finally, since she went to Los Angeles, she went to Pepperdine [University, Malibu, California], so she's working.  And she's getting her degree this month and her parents have gone out for her graduation.  But everything--I sold him his house.  I was working in real estate.  He was going to take care of the child out of wedlock.  He was gon' take her mother, I mean this child's mother into that house.  And I said, no.  I said, the only way you gon' get in that house with that girl, you're gonna marry.  He said, I can't afford to marry.  I said, you couldn't afford to have a child either, but you had one.  And I told him he wasn't going, into that neighborhood with an illegitimate child and common-law wife.  I said, go to the Five and Ten Cents store and get two rings and go down to the court and get some license and go down to the courthouse and get married.  And that's what he did (laughter).  That's what he did, and he took his wife--they live 427 Allison Street, lovely house and well thought of in that neighborhood.  And everybody up there--when the girls went to their prom, they had a big dinner.  And he has two girls now.  And all the neighborhood went down to see each one of the girls off for prom.  He's done well.  He became the engineer in that open-air school, and his school is the model school in Washington [D.C.].  And he retired last, this year--last year, in two [2002].  And, but he's just one of 'em.  I got any number of 'em, and they bring their grandchildren up to see me and tell me, you know, well, how I inspired them to go on and make something out of their lives.  And they're trying to do the same for these kids, you know.
Story_ID: 169494
Speaker 1: Now, have things always gone fairly smoothly in the [Washington] D.C. school system or have you had any struggles in the public school system?
Speaker 2: The school system?  I don't, I can't tell you anything about the school system 'cause I don't--there's so much (laughter)--I just work in my school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you never had any problems with the school system?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  I've never, no problems.  Everybody in Washington [D.C.] knows Helen Newberry [McDowell].  All they know is I'm a hard disciplinarian.  I don't have disciplinary problems.  And I've been in and out as a substitute teacher.  That's the reason they want--I was a permanent substitute teacher.  That was a regular salary.  But everybody wanted me because I was a good disciplinarian.  But I don't have problems.  I tell students, when I go into a classroom, "You don't come in here but for one purpose.  That's to learn.  Be sure you know more when you go out than you did when you come in.  Otherwise, you haven't been here; been here in body, but not in mind."  They think I'm a hard teacher (laughter).  Nobody wants to sign up for my classes.  But I teach, I teach.  The end results of teaching is pupils learning.  If they're not learning, you're not teaching.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I say, you call yourself a carpenter and no one ever sees a house you built, how you gon' prove you're a carpenter?  Not everyone who picks up a hammer and a nail is a carpenter.  You got to produce.  And not everyone who says "I'm a teacher" is a teacher.  You got a whole lot of people working for a check.  They don't care--they'll tell you in a minute, "I've got mine.  You got yours to get.  I don't care whether you learn or not.  I'll get my check."  That person has no business in a classroom, I don't think.  I tell 'em, I don't care whether I get a check or not so long as you learn 'cause that's all you go to school for.  And now that they know I'm celebrating my hundredth anniversary, you'd be surprised at the people who wanna be invited, students that I have taught.  But I haven't kept up with everybody.  I couldn't--I said, I don't know where you live.  They call me.  I got a thousand pictures here of students, but I don't have their addresses.  There's about 139 that I invited.  They belong to the Phelps [formerly Phelps Trade School, later Phelps Architecture, Construction, and Engineering High School, Washington, D.C.] Alumni Association.  That's the only reason I got their addresses, but the word has gotten around.
Story_ID: 169495
Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, to what do you attribute living to a hundred?  I mean how, I mean how did you do it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How did you manage to live this long?
Speaker 2: How did I manage to do what?
Speaker 1: To live this long, to live to be a hundred?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter).  Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long.  I honored my parents.  I tell everybody, God makes promises that he keeps.  And I, I--truthfully, I have lived my parents' [Samuel Newberry and Lucy Ellison Newberry] life.  My parents lived Godly lives, and I'm not surprised that I have lived to be almost a hundred.  And I use myself as an example against my brothers and sisters.  My brothers and sisters don't honor the Sabbath Day like I did or like my parents did.  They'll do anything on Sunday.  I don't do anything on Sunday but go to church.  We couldn't read the funny papers on Sunday.  There was a yard full of us kids out there playing and the Davis kids would come in to play with us.  We couldn't make any noise.  If you made any noise, you had to come in and sit down.  Now, can you imagine children playing and not making noise (laughter)?  But that's why I was saying, they were keeping the Sabbath, not keeping the Sabbath Day, if you're out there hooping and hollering.  And we couldn't do it.  And many a Sunday, he [Samuel Newberry] sent children home and made us come in and sit down.  And we did it 'cause you obeyed your parents.  And that's the only thing I can say.  I don't know anything else.  I try to live with God and God takes care of me.
Story_ID: 169496
Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, what are some of your concerns for the black community today, some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that I have any concerns.  I have shut the world out.  I can't do anything with the present-day generation.  You can't advise 'em, you can't tell 'em anything.  They know more than you do.  I have eight godchildren.  They don't have any regards for me at all, not any.  They don't wanna hear me talk.  And when something goes wrong, I wish I could find some of those letters and cards, then they stop and think.  I got one now who is, lives up here on New Hampshire Avenue [Washington, D.C.].  She has rheumatism--she has arthritis badly.  She's fifty.  She can't walk.  She's on crutches and canes and what not.  She walks from there to Metro.  Now, she wishes she had listened to me.  And she wrote me a nice, long letter--
Speaker 1: Now, you said a student wrote a letter?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You were telling us about a letter that a student wrote?
Speaker 2: She wrote me a--[clearing throat] since Easter, I have received two letters, one from her, a (unclear) up here on New Hampshire Avenue, and one from a godchild in California, telling me how sorry they are that they didn't listen to me.  If I had listened to what you said, things might have been different now, and all that kind of stuff.  I don't wanna hear that, I don't wanna hear that at all.  They didn't listen.  And it's their fault that things are as they are with them, not mine.  I tried to guard 'em against it.  This one who's getting her Master's degree, she's been out of college four years.  She should be getting her Doctorate [degree] now instead of a Master's [degree].  But I have just worried after her and worried after her, trying to tell her, everybody has a Master's [degree].  You've got to stay ahead of everybody if you wanna be up there with everybody.  So she finally realized that that little AB is just the first two letters of the alphabet.  You need to go further.  Mordecai Johnson [the first black president of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] told a girl who graduated from, on commencement day, he met a girl going home from commencement exercises.  And she had her hat in her hand and her gown was flying back, and her head was up high.  And he said, "Good afternoon, young lady, said what might your name be?"  And she said, I'm so and so and so and so, AB.  And he said, "Now, that you have the first two letters of the alphabet, go back and get some more" (laughter), letting you know, you've just started.  You haven't done anything.  You've made a start, but that doesn't mean stop; keep moving.  And that's what you have to do today.  But these young folks will tell you in a minute--I've had many students tell me, "You can make more money playing football or basketball or baseball than you can sitting behind a desk.  I don't need any education.  What I need to know, I play basketball."  So, I said, go ahead.  But I said, when you get so you can't play, what you gonna do?  They don't realize that the time will come--you don't know what's gon' happen to you.  You might not be physically able.  How do you know?  You don't know what God has in store for you.  So don't let any opportunity pass by.
Speaker 1: Okay, ma'am--
Speaker 2: But young folks today don't think that way.  All they think about now, the world has gone money crazy.  Money is everybody's god.  They've forgotten about God, who is all powerful, who controls you.  You turn him a loose, he'll turn you a loose.  And when he turns you a loose, it's nothing but disaster.  They don't wanna hear that, so there's nothing that I could say to the present-day generation that would mean a thing.  I just tell 'em, "I'll pray for you", and that's all I can do.  I tell all of 'em, "I'll keep you in my prayers" and that's as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: Ma'am--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My nieces and nephews don't even go to church.  I can't interest them in going to church, but they can do everything else in the world.  They don't have that problem going from here to Atlantic City [New Jersey] playing the slot machines.  And Sunday, in there more than any other day.
Story_ID: 169497
Speaker 1: What would you see at this juncture as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't hear you.
Speaker 1: Okay, what would you see at this time as your legacy?
Speaker 2: You see--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  What would you consider right now as your legacy?  Your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I do if my mother [Lucy Ellison Newberry] was living?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  What do you see right now as your legacy?  As your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, what do I see as my legacy?  (Laughter) Nobody gon' be concerned about my legacy 'cause the only thing that I know of is, "Stick with God, and he'll stick with you."  Don't ever turn God loose.  If you don't live with God, you might as well not be here, and my whole life, everything--I might not have accomplished much in life, but what little I have accomplished--and I tell myself, I've had a good life, I mean a good, good life.  I've never made anybody suffer.  No one has ever come to me and gone away empty handed.  I don't care who it is.  And there's always been plenty left.  I'd give my last penny.  Before the next person come, I've got some more to give.  But it's all because, I believe God is with me.  So I would say to anybody, stick with God, and he'll stick with you.  I could have been a millionaire, the money that I have given away would amount to--and I haven't asked for a penny back, nobody has ever offered me a penny back.  And I've never expected it.  And I don't regret it.  I don't have regrets.  And I look back on my life, I don't see but one thing that I would change, and I wish to goodness I could change that one thing, but I can't.  My father [Samuel Newberry] came here to visit me in 1940.  I was living in the first house that I'd ever bought.  My mother was dead.  He had married again.  And I had brought these children here.  They were all off of my hands at that time.  And he asked me--I had turned my house--I was living in my house, but it was rented in apartments.  So I an apartment on the--I had a three-story house.  I had an apartment on the third floor, one on the second floor, and one on the first floor.  And the dining room, what was the pantry, I made it into a bathroom.  And what was the dining room, I made into a bedroom.  And that bedroom, kitchen and bath, I rented as an apartment.  The living room, there was a hallway between, and the living room was upfront, and the stairway went up from the hall, right there.  I kept the living room at the front.  And I had put a bedroom, a kitchen and a bath in my basement.  And my father came to visit me--that was the way I was living.  But I was planning, when I finished paying for the house, I was gon' take over the first floor and I would have the basement.  And he wanted to come and live with me.  Well, when I wanted him and my brothers to help me with the children, nobody had anything to offer.  Now, I had a brother--I had two brothers living here.  I had given them down payments on their homes and I felt it was time for some of them to do something.  And why couldn't he go stay with one of them?  And I told him to ask Marvin [Newberry, her brother] or Fletcher [ph.] to let him stay with them because I had my plans for my house, and I didn't let him come.  I've always regretted it.  That was selfishness.  That was nothing but selfishness.  And I don't think God is pleased when you're selfish.  And I wish I hadn't--I wish I had said, yes.  I can't change it.  That's the only regret that I have in my life.
Story_ID: 169498
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: [No audible response].
Speaker 1: I said, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I--well, that would be my legacy.  How I would like to be remembered?  I'd just like to be remembered as a--the life that I have lived is the way I'd like to be remembered, and that's the way I know I'm gonna be remembered 'cause everybody who calls my name will say, "Ms. Newberry always wanted to help somebody."  I'd like to be remembered as a giving person.  I, I don't want anybody--I have tried to help everybody not have to live (laughter) like I lived.  I wanted to go to school. I begged everybody, "Let me live with you and go to school."  Nobody wanted me.  I want everybody to have an opportunity.  I've made it possible for many people to have an opportunity to do the things they really want to do in life, to make it.  I mean worthwhile things, 'cause I didn't want--I know how I felt, and nobody wanted to help me.  And I didn't want anybody else to experience what I experienced.  And that's why I've depended on God.  You cannot depend on man.  Man's not there.  God is.  And with God, you'll make it.  And I had, I haven't tried to play God (laughter), but I know I've been a god in many a person's life.  And at my anniversary, at the party, I'm gonna give a minute--I wish I could make it a half a minute, to people who are seated certain sections.  I will try to have 'em seated in sections according to my life, my early religious life on through four churches.  I want somebody in that group to tell me why you bothered to come to my celebration.  In what way did I influence your life that made you feel you should come to my celebration?  I want that in each one of those sections, just to see what they say.  And if they say what I'm thinking they should say, the only thing they can say is, "You helped me" (laughter).  In some way, they gon' bring in the word "help."  That's all I can see.
