Story_ID: 177965
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Marion Myers.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Samuel L. Myers, S-A-M-U-E-L, L-L-O-Y-D, M-Y-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 18th, 1919, Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm at the present time Chairman of the Board of Minority Access, which is a 501c3 organization.  I'm retired from remunerative endeavors.
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you give us your past two occupations?  I think they are significant.
Speaker 2: The past one I immediately retired, it was seven years ago, as President of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education [Washington, D.C.], whose acronym is NAFEOHE [sic, NAFEO].  The membership association of the one hundred, and at that time, seventeen, historically and predominantly black colleges.  Prior to that, I was President, I was President for eighteen years, but prior to that, I was President at Bowie State College, now Bowie State University [Bowie, Maryland] for ten years, 1967 to 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's here in Maryland, right?
Speaker 2: In Maryland, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Now, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April 8, I'm sorry, that is my birthday.  Today is September the 16th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at Maplewood Park Place [Bethesda, Maryland], which is a retirement community.
Story_ID: 177966
Speaker 1: All right.  Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight type questions we always ask and they only require a brief answer.  The first question is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Based upon my own situation, my household, it's gumbo, New Orleans [Louisiana] gumbo.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you say based on your situation.  I mean what is that situation?
Speaker 2: Well that my wife [Marion Myers] is from New Orleans and has many wonderful memories, and it has a certain appeal and so on and so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I prefer the fall of the year.  It, I guess traditionally, many, many years I was in the, in academe, and that was the start of the year.  And every time is a new beginning, so that's it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: At the moment, it's Florida, believe it or not.  We happen to like the, the environs, it's southwest Florida.  The weather is pleasant and it's--because it's a fast growing area, which is relatively new, we like the newness and obviously Florida attracts a number of people who are retired, but who are still very active.  They--so that's my favorite place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now sir do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's really to set goals and succeed.
Story_ID: 177967
Speaker 1: All right now I'd like to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us the full names of your parents and their dates and places of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's name was David Elcanah, E-L-C-A-N-A-H, Myers.  She was born--he was born in 1882 in Kingston, Jamaica.  My mother's name was Edith Alexandria Reed, and she was born in 1892 in Port Antonio, Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now can you tell us what you know about your, your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace?
Speaker 2: Well believe it or not, that's something that obviously I have youngsters, are interested in, they're interested in that.  And I do not know all of the details.  It is something that, because of genealogical interest at the moment, many people are interested in it, but indeed they are researching that.  My understanding is that he came from a family that was really well--a middle class family in Jamaica.  There were ministers in the family and as a matter of fact, there's an area there known as Myersville after the family.  But he migrated and he came to the United States.  As a matter of fact, it was--he came to Hampton Institute [later, Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at the time as I said, his father was a minister.  And so my father came from Jamaica to attend Hampton Institute and in his first year, his father died and the family resources were inadequate to support him.  So he left college and went to--into--became a seaman.  And remained that until his retirement.  My mother also my mother as I've indicated, came from Jamaica, but she came from, as I also indicated, Port Antonio.  Her family was in business.  They went to a high school there called the Litchfield School [sic, Titchfield High School, Port Antonio, Jamaica].  And for people who know, it may have been Titchfield [High School, Port Antonio, Jamaica], but some of that sort.  And again, I know very little about that family also, except that she came here to visit a sister.  She met my father and a year later they were married and she did not go back to Jamaica.
Story_ID: 177968
Speaker 1: Were there stories on your father's [David Elcanah Myers] side of the family or your mother's [Edith Alexandria Reed Myers] side about why they migrated to the United States?
Speaker 2: I explained that my father came here to study and then because of the death in his family, he had to leave.  My mother came here actually to visit her sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who had already come to the United States and who was employed as a seamstress.  And she came here and was really almost had finished her tour when she met my father.  And, and so she delayed and extended her stay and ultimately married and stayed here.  So it wasn't--it was serendipity; unexpected good return.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not something that was based on an obsession just to come here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As many people had.
Speaker 1: So neither one of them had a goal to come here and stay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: They just sort of, sort of ended up like that.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now on, on--
Speaker 2: I'm glad they did.
Speaker 1: Are, are there stories on either side of the family about life in Jamaica, the nineteenth century and, and what their families were doing?
Speaker 2: As I've indicated, I--we've gone there to visit the people there and the families--and eventually, many of them came here to--in fact or I would say most of them in that family went to England.  But the answer is I know very little about life there, about what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--
Speaker 2: And I know that's disappointing, and it's disappointing to us now that we have grandchildren.  We want to pass down that and--but alas, it's history lost for us.
Speaker 1: Right.  What was there--the port of entry for your mother and for your father?  Was it the same?  Did they come into New York, or did they come into--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well at that time my understanding is that people came in through Ellis Island.  And indeed, the people who are interested in genealogy, say you can always go back and trace those records and learn a great deal about that.  But--so I understand they did come in through Ellis Island also.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they came in through New York City [New York] first and then--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Then they--did they meet in New York [New York] and--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  They were in Baltimore [Maryland].  My mother's sister was employed in Baltimore, and so she came here.  And expected to stay, as I've said, for a short period of time.  But fortunately extended it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were either one of them members of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] back in those days?  'Cause I know quite, quite a few--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 177969
Speaker 1: And were they [Myers' parents, David Elcanah Myers and Edith Alexandria Reed Myers]--when you were growing up, were they, were they part of a West Indian community?
Speaker 2: Not only were they members there, but my mother was very active in organizing what was called a Caribbean Club.  And the--and this--and that, that showed me a group of people who at the time were high achieving, highly motivated, and I understand that frequently immigrants have a higher degree of success in, in studies and in areas there now because of the dedication and perhaps not being distracted in many ways.  But the point you're making is that she did have the, the various groups and they would meet at our house.  And so we were able to get the richness of the, of that culture.  Also to see them play cricket, they were--the men were obsessed with that.  So we were able to see the, the aspect of that culture that we appreciated.  And indeed, we were able to visit Jamaica and at the time, apartheid prevailed in the United States.  You never saw a black face on television or I mean or in key slots in the integrated society.  So went to Jamaica to see black policemen directing the traffic and to see and obviously I'm now talking about the 1960s, much, much later when Jamaica actually had its independence and we could see policemen and such, they were role models who were very inspiring.  And that gave us a foresight of what could be in our society.  And now I see this here on television, we have anchors, we have other people who are in pivotal slots.  So they're integrated in the society.  But Jamaica showed us what could be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now during the time period that your parents came over, the most popular black figure in the United States was Marcus Garvey.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were not a part of the Marcus Garvey movement, but obviously people I think were inspired by his grandiose ideas of getting an exodus of people.  And I do not know whether they invested in his ventures, in his ship line and elsewhere, but I do not know that.  But--and I do not know--but they were not followers or advocate, advocates of Marcus Garvey as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause there was a huge organization.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Probably the largest organization we've ever had in this country.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Or in the world to tell the truth.
Story_ID: 177970
Speaker 1: So tell us about growing up.  Now--
Speaker 2: Well there were two aspects to this.  We--because we were offsprings of foreigners, we encountered a great deal of oppression and discrimination within the black community itself.  People would ridicule us, call us monkey chasers, because of the difference in intonation or the speech that we had.
Speaker 1: Did you speak differently then?
Speaker 2: Well I think--I thought it was the same, but apparently they thought it was different.  A little accent that I never detected, but they, but they knew somehow we were different.  In retrospect, that was a very, very happy experience because I'd say a large percentage of the young people who surrounded us at that time ended up in the criminal justice system.  And because we were isolated and had people who were obsessed with education, that we were I think protected from that.  But we also were in a community in which most of the people were renting, many were on--very, very, very poor.  And our family was not a middle income family.  But still we were able--were homeowners, which gave us a certain status there.  We owned our home.
Speaker 1: Sir, what, what community did, did you grow up?
Speaker 2: It was in Baltimore [Maryland], it was 1030 Stricker Street in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: What, what do they call that area of Baltimore?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it, it was called the--in Baltimore you had two clusters of, of blacks who lived on--in east Baltimore.  The second lived in what they called northwest Baltimore, and we lived in northwest Baltimore on the west side.  But we lived on Stricker Street.  There were gangs of which we did not become a member.  The so-called Sandtown Gang.  Then the World Gang.  But we had again, somehow the people respected us then.  So we had no problems with them.  But I repeat, that given the fact our parents [David Elcanah Myers and Edith Alexandria Reed Myers] were homeowners and that we--and they had an obsession with education, that we were able to attend school regularly and unfortunately, segregation prevailed at the time.  But we had superb teachers there.  The--as I indicated to you before we began, I went to the--both the, the black junior high school and the black senior high school, Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland] was the name.  And the teachers were superb, absolutely superb.
Speaker 1: What were the name, names of some of the, the teachers that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Well I remember that there was one name Mrs. Jefferson [ph.], who was our history teacher, who was just a tremendous, tremendous person.
Speaker 1: Was she at [Frederick] Douglass [High School, Baltimore, Maryland], or--
Speaker 2: She was at Douglass.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had a--there was a, a, a person named Mrs. Cook [ph.] who was a very elegant lady.  The--and the names come to me now but I repeat we had outstanding people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 177971
Speaker 1: All right now what were some of the, just to backtrack a little bit, what, what were the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhood when you were a little kid growing up?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, even though I considered to be a wholesome, safe environment, I can see in retrospect that in light of the sounds and the sights and the smells that you're talking about, that we were in the slums because the--I can just even now, smell the gaseous odors from the sewage system, the open sewage system there where things would run through there.  In addition, I guess it's only later have I realized that the poor communities were always juxtaposed to the railroad tracks.  And so we were near the railroad tracks.  As a matter of fact, later I said any time you wanted to go to a black community, find out where the railroad is and so, and the black community would be near that.  I repeat, it was supportive, warm community that was to us safe and people knew each other.  Many people talk about being, having, being reared not only in a family, but in a village.  Everybody was responsible--everyone else, and we had that.
Story_ID: 177972
Speaker 1: To back up a little, there is someone again who has passed, who perhaps had more influence on my life than anyone else.  Her name was Essie M. Hughes, who was just a fantastic teacher at--this was in junior high school [at Benjamin Banneker Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland], but also who was supportive of us in many areas.  She taught us Latin, which paved the way for understanding many other--
Speaker 2: Okay, Essie M. Hughes.
Speaker 1: Essie M. Hughes.
Speaker 2: She was in middle school, that right, you said that.
Speaker 1: Well what we call junior high school.
Speaker 2: Junior high school.  Well what was the name of that--
Speaker 1: Benjamin Banneker.
Speaker 2: Benjamin Banneker, okay, all right.  Now what, now what kind of a little boy were you?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 1: Well I went through the normal, of course because we were rooted in the church, Metropolitan Methodist Episcopal Church, which later is United Methodist Church.  We had the activities, the Boy Scouts that they had.  So I became a Boy Scout.  Became a First Class Scout, which you know you have your Tenderfoot, you have Second Class, and then First Class.  And then you go on to the true top, the Star of Life thing, up to the Eagle Scout.  I never made that, but I got to First Class.  And that--so we had all the activities going on, overnight hikes and we again, still were relatively poor, so I never went to a summer camp.  But we were able to go to a number of activities.  So we were involved in those.  And then because again a family example and motivation and so on, I spent an enormous amount of time studying, I was an avid reader.  And we then--and so the grades were good and so that satisfied our ego and enabled us to get the accolades with the family group.  So studied even more, read even more and that kept us out of mischief I guess, but also helped us to move ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now all right now, so you were--were you a good student in school?
Speaker 1: Initially I would say that when--in the elementary school I was a very poor student.  And again in retrospect, in part it was because of poor eyesight that I--that later was corrected and so on.  But then I began in the--after the fourth grade or so, the grades began improving and--but and I repeat, I had such people as Ms. Hughes in the ninth grade who inspired and motivated and sparked me.  And so by the time I was in high, senior high, I was put in that category of classes the better students were placed in, A Curriculum, I was placed in the A Curriculum.  And, and in about fifth or so, from the top of my class in high school.  But I was on course.  And then in college I just soared.
Speaker 2: Okay now in, in high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] did you participate in extracurricular activities?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  I was the editor our newspaper there.  In addition to that, I was--I actually made the varsity team in football.  Mainly because I had a cousin whose name was Henry Lansdowne, who had he lived to this time, would certainly have gone into the majors in some way.  He would have been a star, but he was good.  So he pushed me, pushed me to get into something that was foreign to me, but still he showed me all the things to do and so I was able to get into that.  So I had excellent grades and also participated in--I also was in debate, the debating team.  And so I was active in some of those activities at the time also.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 1: No, not in high school--
Story_ID: 177973
Speaker 1: Now sir, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Well I was--perhaps that's one of the reasons you might associate with that obviously it--prior to getting into college, we had the general curriculum.  So I, I liked all of 'em.  I liked algebra that, you know, people say is creating so many problems with young people, but I enjoyed algebra.  I enjoyed history.  I told you about Mrs. Jefferson who was the teacher.  Essie M. Hughes taught me Latin, I enjoyed that.  As a matter of fact, I enjoyed the languages.  I--as a matter of fact, it was in high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland] that I took French and obviously I did not develop complete proficiency in it, but I had an experience when I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for the doctorate.  The requirement at that time, I understand that it's changed now.  The requirement was that one should be proficient in two languages.  And I assumed that I would have to take an entire course in French because I had gotten it--I had taken it in high school and enjoyed it.  But I did not take it in college.  And so I assumed I would have to take additional courses in French.  And I took the examination for--that would fulfill the requirement for the doctoral degree.  I took the examination, assuming I was taking it on a trial basis in order to see what I should emphasize in the courses that I would take.  And I passed the examination.  And now in retrospect it may reflect on the nature of the examination, that I understand they no longer have--they require obviously other kinds of--even when I came along, they changed from emphasizing languages to emphasizing statistics and then the computer later and so on.  But at that time, it was French.  And I passed it, so I did not have to take an additional graduate course in French.  Therefore, that course in high school worked out very well.  So I enjoyed it, and at the same time it proved to help me to concentrate on more important things, on the economics that I had to pursue.  Now looking at another side, when I went to France, to Paris, the people considered my poor use of the language as almost a sign of French illiteracy.  So but in any event, that's a long winded, verbose answer to your question what were my favorite subjects.  French was one of them.
Story_ID: 177974
Speaker 1: Now how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Three.  I have--they're all high achievers.  My eldest daughter received all, all three went to historically black colleges [HBCUs].
Speaker 1: I mean siblings.
Speaker 2: Siblings.  I, I was thinking of offspring.  Yes, siblings.  There were two.
Speaker 1: Two, okay.
Speaker 2: I have a brother and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you the oldest, or--
Speaker 2: I'm the middle.
Speaker 1: The middle.
Speaker 2: Yes, my brother's older than I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you engage in a lot of high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, in Baltimore, Maryland] acti--activities it seems.
Speaker 2: I told you that I was in--on the school's newspaper, debating and in the--on football and--but I was not a class officer.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you pretty popular in high school I guess at that point, or would you consider--
Speaker 2: Well everyone knew everyone else.  So that that was a close knit group.  Again, one of the advantages is that, I do not advocate segregation, but one of the advantages there was that we were all closely knit and understood each other and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's something that--
Speaker 2: And I would think and hope that I had the esteem of my classmates and that certainly they had mine.  There were twenty-four of us who were on the--I guess you'd call it the Honor Roll at that time.  And twenty-three of them went into what was called a normal school at that time, was a teacher training institution.  And I wrote an article condemning that and saying that just because tuition was free, they should go there, they should go to a liberal arts college.  Now it really in retrospect was not harmful because many of those used that as a stepping stone.  And one person went on to become--he went first into teacher training, and then he used that as a stepping stone to go on and get a baccalaureate degree and go to law school, become a very distinguished judge.  So that--but at the time, I bemoaned the fact that all of them were going into a limited field whereas they could branch out into a liberal arts field.
Story_ID: 177975
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you graduated from high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, in Baltimore, Maryland] in 1936.
Speaker 2: That's correct--
Speaker 1: And this is the middle of the [Great] Depression, basically.
Speaker 2: That's correct, yes.
Speaker 1: And was, was your family really suffering from the Depression, like--
Speaker 2: In retrospect, I am certain that my father [David Elcanah Myers] had many frightening moments, but he had worked on--in--as a seaman.  He became--and obviously there was segregation there too, so he was concentrated in the Steward Department.  But it did--he became a cook, and then chief, chief, chief chef and then rose to the position of being the steward, Chief Steward.  Which actually worked to my advantage also because he was able to hire us, myself and my brother, during our breaks.  And we would work on the ship as cabin boys, mess boys they called 'em at the time.  But it provided us with some wonderful experiences, good work experience and the like.  But at least he had a job.  So to get to your point, were the apprehensions, or did we suffer because of the--being in the depths of the Depression.  We, as I've indicated, my father must have had apprehensions and some concerns, but we did not suffer ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now 1936 was also the, the year you graduated from high school was the year that [President] FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] was elected.  Was, was--no--he was already in office.
Speaker 2: That's correct, yeah.
Speaker 1: He, he, he was elected in '32 [1932].
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-two [1932].
Speaker 1: Thirty-two [1932], right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We--
Speaker 1: Were your parents Republicans pri--prior to that, or did they worry about that?  'Cause I know a lot of African Americans were Republicans in their first transition.
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right, absolutely right.  Because of the perception that [President] Abraham Lincoln had espoused our cause, that we know that history has shown that he was concerned with preserving the Union, he was ready to make some deals.  But that he persisted and he did issue the Proclamation, Emancipation Proclamation.  He did actually free the slaves and you know there was initially the thought that he would free only those slaves of states that were still in rebellion, but we, we know all of that.  But in any event, because of the gratitude, most of my--the people were strong Republicans.  And so my father and mother [Edith Alexandria Reed Myers] were strong Republicans.  And so I was a Republican even during the time of [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  And we--and--but it's only after in the 1950s when I began really teaching as a professor, began looking back analyzed and said wait a minute, wait, wait, wait.  Why should I?  So I changed to become a Democrat.  That--but as you have astutely observed for the most part, blacks at that time were, were Republicans.
Story_ID: 177976
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [at Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland], did you know that you were going to college or where you were going?  Did you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother was brighter than I and he was a brilliant student himself, even though I was a good student.  And he had gone to college before me.  So he had paved the way.  So there was a very--it was just the expectation that I would go to college.  And again, because he paved the way and people assumed that I was a good student, there were scholarships that were available to pay the way to go to college.  So that--there was no question about whether.  I mean it was just a matter of when I would go.  And I looked forward to that.  And as I've also indicated, I was the renegade in the whole class because there were--we had to pay our way to go to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], even though I told you I was able to get scholarships.  But Coppin State College [later, University, Baltimore, Maryland] which was the, or perhaps it was the normal school at that time, was free.  Not only was it free, but the person could be assured that once they finished, they would step into a teaching position and so to have a job ahead.  In liberal arts college, you come out and you have to begin searching and so on.  But in spite of that, I knew I was going to college and I have never regretted that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you didn't go to Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], but you went to--
Speaker 2: Morgan.
Speaker 1: Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you all had to pay, you had to pay some sort of tuition?
Speaker 2: That's correct, yes.  But I was able to get scholarships.  Plus I indicated to you that I was--my father [David Elcanah Myers] provided--was able to arrange for us to get employment and so we were able to work on the ship during the summer.  And that, that opened, opened just, just whole new avenues for us.  We--I was number one in my freshman class at Morgan.  And I had the--received again at that time, parents aspired for their youngsters to be physicians.  So I just knew I was gonna be in pre-med.  Excelled in, I got the prize as the leading student in chemistry.
Story_ID: 177977
Speaker 1: But at the end of that freshman year [at Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], I immediately went to work on the ship and the ship was--it was a, it was chartered by the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] to take automobiles to India.  And it happens that the captain of the ship had a son in the University of Maryland.  And so he had his son to skip that semester and work on the ship to, to go to India.  And I--perhaps that influenced me.  So I also decided that I would like to stay on to work, accumulate money, at the same time make this trip to India.  Not only to India, but to Iraq initially, then to Egypt, and then on to India.
Speaker 2: So did you go to those places that summer?
Speaker 1: And the answer is yes.  That all of my advisors advised me not to go; not to drop out; not just--education was most important to stay in school, particularly since I had done well.  But I said I would go and I did go.  And in retrospect it was a good decision.  It opened my eyes to the world and I was able to return and fortunately, double up on some of the courses and to finish with my class.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what were some of the--are there any experiences you can share with us from that trip?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 2: You know, so some things that happened to you along the way.
Speaker 1: Yes, indeed.  The--I had a professor at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], his name was Edward G. Carroll, who had--who later became a bishop in the United Methodist Church, who had gone to India before.  And he had met [Mahatma Mohandas] Gandhi, and he had met [Rabindranath] Tagore, the great Indian poet.  People at the very highest level.  But also he had studied some of the religions in India, even though he was a United Methodist minister.  He came back and he was able to just open my eyes to a new culture.  One of the dangers of America, at least at that time, was that we were parochial.  We didn't get this breath (unclear).  I was--I never personally met Gandhi, I did not meet the Tagore, I did not meet these people, but I was emerged in the culture of the people over there.  I went to places like Calicut [later, Kozhikode, India] and could see--in Calcutta [later, Kolkata, India].  Could see the large numbers of people.  I could--I saw poverty that I'd never seen before at that time.  The lepers walked the street, so you could see people whose--with hole in the head for the noses and dropping off, had dropped off, and who had the (unclear)--I assumed at that time that homelessness was limited to those countries.  I've later learned that's wrong because I've lived in Washington [D.C] and Baltimore [Maryland] and the like.  But to carry on, I was able to get a, a depth, an in depth view of the extent of poverty.  And I think those convinced me to change to the social sciences that I felt that somehow that to deal with people in that way was a better way to use my own life.  And so I really changed my major to sociology, or the social sciences.  They did not have any emphasis in social science.  So--and I thought that I would emphasize sociology, but I told you privately earlier, that I met a man named Dr. Winfred Bryston [ph.] at Morgan who was an economist and so I said well I'm not sure that a sociologist can focus on solving some of the problems of the poor.  But in economics, you can, and so on.  And so I changed to economics and that became my major.
Story_ID: 177978
Speaker 1: Now when you were on your trip, did you get a chance to see other--I mean black people in other countries and you know like particularly Egypt, Iraq or India has large numbers of black people.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  In, in India, now I repeat, I was--we were on a ship.  And the ship would go to the port and just stay there two or three days in the port.  We had a guide to take us around, simply to look at the people.  So we did not get an opportunity to have an in depth view, but I could see people of color, obviously.  It's only later having made a number of trips to Egypt, that I could see the nuances of it and to see that there's a pervasive problem that we have in this world.  That people of darker skin in an integrated setting, seem to be, to have the worst of it.  In Egypt, the, the Sudanese are downplayed.  In India, in India, you have the Dravidians who are the darkest and beautiful, beautiful people in terms of physiogamy [ph.] and so on, but still in a lower status.  Many of the people in I guess the caste system has been eliminated theoretically, but there's still the so-called untouchables.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it--
Speaker 2: Those of the darker hue.
Speaker 1: I think operationally it's still going on.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  So the answer is I was able to get a glimpse of that on the trip to India in 1936, but I--'37 [1937], but I was able to get a greater understanding of that later.
Story_ID: 177979
Speaker 1: Tell us about Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I mean, I mean--what was the--what was Mor--what was your impression of Morgan State?  You did well academically there, but what--Morgan State is one of four state universities in Maryland, black schools in Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] at the time was a private college under the Methodist church.  And it in retrospect had limited facilities and resources and the like, but to us it was, it was a college.  And the, the warmth of the people, the rapport that was established among people and the, the caring.  And the interesting thing is that we had a, a number of people who--I mean were world class quality people who came to Morgan to teach and to be true, most of them were, were white.  But still they had a missionary zeal about them.  And so there was a warmth, there was the acceptance, there was the rapport among the people.  And then dedicated, just caring, superb teachers.  When I came along, when I confused the matter of offsprings with siblings there, I meant to and later you'll perhaps talk about that.  But I had no qualms about where our youngsters were going.  No, no ambivalence about it.  Morgan was the place.  And Morgan has continued to move ahead and is now in the top tier of all colleges.  But the point--in answer your question was that it was the warmth and the support system and the understanding.  I also look back in retrospect and to realize that it wasn't easy getting there because we--I did not stay on the campus; I stayed at home.  And we'd have to catch the trolley, the streetcar, to go to a certain point and it meant walking I guess literally several miles from that--the closest trolley stop to Morgan.  Again in retrospect, I realize I did that in thinking I would reflect and it was a good, good walk.  And now people tell me that's good for one and so on and one should be doing even more of that.  But it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you graduated from Morgan State in 1940.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you had a degree in--
Speaker 2: Social sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was graduated number two in my class there at Morgan.
Speaker 1: You, do you, do you remember who number one was?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, her name was Beatrice Myers, but there was no relation to me.  Her name at that time was Carrington, Beatrice Carrington, and her father was a Methodist minister also.  But she was number one.  She went on to become a high school principal and was that for many, many years.  She died last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were number two in the class and the top male student I guess at, at Morgan State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's a good point.
Speaker 1: Now that put you in a special place.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 177980
Speaker 1: Did you go right on to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or did you--
Speaker 2: That was interesting.  I took what was called a civil service examination at the time in the city, the State of Maryland.  And passed it.  And so that they immediately gave me an appointment as a social worker in the Health Department of Baltimore City.  And so I was graduated in June and I had that position I guess until September.  But I, at that time I applied to various schools and I was accepted and my brother had gone to Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], to the graduate school there to get a master's degree.  And he was very happy with it and I assumed that I would also go to Atlanta University.  But the--but I applied to, to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I received a letter of rejection from Harvard to say that well even though my record was impressive from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], that what--they would hold my application on file.  But if I could go to a more selective institution and then come back to them within a year, they would look at it.  So they--I said they rejected it.  They said they would hold it in abeyance so I could see whether that same record could be sustained at another institution.  So I had--one of our professors had been at Boston University.  So he arranged for me to get a fellowship to go to Boston University.  And I went--I was admitted.  And I went to Boston University, which has since become I mean a outstand--I mean this very liberal, very, very fine institute, very wonderful atmosphere.  I enjoyed Boston University.  And went there and made virtually straight A's.  And the--and at the end of the year, the first year, I was well on my way to doing two things.  To receiving the master's degree, and it was a matter of fulfilling I think some papers.  So I stayed there for the next year.  And in the second year, I received the master's degree from the graduate school at Boston University.  And concurrently had accumulated about one year toward the doctorate.  And so I said that I would, I would really go on and pursue the doctorate there.  When Harvard resurrected that last--you know what, how did I make out and what were the grades and so on.  So I then sent it to them and they said that they would admit me to the doctorate degree.  I had some ambivalence and some hesitancy about it.  But then I said that perhaps I was caught up by the mystique of the Harvard name.  And so I said good, I'll go there.  I was I guess ambivalent because they said that none of the work that I had taken at Boston University could count toward their doctorate degree.  There was a set three year program.  You had to go forth and take all of those over.  So I gave it some thought, but in the end, I grasped the opportunity and went there and the--and later, well I was--then I was interrupted because while I was at Harvard, I was drafted to go into the service.  But I came back and received not only another master's, which was automatic because in the process of working toward that degree, and received the doctorate degree.
Story_ID: 178156
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about the--
Speaker 2: The service (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: The war [World War Two, WWII] and service, right.
Speaker 2: I was drafted, and obviously as, just as an ordinary soldier.  It took us--I was drafted in Fort Devens in Massachusetts.  They then sent me down to Fort Meade in Maryland to that processing center.  And I'm told that there were sixteen thousand people whom they got up at four o'clock in the morning to take a whole battery of tests.  And there were two of us whom they picked out and said that they would send us to Officer Candidate School, and I was one of those.  I was then sent--asked our preferences.  I told you I had already gotten a master's degree from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in economics with a very strong background in business administration.  And so I, I chose to go into finance in the [U.S.] Army and so on.  They sent me to Camp Lee, which I think later became Fort Meade [sic, Fort Lee, Virginia].  I mean I'm sorry Camp Lee was--I think became--may have upgraded it, which was a quartermaster training school.  And I argued that the--in effect we were no more than housekeepers and--but we did go through officer candidate school, and that was I think there were only a small number, two or three of us who were in minorities, or, or at least blacks, Negroes at the time.  But that was a thirteen week period for Officer's Candidate School.  They were called second lieutenants at that time, ninety day wonders.  But it was a very intensive program.  And so we finished that and they sent me to New Orleans [Louisiana] to the--really the, the, the, the port from which many people were being shipped overseas.
Story_ID: 178157
Speaker 1: And so we stayed [in New Orleans, Louisiana] and as I've indicated, it--became disenchanting with the various things they [the U.S. Army] were doing.  And I state this for the record.  That we were second lieutenants and they had a, a program whereby they--well each company, we were in a--it's called Quartermaster Service Company.  And in effect we were labor officers.  But each company had what was called a table of organization which called for certain slots.  One second lieutenant, one first lieutenant, and one captain.  The captain would be the commanding officer of the company.  I think they had two or--well in a battalion I think they had three different companies, each with that table of organization.  So theoretically, we had slots for three captains, three first lieutenants, and three second lieutenants.  The--all of the field officers, major, lieutenant colonel, over the battalions who were white.  The--I discovered that the colonel at the time would use the table of organization to keep all of the blacks who were there as second lieutenants and instead of being put in the slot there, we were on what was called detached service, but we were working in there.  And so they would take that slot, the slots of the captains and the first lieutenants, and use those to promote whites who were coming through this port of debarkation.  And promote them before they went overseas.  They'd have others come along and use those.  And I was the rebel; I vehemently protested that.  I in retrospect, I did not realize that I could have been killed.  The--we had the officer's club there, but the blacks could not go to the white officer's club.  And I was--people tell me that I was very vociferous in opposing that and could have been shot, it's a wonder I wasn't.  But we stayed--so I was the first lieutenant for, again there's a rule there in the Army that there should be this upward mobility after a certain period of time, but I stayed a second lieutenant for a long time until I--people came along and promoted us.  But also I then--and in retrospect just in order to put this in the proper context.  I look back upon that as a very meaningful experience in terms of helping to serve the country because unlike I understand, the veterans of the Vietnam War, we were all treated with, with great accolades.  And people, the public just adored us.  And so we had the great support.  And so--and we felt we were a part of something, of a very noble cause.  So--
Speaker 2: But it, but the [U.S.] Army itself was segregated.
Speaker 1: That is correct.  But that, that--in terms--that gets to the next point I'm going lead to, but I'm saying in terms of the specific individuals having the white field officers over the people and then to use us and then to use the slots to promote others, I felt was unfair.  And I tried to get--threatened to go to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and to go to the Inspector General and so on, but--as a matter of protesting against that.  But it was to no avail.  The other is that when I, I wanted--I felt that I had skills in finance or in some other area.  I cannot say that I, like some of my colleagues, had a keen desire to become--to get into a tank battalion or to get into the infantry and march fully ahead.  But I wanted to get more meaningfully involved in this.  And we in effect were a company that had a group of men who then were detailed to go clean up the barracks for the white officers and the others.  And it was very insulting and demeaning and so I did not like that.  In addition, we're in New Orleans [Louisiana], and on the base even though there was segregation, but in going through the city we had to sit at the back of the bus and again, I have to respect people like Rosa Parks who took action against that.  And I felt demeaned and--but they say you can't disgrace this uniform and so perhaps I was too submissive in acquiescing to that whole system.  But it was all unpleasant.
Story_ID: 178158
Speaker 1: A more pleasant thing, I met my wife [Marion Myers] in New Orleans [Louisiana], that worked out well.  But--
Speaker 2: How did you meet?
Speaker 1: The--it happens that her sister had--was dating a warrant officer there and he introduced me to her and I found that she was teaching at the time and we--we were--there were only six black officers at that time in New Orleans so that we perhaps had the status.  I indicated at the time that, that I couldn't consider marriage because I was going to go back to school after the [U.S.] Army and I didn't have any money.  She said she'll be teaching and so on because she was teaching at the time.  And so it all worked out.
Story_ID: 178159
Speaker 1: But now to get back to the [U.S.] Army itself, we stayed there.  And then there is something else.  I think I state for the record that was done, and somebody can see the extent to which this was part of some global pattern.  We were shipped overseas.  Now I've not researched this, but I can tell you my reaction at the time.  Many, many years later I was giving a commencement address.  I told you I was the President of this Association of the Black Colleges [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO), Washington, D.C.], and so very frequently they ask us to give commencement addresses.  And I was going down to one college. I think it was Talladega [Alabama], and I went to Atlanta [Georgia] and the president called and arranged for someone to pick up a board member of his with me to bring me down to Talladega.  And so it was a trip for a couple of hours and we were going and he, he began talking, you know you feel around to see, get a point of contact.  And so we got to the war [World War Two, WWII] and he talked about his experience there.  And then I talked about my experience and I said I was in the Pacific.  He was in the Pacific.  He said he was a pilot and that he immediate--in, this was in 1945, that he was flying to the Pacific a cargo combat plane that--with X number, he talked about many thousands of body bags and that were going to be used.  And also I understood that a half a million purple hearts that had been produced and manufactured.  So they were ready for a slaughter, a slaughter, in going and in the invasion of Japan at the time.  And so I look back now to say that I'm one of those who for the good of the nation I guess, had been slated to go to a slaughter because they expected the invasion of Japan to be a slaughter.  It just happens that the atomic bomb was dropped at that time before we got there.  And so we had to--and incidentally along the way, it took us a month at sea.  We stopped and then we'd stop at Eniwetok [later, Enewetok] and certain islands to get off with the packs on our back and to walk through water that was shin high and so on.  They were preparing us for that.  But as I've said things turned out, now I know that the views vehemently differ concerning the dropping of the atomic bomb.  But I look back now and realize that things might have been different.  But it was--but it did happen.  So we went to Okinawa [Japan] and stayed there.  We were there about six months, but our job was to deploy men to guard the Japanese prisoners of war at the time.  Still unloading ships and still doing the menial kinds of things.  So I--when I left the service, I stayed in the Reserves and actually was promoted to a captain during the time I was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in--I returned to Harvard and, then--
Story_ID: 178160
Speaker 1: So you came back a captain in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Well I technically they--you, you leave as a first lieutenant and then they promote you to captain after you get out.
Speaker 1: After, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so but I was a captain.  And then I, I then after going to, as I said, going back to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and for a couple of years.  And perhaps in retrospect it was being selfish, but I got a, a--we had $125 a month in terms of the benefits that we had gotten and I stayed in the [U.S. Army] Reserves with this little stipend for and I had the family and by that time two children.  And so I--while going through school as a veteran, I stayed there.  But then after that, I was completely disenchanted with the Army and I resigned and the commission, and they sent someone down from Washington [D.C.] to talk to me because by that time President [Harry S.] Truman had started the whole process of integrating the Army.  And I think he initiated that process in 1948.  So I--and I think, I think the performance was good in the Reserves.  But I still left and I frequently say to the family group that one of two things could have happened.  One is that I might have gone on to become a general, or the other give--career, Vietnam and so on, that I could be celebrating in some memorial someplace, so I don't know.  But in any event, the--and again, unlike the Jackie Robinson, he, he fought out, but I, I protested and argued against it, but I never did what a Jackie Robinson could do and so on.  In terms of, of being court marshaled and so on.  But that was the Army and the--and I think that they misused a lot of talent that was there.  It was very meaning--I was--to be, I wasn't proud to say I was in the quartermaster.  Technically, that's a logistical arm of the Army and one should have been proud of that.  But we were in effect housekeepers and I was not happy with that.
Story_ID: 178161
Speaker 1: You came back to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or you went to Harvard to, to grad school after that.
Speaker 2: That's correct, and then--
Speaker 1: What was--how did you find Harvard?  I mean what, what was, was that different from Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts]?  You'd already been in Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], that was similar I guess--
Speaker 2: I, I, I would say that Harvard wasn't so liberal as Boston University.  But, but still, and I did not realize at the time that in my field there were two of us.  And again I, I didn't give much thought to it, two blacks.  One was a--first named Sam Westerfield went on to become an Ambassador to Liberia and he was killed over there, or at least died of a heart attack.  But the--now that we have talked about affirmative action and these kinds of things and I look back, I cannot condemn and I do not know the statistics, but there was just two of us at the time.  The--it was a beautiful experience.  I mean it was wonderful.  There was a man named John D. Black who was the professor in--who in the graduate school of arts and science who was my major professor.  And then he had a young protege of his, John Kenneth Galbraith, who came along.  And so he assigned me to Dr. Galbraith, who was just a tremendous person.  I mean one who was just out there in the very forefront, very courageous, outspoken and very--he was a true liberal.  And that was just a magnificent experience to be under him.  They gave good guidance and opened doors and the like.
Story_ID: 178162
Speaker 1: Just wanted to stop for a minute and ask you what [John Kenneth] Galbraith was like?  He's probably the most famous economist that America produced, you know and so--
Speaker 2: About six feet, five inches and the--and but very, very articulate.  He was technically a, a Canadian who came to the United States and then he came there.  He was the one who went to the federal government to set up the rationing system during World War Two [WWII] that he later opposed.  But then he became as I've said a great, great liberal in terms of economics.  And the--his most, more famous, I mean you say I branched off as, you know, into administration.  But Andrew Brimmer who came along later who stayed in economics and established his own firm in economics to advise people and was on the Federal Reserve Board, that I would say was his most famous black student.  But again, he was--he gave personal guidance and gave encouragement and support and so on.  And whereas some people, perhaps because of the prestige that they had, I had no difficulty.  The grades were good and I was able to get through without any, any setback, on course.  So that worked out well.
Story_ID: 178163
Speaker 1: So the work was--more was--you didn't find it very difficult.  I mean you--
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Well, well no Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was very difficult.  But the--and I frequently mention to people that the difficulty for me and again I went through, I think I--with all A's.  So, so I was able to move through.  So I had no academic adversities.  But, but there were people who were considered to be some of the greats in our society. One man named [Gottfried] Haberler in international trade was preaching a lot of things that only now people are coming around to.  An even greater person was [Joseph] Schumpeter, who advanced some theories about economic development that now are considered to be out on the cutting edge.  But they--
Speaker 1: How, how do you spell his name?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: S-C-H-U-M-P-E-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: S-C-H-U-M-P-E-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Joseph A. Schumpeter.  He, he had a theory of economic development and a matter of how things become of obsolete and how you keep going and so I'm saying that I was saying great, great people.  But, but for me, they--one was from Austria and, and indeed perhaps they were top world class people who came here in order to avoid [Adolph] Hitler.  But the point is I understand that Harvard had a whole boatload of the best minds in the world coming because of the persecution in Europe.  But it was extremely difficult to understand him for me in terms of the language and the like.  Now in time it mattered not, but and--but it required trying to break through, what were they saying, what were they--and it required digging and digging and doing even more extensive reading that I could understand, than just getting it from the lectures.  But I went back and it worked out, it worked out well.  At the end, I was scheduled, had finished all of my work in 1949.  Finished all of the requirements for the degree and had finished the dissertation.  And when the fellowships for which Dr. Black, John D. Black, had recommended me, all of them came through at once.  Got one from the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture, got one from the Rosenwald Fund, and a third one from the Rockefeller Foundation.  And all of them came through.  And so I did what I think many people had not even thought of doing, in that I delayed really getting the degree in order to take advan- and then to go back and really dig into the kinds of study to understand all that I'd done.  So I spent an additional year.  And then I--Dr. Black wanted me, recommended and I was accepted, to become an economist at the Bureau of Labor Statistics.  So I--after the semester ended, I left.  But then--
Speaker 1: So you were, you were there a couple of years you said?
Speaker 2: No, I stay, stayed there only half a year--
Story_ID: 178164
Speaker 1: Half, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Then I went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] where again, I've said to--I say to many youngsters.  I told you at the present time I'm the--on a board that advises--of an organization that advises students.  And they give a great deal of emphasis to how do you fill out this resume and how do you get that application, what do you say and what you don't say, or interviews.  And I look back and find that in almost every position I've been into throughout my life, it hasn't been one for which I applied.  I mean there's some people who've come and--so Morgan--
Speaker 1: Who you know is more important--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Morgan wanted me, and I had that dedication and so I started that semester at Morgan State as I've indicated, for thirteen years.  Best experience of my life.  Working with young people and working with students, bringing them out.  And a number of those people, now obviously some of those people now are retired.  But they've went on to do marvelous things.
Speaker 1: Now one of your students has gone on to become the, I guess the most high profile proponent of 'Black Business Enterprise' [sic, 'Black Enterprise' magazine] and--
Speaker 2: [HM] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.].
Speaker 1: Earl Graves, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, yes.  He was a student and always outgoing, very resourceful, very imaginative and so on.  So--and he has, and he has paid back to many people.  He has been very supportive of Morgan.  He's been very supportive of many, many different communities.  So you're right.  But that's one of the advantages of teaching, any teacher, any teacher can go out and point out certain people who have gone beyond them.  I mean as a matter of fact most people say that's the joy of teaching; everybody, not everybody, but many of the people whom they have tutored who have, whom they have mentored and gone on to exceed them in what they have accomplished.  So we're very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what else made Morgan State a--such a good place to be?  When, when you were there was Mr. Bryson [ph.] still there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  He was my teacher and he was the one who really introduced me to economics and so that as I've told you after I'd gotten the doctorate, it was he who wanted me to come back to be on the--so he, he, he really, not coerced, but he really encouraged me.  And I--so I made the commitment to go there.  And I, I repeat, that was one of the best experiences of my life, to work with the students.  He has passed just recently, but he not only did that, but he went outside of the community to--because he discovered that even though he taught finance there, that a number of people would go to the black bank--the white banks there.  And the white banks would charge higher rates to blacks at the time, and they would take their funds and support projects in the white community.  And very few of them had mortgages with those banks.  So he formed a savings and loan association there.
Story_ID: 178165
Speaker 1: All right, now you were chair of the social sciences department at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for a number of years.  It was thirteen years?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, not for the entire thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you did become--
Speaker 2: It was really near the end.  I started as associate professor, became a full professor, tenured professor, and then Dr. Martin Jenkins that was the President at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And it was his vision to have Morgan establish a graduate program.  So I was the--well first I was the Chair of the Social Science Division there.  But then they had me to take the leadership position and establish bringing all the faculty together to see how we could establish the graduate school.  And I was--so I chaired that activity and was scheduled to become the dean of the graduate school.  But the--it was really through the, the, the [U.S.] State Department called me and I think the--I, I do not know that this is accurate, but I believe that [President] John Kennedy--F. [Fitzgerald] Kennedy at the time, chastised the State Department for not having an adequate number of blacks.  And so they wanted to reach out to get blacks.  And so I was identified as one.  So I was offered the position to come there at--it, it--they call it the--it's, it's really the third rank of officers whom they had there.  And I was in the midst of my commitment of that activity such as forming that graduate school.  And also writing and I considered it and I turned down that position.  And I think they were astonished that one would turn it down.  And so they apparently passed the word up to the top layers there that I had rejected the position.  And so they came back and offered me the second level of--at the State Department and so I accepted that.  And left and went to the State Department and stayed--that was actually in 1963.  And stayed till 1967.  And it was again, Martin Jenkins who recommended me to be the President at Bowie, and Bowie State College [later, Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] at the time.  And--but I was--by that time I was entrenched in the State Department and very excited.  I had traveled, I'd taken the whole family down to Colombia at that time.  That was before Colombia really collapsed because of all the things that have gone on there.  And we stayed there.  It was for one summer advising there.  We also studied Peru.  The factors contributed to exports from Peru.  So we really were very immersed in the, in that.  And the--this was after President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was assassinated.  [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson came along with his so-called Alliance for Progress in Latin America with the idea of creating a free market in--a free trade area in Latin America.  And so it was--I was excited to be able to, you know draft a statement and I gather that it--a little bit of it got--is--it made me understand what a president's speech is like to get, you know, several thousand words and to have a few of your words in that.  But the--so it was exciting to be a part of that particular thing when, as I've indicated, Dr. Jenkins asked me.  And so the family group had a great deal of discussion.  But there was also the aspiration once I had been established there, of becoming an ambassador or--so we were excited.  And really had to give a lot of thought.  And plus, plus in going from that to the college presidency, I would have taken a big cut in salary.  And that was a very--so really had to think hard about that.  But finally, I accepted that.  And then that turned out to be the most excit--up to this point, the most exciting period of my life.
Story_ID: 178166
Speaker 1: Okay.  As president of Bowie State [College, later Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --college it was called.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what happened?  Why was this so exciting?
Speaker 2: Well the Bowie State--the--Bowie State was actually founded in 1867 as a private college.  And then in the early part of the century, after Plessy v. Ferguson decision in 1896 in which separate but equal doctrine was founded.  They had normal schools to teach black teachers to go into black schools.  And Bowie was then moved to an area in Prince George's County in Maryland, that was an isolated farm area in order to teach teachers or young people to become teachers in the rural areas of the state.  I already alluded to the fact that Coppin State [College, later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] had become the normal school for teaching black teachers to go into the city, Baltimore City school system, but Bowie State was the normal school to teach these youngsters to go into teaching elsewhere in the state of Maryland.  By the 1960s, Bowie had declined and in enrollment and in funding and that there was really thought of really closing it.  And so the state had ceased pouring funds into it to maintain it and to--and the students were disenchanted.  They were--they felt that other colleges had facilities that they did not have and they were in great distress there.  Was a man named Dr. William Henry who had been there for twenty-five years and was a very dedicated and very loyal person to the state of Maryland and had held things together.  But he was nearing retirement and the students were unappreciative of all that he had done.  Here's a man who was a giant in many respects because he went through deseg--desegregation area.  And even though this was a college up there in that community, it was secretly permit of the, the, the Civil Rights leaders to come to his home on the campus to convene, strategize and to do a lot.  For the most part, the churches of those--that were the meeting ground and the focal point for organizing these.  But this was a man who was head of a college who did this.  So I have great respect for all that he had done.  But the state as I've said, was very ambivalent about Bowie.  And now the--and it was almost the threat of closing that institution.  So that's one of the reasons that I had some reluctance about giving up something in the [U.S.] State Department with this great prestige and looking forward to becoming ambassador, to become a president of a small college.  But then I saw again opportunities and challenges.  And so--but before accepting those, I did meet with some of the board members to assure that I would have their support.  And I would say to you that they committed themselves and they stood, really stood by that commitment.
Story_ID: 178167
Speaker 1: So I went to--in 1967, that I accepted the presidency of Bowie [State College, later Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] and went there.  And then immediately used some of the knowledge that I'd gotten from Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] in order to start things.  One of the things I did was to start a graduate program immediately.  The--I went to--it just happens that a number of people had--were in the local community.  Bowie was like a bedroom community to Washington, D.C.  And a number of people there were working in the federal government.  And so they wanted someplace nearby home to finish their degrees or to advance themselves in order to move up in the matter, in the government.  And so that was an opportunity.  And indeed I talked to people there who said that's what they wanted.  And so since I'd had that experience, I said we would do that.  In addition, Bowie at the time had only one major emphasis, teacher education, elementary education as well as some secondary education disciplines.  But I decided the way to do it was to broaden the curricula and so I suggested nine different majors that would be implemented in that first year.  Went to the Board, they were very supportive.  Bowie took off.  In retrospect, I'm not sure that it excelled so much because of my own efforts, but there were but two.  One as I've indicated to you, the population shift that you had large numbers of people coming into the area.  Once you have the people, that's the important thing.  But the second was the student boycott.  Students--again this was in the 1967, '68 [1968] period when the Civil Rights movement was at its height.  The students protested; they took over the president's administration building and threatened to turn the water on and to flood the building and to burn the building down.
Story_ID: 178168
Speaker 1: Now what were they pro--protesting at Bowie State [College, later Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: The dilapidated facilities at the campus.  But I would say they were caught up in the spirit of revolution that occurred at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], at Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], throughout the country.  The--I was a member of the establishment and I--but indeed one of the things--before we get into that I'll say.  That one of the things I did was when I went to Bowie with the idea of rejuvenating, rejuvenating and improving the institution, that we would meet with the students to find--and also with faculty and others, to get an idea of what they wanted.  So my wife and I used to have dinner with the students every Wednesday.  And we established rapport with those students.  We knew them by name.  We knew their families.  We, we were--we knew them.  So when the protest came along and they took over the building and so we had direct linkage with the students.  And so there were two elements there.  One was that we could--we were a part of the establishment saying, you know, they were wrong.  But then we had secondly a link with them.  There was one young man named Roland Smith who was the President of the Student Government Association, who would--who said to me something and it was very, very perceptive for a young man.  He said you know, you will look good if you look bad.  And his idea was that if the, the students could see that you know I was supportive of what they were doing and so on, it is bad in terms of the government, but it's good in terms of those students.  So we, we would silently get together and I would--and it just happened something else occurred.  My daughter at the time was President of the Student Government Association at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And they were having a strike and so on.  And so the young people would tell me things from their point of view, but I could share with them things from the administration point of view and it was a good rapport.  This Roland Smith has since gone on.  He's now vice provost at Rice University down in [Houston] Texas.
Speaker 1: In Houston, yeah.
Speaker 2: We stay in contact with each other.  But I'm saying that as a result of that--
Speaker 1: Now was he a student leader?  I mean he was--
Speaker 2: He was the President of the Student Government Association.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And so he was the leader of that--
Speaker 1: So this was a highly political--I mean this was a delicate political matter here.  How do you deal with a student strike.  How did the student leader get with you to try to solve the problem.
Speaker 2: That's right and I think he would without being a traitor to the cause.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He would frankly lay his cards on the table.  I would lay the card on the table--"you can't do--you can't burn down a building and not expect the government to come in to do something."
Speaker 1: So the issues here and what I'm hearing are the issues here--overall--
Speaker 2: No, no.  We agreed fully.  We agreed, we agreed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the value of the school was much greater than the, than the [unclear]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But I'm also saying to you in the context of this, that I had this hesitance about going to Bowie.  We went there and it was a phenomenal increase--but--improvement in the institution.  But I'm not, and I talked about starting new majors and starting the graduate program and all of those.  And I talked about the movement of the population afterwards.  But I've also said that a key element was that student strike.  That the students protested and the state then agreed to pour resources, acquiesce to the student demands because the papers throughout the country--New York Times sent reporters down there.  And all over the country, to cover this strike.  And they could see the legitimacy of the demands of the students to improve the quality of the institution.  But having white students there, some of those students coming from the area, also enhanced the willingness of people to give resources.  So they poured resources in that college.  It's a beautiful college now, beautiful college, Bowie State.
Story_ID: 178169
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Everybody won on this one.  I mean--
Speaker 1: They did, they did.  And I would say that when the--and another thing is that Spiro Agnew was the governor [of Maryland] at the time.  And he came to me and said, "Now this is wrong," said, "now you as the president of the college, you arrest those students."  And I just assumed that the governor was the boss but I said, "Nope," I knew them.  I knew--I said I wasn't going to arrest those students.  And so my wife [Marion Myers] and I packed our bags and we were ready to leave.  And I find in retrospect had I acquiesced to his demand, I would have been out of there.  But by sticking with the students, they took me in their circle when they were singing 'We Shall Overcome'.  And I remember vividly that I discovered the difference.  I didn't know how to clap.  I mean they would clap on--I would clap on the beat, they would clap off the beat and so on.  But we were there at this--in the circle singing 'We Shall Overcome'.  And they--
Speaker 2: And what year was this?  This was--
Speaker 1: It was 1968.  But also at the time, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s assassination occurred there and that just, just caused chaos in the whole area and so on.  But I repeat in retrospect, resources came and the state was committed to it and then they had in retrospect another agenda.  They could see the number of whites coming into that.  When I went there, it was all black.  I think there were two white students.  When I left--and the enrollment was less than five-hundred and was declining.  When I left there were three-thousand students there and fifty, almost fifty percent of them were white students.  So that was--but that also set the stage for something that now is being looked at more closely at institutions throughout the country.  That this matter of getting a diverse (unclear).  Because we found that both groups came.  It was very enriching to the--to whites who had been isolated to see--be in contact with, be colleagues with and to interact with the black students.  The black students learned from them and so on.  And also learned some other interesting things.  That some of those--say a white housewife could be very articulate, have perfect English and--but when you got into many nuances, decision making, the choices and so forth, you found that the person who, because that person was well established in the use of language, say the white middle income housewife, could have a 3.8 average on a 4 point scale which is sum cum laude.  And that black could have a 3.1 average and yet that black in terms of totality, was a superior human being to the other one.  Now so I'm now saying that now we blacks generally serve, have one standard deviation below others on standardized tests and the like and as they have been kept out of many, many different things.  But there's a lot of quality there, (unclear) quality.  And a lot of talent that is to be used.  So what I've said that Bowie [State College, later Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland]--but Bowie also told me the compassion and the understanding of both races, how both can learn from each other.  There were incidents at time, but in general it proved to be a model and now people look at Bowie.  I mean it's still--I don't know the ratio at the moment, but it's almost half and half.
Story_ID: 178170
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you went from Bowie State [College, later Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], being president of Bowie State, to being the president, the founding president of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education].
Speaker 2: That is correct, yes, yes.  I retired from Bowie because the state actually had given me credit for all of the years I had spent there, and through some technicality they would buy back a certain number of years on which I was on leave and so forth.  So I had thirty-two years of exper--and, and also the state passed a law indicating that the time one spent in the service if one were mariner, could then be counted toward one's retirement in Maryland.  So I had thirty-two years and so I retired and expected to relax and to travel around the world.  And again I was approached.  I'd been on the board of this Association of the Black Colleges that had been formed.  And they approached me to be first executive director, and then later the president.  And so it was with some--as a matter of fact, when I retired from Bowie as the president, there were thirteen, actually sixteen, sixteen unsolicited offers that came in to do various kinds of things and so forth.  And I was--they thought I was young and still relatively young, in the 50s, and that, that I had something left.  And so I had these--the one of the bottom of the list, the very bottom of the list was the one to be, to head the Black College Association.  'Cause they had a budget I think of sixty-thousand dollars and to staff and to do all the things that had to be done to coordinate that.  And so it was not appealing, but again out of a sense of dedication and commitment, that I accepted that.  And that proved to be a fantastic experience.  I have indicated to you, again, privately, some of the, the, the, the two outcomes of that.  We were able to do the normal things and by getting foundation support.  We were able to catapult that so that now that, that--I mean it's visible.  I mean they, they, that group is well known--still not so well known as UNCF, United Negro College Fund, which is you know, it, it's the premier organization that's known throughout the whole nation.  I understand that among all fundraising organizations, that, white or black, that it ranks way up there at the top.  So Bill Graves the head of that, that's well known and very prestigious.  Less well known, but one that--and theoretically UNCF represents the forty-nine or perhaps thirty-nine, private black colleges.  But--and those depend upon that to a considerable extent for their sustenance.  NAFEO, the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, is the membership association of 116 black colleges, public, private, two year, four year and so on.  And the--I gather that technically the Department of Education still recognizes about 104 of those as being historically black.  But it now is very prestigious and well known organization.  I would say that the most satisfying parts of that as far as I was concerned, are that number one, Mary Berry who was the Assistant Secretary of Education in the [President James "Jimmy" Earl] Carter Administration in the--must have been 1979 prior to the election said, you know, "What is it that the president can do for you that won't cost any money?"  And so I came up with the idea that what he can do is issue an Executive Order to all these agencies to help the black colleges.  And there's two aspects of this.  I overstated the importance of that.  I, I just assumed all he had to do was to say something to all of these.  On the other hand, I understated the autonomous power that these different agencies--our federal government is almost like a group of little fiefdoms that they, they do what they want to do.  But, but still as I see it in retrospect, the executive order has, has a lot of clout.  And it certainly has helped.  Now the Hispanics have come along, HACU, HACU, the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities, and similarly have gotten an Executive Order.  The Asians have come along, have gotten an Executive Order.
Speaker 1: It was a good idea.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  And the, the Native Americans have an Executive Order.  So and I'm saying that they, they--and those agencies pay attention to that.  Now the Congress came along and reinforced that.  And again it just happens that my vice president at the time was from South Carolina, and she knew Strom Thurmond when he was trying to change his position about things.  And so she went to him, Wilma Roscoe was the vice president, who went to him to see what he could do to support that.  And so he introduced into Congress legislation to have historically black college week.  And now that week continues to move ahead and the, the--when the exec--when the president says to all the different agencies, get people there, they drop what they're doing and they get there.  And then once they come there, they try not to come empty handed.  And so it's still is something that is going on and I, I, I'm pleased that I had a part in that.
Story_ID: 178171
Speaker 1: We've indicated that Mary Berry, as the assistant secretary [in the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare], asked what we could do and we suggested that it was my idea to have an executive order.  The presidents came together and spent--led by Elias Blake who was then President of Clarke [College, later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] who led a whole group who sat up virtually all night to write that executive order.  And that was passed.  Now the others have it, and it has proved to be a very valuable resource in getting support from the various agencies for these institutions.  But the second and perhaps the, I think the more significant one, is that Sam Proctor, who was a giant in the community, he's deceased, and Willa Player who also is deceased, in the Department of Education, implemented some legislation that Congress had passed to help the black colleges.  And what they did was to pass what they call the Title III Act of the Higher Education Act, which gave money to help what they called developing institutions.  The only problem with that was that many institutions throughout the country said they were developing.  And that little pot of money was just spread very thin throughout the entire higher education community.  There was a professor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] named Kenneth Tollett, I think he's still there, who was on an advisory committee.  And he kept articulating the concern.  Look why, why are we afraid of black?  Why, why are we trying to be euphemistic?  Let's call what it is.  Let's say we want money for black colleges.  There are many people who said no way, now way we're gonna get money for the black colleges.  Because you have to include the others.  You can't specify it's only for them.  I--the President [James "Jimmy" Earl] Carter lost the election in 1980.  And there's one man named [Buddy] Blakey who was a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Education, who left and he was in effect between jobs; brilliant lawyer.  So I and of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] invited Blakey to come in and draft some proposed legislation for us.  And so he spent the whole year drafting this proposed legislation just for--to earmark money for the historically black colleges.  By good fortune I wear a bowtie.  And I became friendly with a Senator who--because he also wore bowties constantly.  His name was Paul Simon.  And who's a very great liberal.  And he as a senator, became chairman of the Education Committee.  And so he also selected as his Chief Legislative Aide, Buddy Blakey.  The same person who had written this draft for us.  So then it was a matter of getting the support of the higher education community.  And it meant our, NAFEO's systematically going to all the different u--and making deals with them to find out--to give the American Council on Education for example, to give them what they wanted in order that we would get their support for this.  And so we had--we were able to get widespread support.  Went back and they sent it to the Congress, got a large number of cosponsors, got it through, and Congress passed this earmark act specifying that money should go to the black colleges.  I-- at least a hundred million dollars per year.  And every college would get at least a hundred, get at least five hundred thousand.  Many of those colleges now depend upon that money.  I estimate that we've gotten over--almost two billion dollars to these colleges now based upon that alone.  That in my mind stands out to me because it's, it's something, tangible evidence.  Because you go to these colleges now and you see the large number of programs that they implement under Title III.  So it's very satisfying.
Story_ID: 178172
Speaker 1: I was at NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] as the president for eighteen years.  I then left and retired.  I'm president emeritus of NAFEO at the moment.  But then I became chairman of Minority Access [Incorporated, Hyattsville, Maryland].  Here we saw a trend of something that's happening.  When I went to NAFEO and was on the Board in the 1969 period when NAFEO was formed, it was formed in October of 1969.  Eighty or ninety percent of students were going to black colleges, of black students.  Now believe it or not, almost eighty percent of black students go to what were predominantly white institutions.  And indeed some of these institutions, Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] for example, which had been predominantly white institution, now is ninety percent black.  It is predicted that by the year 2015, which is just around the corner, eighty-five percent of the new entrants going into post-secondary education will be black students.  And most of those students will be going to what were formerly predominantly white institutions.  So the problem now is that we have this flood of black students going to white institutions, but many of them have problems.  People have problems in terms of tenure and some of the selective institutions have been resistant because the fear of getting--having lawsuits for favoring affirmative action.  So it, it's so--there is a need for an organization to work with majority institutions to help in the recruitment, retention and graduation of, of black, of minority students.  Not only black, but Hispanic, Native Americans and the like.  So we have--this organization has been in existence for seven years.
Story_ID: 178173
Speaker 1: Each year it [Minority Access, Inc., Hyattsville, Maryland] has a number of internship programs, it has--has been--it has a national conference also in which it brings together and gives awards to various people.  One of the areas we're working in is to help to address the health disparities.  As you know, blacks, Hispanics and Native Americans die more frequently from illnesses, they're sick longer and have more severe illnesses.  There is a disparity gap between the health of minorities and the general population.  So one of the things we have to do, a lot of things we have to do.  But one is to increase the flow of minorities into biomedical research.  And since they are more likely to concentrate on research of those illnesses that disproportionately affect minorities, the chances then are greater for them to find cures for these illnesses, and thereby close the disparities gap.  And so we discovered that in addition to our general mission of identifying bright students to go into these predominantly white institutions, and also to help those students to be retained and to increase--if we could then get models, models, students who have excelled, students who have gone into biomedical research.  But at the same time, identify people who recruit minority students to get into those institutions.  Those mentors who have assisted the minority students to succeed and whether--regardless of their race, and then to get alumni who have excelled.  But what we can do is to glamorize them and to publicize them and use them as role models in order that others through emulation will also go into those fields and thereby we increase the flow of talent.  That's the hypothesis on which we've worked.  We have now for four years now, we've had Oscar-like conferences in which we have played up these people and glamorized them.  We've really done it at the Hilton Hotel and there the big banquet, have large numbers of people we give them prizes and so on.  I'm saying this for the record because undoubtedly you will be including Oprah Winfrey in this.  We've really tried to say why can't we get these very bright students on the Oprah Winfrey Show?  Because once you get them in an audience such as that, that'll give them the visibility that they don't have.  We ourselves have publish, are publishing a magazine 'Minority Access', that we distribute in eight-hundred Wal-Mart stores and so on to, nationally, to give visibility.  But that's no--that doesn't begin to compare to the visibility that these people could get.  So we have written to her and haven't gotten a response.  But that will be something.  In addition we've gone to White House.  We went to a session yesterday to tell the people.  Will you let us just dis--put our role models on display in the White House?  Just give them awards in the White House, that would do it.  And we're still working on that.  I'm simply saying now that even though I'm an octogenarian and well--the people who are in this nonprofit group, Minority Access, says that it's good for me, that it keeps me alive and excited to be involved in these things.  But I am committed to this concept of assisting and recruiting and retaining and graduating minorities in these majority institutions, and concomitantly, to play up, to visu--to, to give a greater visibility to these role models, not only blacks, not only the Hispanics, not only Native Americans.  But to whites, to anyone who has helped them to get up.  And then to glamorize these in order to have the effect of increasing the number who will support and enhance the education of these young people coming in and thereby creating an environment in which we truly realize the, the principles of this democracy.
Story_ID: 178174
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?  I mean not as if you haven't been talking about them already, but, but just focus on that.
Speaker 2: I've indicated that it's to share equally in this democracy.  And I think that in order to do that, we have to solve some of the sociological, pathological problems that we face in our community, get into--get economic power, you see, that in turn will help us to get political clout.  And to use the numbers that we have in order to get economic and political power, in order to get greater equal--and more near, and more nearly reach equality in our society.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back at what you've done over these many, many years, what do you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: The--it is working through others, through my own children, through the students, and through the individuals whom I have helped in--through Minority Access [Inc., Hyattsville, Maryland] and through NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], to again enhance their positions in education.  And hopefully that education, increase in education has helped them better to share in this economy and society of ours.
Story_ID: 178175
Speaker 1: Sir is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I indicated to you earlier that, that whereas we do teach people to, to fill out applications properly and to prepare for interviews, and to set their own goals, which is very important in order to move toward those.  That I have been selected, I have responded to what has been asked of me.  And therefore, I can't say it wasn't by design, therefore, I would not change it.  I would not do anything differently.  I would do exactly what I have done before.  If I--I, I just feel that there's been some design, divinely created pattern that I in my frailty, could not have done myself.  The answer is no, I would not have changed things.
Speaker 1: And lastly, lastly, sir and this is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As one who has helped others.  And as I've indicated before, through the--as a matter of fact, when I retired as the president of NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education], they gave me a going away banquet and there were nine, nine-hundred people who came there.  And what they did was to--someone, one of the professors, made a research of the number of people whom I'd helped to get doctorates by using the clout that a President has to get foundations to give fellowships to people and the like.  People who had been helped directly to get into graduate professional schools, and other people who had been catapulted to positions of fame and fortune.  Indeed I, I, I will even digress to say that there is one person who excelled and prospered independently of anything I did.  But he did come to me as the--when I was President of NAFEO and said, "I have an idea.  Do you think you could help me?"  The idea is to go to the black colleges and simply tape their football games and then show them to a community, in the black community in various other cities.  And so I did write to all the colleges and so on and he arranged to have this done.  And it just happens that he independently went off to coalesce with a very wealthy producer and again serendipitously, cable came along at that time and he was able to tap into that.  And then he went to the people in the District of Columbia to get certain concessions, independently of anything I did.  He was able to go forth to get these resources.  But he then was able to catapult that into BET [Black Entertainment Television], and then to sell it off and has become a billionaire, Rob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson].  So I'm saying that at the reception that they gave to me, they outlined a number of people whom I'd helped over the period of time.  So I get back to your statement, how would I like to be remembered?  And it is to--what I have done to help others in catapulting them to positions of--at least of a good life and sometimes in the positions of fame and fortune.
