Story_ID: 252119
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Lena McLin, L-E-N-A, and my middle initial is J, and my last name is McLin, M-C-L-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--
Speaker 2: And the J stands for Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay is that your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have another middle name before?
Speaker 2: May, I don't like it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they, did they call you Lena May when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, they called me Lena May.  That's why I got rid of it when I got grown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 5th, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Atlanta, Georgia at Grady [Memorial] Hospital.
Speaker 1: All right, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm a musician, a teacher, I guess you could call me an educator in a way, and a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're a composer too.
Speaker 2: Yes a composer.
Speaker 1: Which is very unique, you know, yeah, there aren't as many women out here, you know as professional composers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 5th, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We--you're at the present time in my home at 6901 Oglesby [Avenue], Apartment 4A, Chicago, Illinois 60649.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  December 5th.
Speaker 1: January, sorry.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  We historians have to be careful about that stuff.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Forget about the--
Speaker 2: That's right, an important correction, right.  That would put us twelve months ahead of ourselves.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 252120
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, kind of nonsensical kind of questions we ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That only require a short answer.  But they make sense.  The first one is ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Wow, my favorite food.  My favorite food would be turnip greens with ham hock and fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite time of the year is Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just love it.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really because everywhere I go, I consider it a vacation.  I used to travel on the road as a composer for my publisher, Neil [A.] Kjos [Music Company] of San Diego, California.  And I traveled for about thirty-five years every weekend, promoting music, my music, and promoting music history and teaching music history in over fifty universities.  And so wherever I am, that's my favorite vacation place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the last question in this set is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I really do, but it's rather long.  I don't know if you wanna hear it.
Speaker 1: As long as it doesn't take up over two hours long.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Well it's a poem I wrote for my students and I really set it to music.  Alice had her wonderland, Dorothy had her trip to Oz.  Cinderella had a ball and Jack had a beanstalk tall.  Midas had his golden touch and Rumpelstiltskin's name was much.  Pinocchio had a craftsman wise and Puss in Boots was no surprise.  Make believe is fine you see, but life is more than dreams to me.  'Cause my fairyland is where I am, how I think and what I do.  And miracles for me are things that happen when I cause them to.  I believe I am a dream.  I am the theme of life's full scheme and without me, there'll be no way for make believe to have its day.  So let me say to all who doubt that what you want can come about.  Just keep this little fact in mind, that all you need in life is time.  'Cause your fairyland is where you are, how you think and what you do.  And miracles for you are things that happen when you cause them to.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's beautiful.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 252121
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Benjamin Johnson] side, but we'll start with your mother's side, okay.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E, Dorsey, D-O-R-S-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know her date of birth, let me see.  I know she died in 1953.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she died?
Speaker 2: And she was about, I'm sorry, 1956, and she was fifty-three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well we can figure out her date of birth.
Speaker 1: This is 1903, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: All right, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And well what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back, first of all, can you trace her and the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Back to Villa Rica, Georgia.  And in Villa Rica, Georgia, my grandmother had seven children.  The oldest was Thomas A. Dorsey.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Villa Rica for us before--
Speaker 2: V-I-L-L-A, R-I-C-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the--all right.  So go ahead, Thomas Dorsey.
Speaker 2: The oldest was Thomas A. Dorsey, he was born in 1800.  And he became--
Speaker 1: He was born in 1900 you mean, or--
Speaker 2: No, he was born in 1800.
Speaker 1: Eighteen something.
Speaker 2: Eighteen, yeah 1800.
Speaker 1: This is your uncle you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Thomas A. Dorsey.
Speaker 1: He was born in 1800, that would be too far back, 1800 period, I mean--
Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900], yeah, 1900, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he was--my grandmother, which was his mother, Etta, E-T-T-A, Dorsey.  Etta [Plant Spencer] Dorsey, she taught him how to play the piano.  She played for his daddy, Reverend Dorsey, and Reverend Dorsey taught at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and also had a church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so the family history on your mother's side starts in the Atlanta area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they moved on Beale--
Speaker 1: As far as you know.
Speaker 2: When they moved from Villa Rica to Atlanta, and they took the children.  And they--my great-granddaddy had a church there.  And there were seven children.  And all of 'em were musicians, just fabulous musicians.  I'm telling you, it was something to hear them.
Speaker 1: Now do you know your great-grandfather's name on that side?
Speaker 2: Thomas Dorsey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Senior.  Thomas A. Dorsey, Sr. [sic. Thomas Madison Dorsey].
Speaker 1: So your uncle was Thomas Dorsey the III?
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: Junior, okay, so this is your grandfather we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Grandfather, not my great-grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: Grandfather, all right, all right.  Does the family go, go all the way back to slave times and can you do--there were stories about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  His, his--my mother's grandmother--Dorsey's mother was a slave.  Dorsey's mother's mother [Silvia Plant] was a slave, that's the picture I showed you of the lady from Villa Rica.  She was a slave.  And she escaped from Villa Rica on a hay wagon because she had starched a shirt and she refused to take a beating for it.  So she hitched the children up, piled them up under hay and moved to Villa Rica.
Speaker 1: Okay from--where was she when she started?  Was she--
Speaker 2: She was in--she was somewhere beneath Villa Rica.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then moved to Villa Rica, and then in Villa Rica, Dorsey and him--my grandmother really got started and married a preacher.  And then they moved from there.
Speaker 1: So was this during slave--I mean this was right after slavery it sounds like, rather than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: During slavery 'cause she, she left that town to--
Speaker 2: Well but my great-grandmother was in slavery, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a little bit before 1865.  But coming on down the line, Villa Rica was the settlement.  Then after the settlement into the 1900s of Villa Rica, they moved to Atlanta.  You understand me?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where the family, you know.  And like I said, that family had seven children.  And there was my mother who was a fabulous musician and composer, there was my--the oldest was my uncle Thomas A. Dorsey, who became known as Georgia Tom and played for--he was a musical director for Ma Rainey, the mother of the blues.  And you know Ma Rainey, the one who discovered Bessie Smith and all that.
Speaker 1: Right, right, famous Ma Rainey (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now his wife, his wife Nettie, Nettie [Harper] Dorsey, was the costume designer for Ma Rainey.
Story_ID: 252122
Speaker 1: How did your grandfather [Thomas Madison Dorsey] feel about Thomas [A.] Dorsey, your uncle, you know, becoming a jazz musician with Ma Rainey?
Speaker 2: I don't think he would have liked it so much, but I kind of think he died before that got too prominent.  It was my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] who objected tremendously, my grandmother [Etta Plant Spencer Dorsey] who objected tremendously because she felt he wasn't serving God.  But see as a boy, he would slip out and go to the Decatur Theatre [Decatur, Georgia] down there, sit around all the musicians you know, and he learned how to play, you know.  And he became known as Georgia Tom.  And he wrote over a hundred blues.  And he was a musical director for Ma Rainey.  And his girlfriend was Nettie [Harper], and they got married.  And in 1932, she was expecting a child.  And he went to a convention to direct a choir and when he got up to direct, he got a telegram telling him that she had just died in childbirth.  He rushed back and the baby boy died the next day.  And he was just, just couldn't take it.  And that's when he wrote his famous song, 'Precious Lord, Take My Hand, Lead Me On, Let Me Stand' [sic. 'Take My Hand, Precious Lord']  Which became one of the most popular gospel songs in the world.
Speaker 1: That's right, right, if not the most popular.
Speaker 2: And all over the world in all kind of languages.
Speaker 1: Well how did he come to be--now a lot of people don't--now I didn't understand until I was grown, the difference between a spiritual and a gospel song.  There--a lot of people think that gospel--we've always had gospel music.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But, but what's the difference?  Can you tell (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well spirituals are folk songs created by the American slave, in which the singer must have a personal connection with the deity.  And they usually run in three major kinds, short segments syncopated.  Like "I got shoes, you got shoes, all of God's children got shoes."  A long phrase melodic like "Deep river, my home is over Jordan."  Call and response, like, "Have you got good religion?  Certainly Lord.  Have you got good religion?  Certainly Lord."  These are songs that are the historical documentation of the lives of slaves by slaves.  And these songs were composed just starting back when slavery began, all the way through 1865, by the slaves.  Not single slaves, by the slaves.  That's why they are called folk songs.  Handed down from generation to generation and still able to survive.  Now the gospel song is a song written by an individual, or individuals, which Dorsey had a lot to do with.  And he added his beats for popular music into church music.  And you--and it worked because at that time, the churches, after the Emancipation Proclamation, did not wanna sing spirituals anymore 'cause they brought back too many painful memories.  So they ostracized for a period of time, the spirituals.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that black people--and that, you know you still hear that some places, that black people and black churches don't wanna sing the negro spirituals because they have a slave connotation.
Speaker 2: Not so much a slave con--con--well I guess you could say that in a way.  But, but it brought back too much painful memory.  If you say "Mama, is massa gonna sell us tomorrow?"  The answer is "Mm, mm, mm."  "Mama is massa gonna sell us tomorrow?  Mm, mm, mm."  Third time.  "Mama is massa gonna sell us tomorrow?  Mm, mm, mm, watch, hope and pray."  And when people got out of slavery, they didn't wanna go back to that.  They didn't wanna hear that.  You understand me?  So they wrote hymns, some gospel hymns.  And some of them were written by whites, some of them written by blacks, you know.  [Charles Albert] Tindley was one of the great black writers, but--and Lucie [E.] Campbell.  And so this really, you know, what was happening, Dorsey added a beat to his, you know.
Story_ID: 252123
Speaker 1: You're saying that gospel music existed before Thomas [A.] Dorsey or--
Speaker 2: No, I'm saying that it grew from Thomas Dorsey.  He's the father of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's the father of it.
Speaker 1: But just to be--
Speaker 2: I'm saying that he added a rhythmic beat like he had for Ma Rainey to his music.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the black music, church music that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was livelier.
Speaker 1: Was composed after slavery was not what we consider gospel now because it didn't have the same kind of beat that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was considered gospel after the blues.  The blues came in really right after Emancipation Proclamation.  That was the iambic pentameter style, you know, you know.  Singing that was created by the slaves.  Well there were more slaves that were emancipated, but that was it, you know, you know.  "Woke up this morning, blue as I could be."  Statement again.  "Woke up this morning, blue as I could be."  Solution, a digression, a refrain.  "The man I love, he done left me."  Just like [William] Shakespeare, you know, "The quality of mercy is not strained.  The quality of mercy is not strained.  It droppeth as the gentle rain."  'The Merchant of Venice.'  And that's the only really form that we have created in America.  That's the only musical form.  All the other things came from Europe.  But it wasn't just the blues with Dorsey, he added the shuffling beat that he had with Ma Rainey to the church music.  And then he called it gospel.  He named it, he coined the word gospel.  So that's why--that's how it became gospel music.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year was it that, that he created gospel music?
Speaker 2: Well you can't say exactly a year, but right after the stock market crash of 1928 [sic. 1929].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right about that period.
Speaker 2: About that period of time.
Speaker 1: So about the beginning of the Depression, the Great Depression (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Was the beginning of gospel music.  Okay.  So well now how did--well since we're talking about your uncle who was one of the great--and now he passed away about ten, twelve years ago?  Was that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1993 I think.
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], okay, all right.  That's twelve years ago exactly, right.  And did he talk about--ever talk to you about how he--what he was thinking about when he created gospel?  How he--
Speaker 2: No, he would just say things like "It's great stuff, great stuff."  He was a great worshipper of God.  He became a minister and he did leave the world of, you know, the blues and what have you.  And he wrote over a thousand gospel songs and took them all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And had his own publishing company [Dorsey's House of Music, Chicago, Illinois].  He published all of his own music.  Very excitable thing 'cause he wrote over a thousand songs.
Speaker 1: I guess, I suppose that '[Take My Hand] Precious Lord' would be the most--
Speaker 2: 'Peace in the Valley.'  Not only that, let me see, I think 'Old Ship of Zion,' 'It's a Highway to Heaven,' '[I Feel Like] Traveling On.'  'I'm A Stranger, Don't Drive Me Away.'  'If We Ever Needed The Lord Before, We Sure Do Need Him Now.'  You know the Take Six became famous with that.  They used that.  And just numerous gospel songs.  "I was standing by the bedside of a neighbor."  "If you see my savior, tell him that you saw me.  When you saw me, I was on my way.  You may chance to meet my father and my mother.  Tell them I'm coming home someday."
Story_ID: 252124
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about this, 'cause this is sort of ironic that in the--there's a, you know, popular movie about Ray Charles out now called 'Ray' starring Jamie Foxx.  And one of the themes of the movie is that Ray Charles, and I've heard this before, that people that heard his music, they heard like gospel music in his secular music.  But you're telling us that it started with secular music changed to, you know, became gospel music and then so Ray Charles was like taking it, almost taking it back to--
Speaker 2: He imitated my uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he's going full circle with it almost, back to the secular, you know.  So that's interesting.  Did your uncle have any feelings about that?
Speaker 2: Not really, he just did his church thing and went on, you know.
Speaker 1: So he never discussed Ray Charles' music and how--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Did he ever say to you that he thought that Ray Charles was playing gospel music?
Speaker 2: No, but we all knew it.  You couldn't miss it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a scene in the movie where two patrons in a nightclub walk out of the nightclub.
Speaker 2: And fuss about the Lord's gonna get him, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Well my uncle's heard that before.  He became the musical director at Pilgrim Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] at 33rd [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  And when his baby died, he had--he made my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] send me up here to live with him.  And I stayed with him until I was ready to go to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so were you the only child in the household?
Speaker 2: No.  I was--I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: But were you the only child in that household with your uncle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with, with his mother [Etta Plant Spencer Dorsey], with my grandmother and him and his sister.  Because there was seven of the Dorseys and they all played.  My Uncle Curtis [ph.] could just tear a piano up, play jazz like you never heard before.  I mean my Uncle Lloyd [ph.].  My Uncle Curtis could play a violin like you never heard before.  And there was my mother who could play the piano and sing like you'd never heard before.  And then there was Doris [ph.] and, and then Lovey [ph.], his other sister could play a little.  She wasn't as prolific as they were.  And then there was another one, I can't think of her name, but she died early.  So that was the makeup of the family.
Speaker 1: Really talented family.
Speaker 2: Very talented.
Story_ID: 252125
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about your father's side of the family, and then we'll get back into your childhood.  But can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Benjamin, B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: And his name was doctor because he had a doctorate in theology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know his date of birth, but I know he died in 1978 or '9 [1979].  So that should about give his age.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he older than your mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in 1890s at least I guess maybe, yeah.  So okay, so he was--all right.
Speaker 2: He graduated from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: From where?
Speaker 2: Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Morehouse, okay.  All right.  Now what do you know about his side of the family?  Does he come from a long line of educators or was he the first one to go to school?
Speaker 2: He came from a long line of very interesting people.  His mother was partially Indian [Native American], and his father was a Baptist preacher.  Preachers just run in our family.  His sister, Aunt Susie [ph.] was an educated, beautiful young lady.  She was--looked almost Caucasian.  They all looked almost Caucasian.  All of them, I don't know where they--a lot of white blood evidently.  And he had one sister, Marguerite [ph.], she was a troublesome one.  But--and let me see, Susie, Marguerite, and uncle, yeah uncle--what is his name, uncle--can't think of his name, wait a minute.  Uncle--not Lloyd, that was on the other side.  Uncle--it'll come to me and okay, the brother.  And his brother had served in the [U.S. military] service, you know and what have you.  He was a very prolific young man.  And they were, they were interesting people.
Speaker 1: Now what did they do for a living?  What were some of the occupations?
Speaker 2: Mostly business things like work in banks and kind of business acumen on that side.
Speaker 1: Okay now was your father from Atlanta [Georgia]?  Was he born in Atlanta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My father was born in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 252126
Speaker 1: Were they part of the Auburn Avenue black business district and all that when they had the (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my father [Benjamin Johnson] and M.L. King's daddy [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.] were inseparable.  And [Reverend] William Holmes Borders of Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  And the first black policemen were inaugurated in my father's church.  He started that.  Greater Mount Calvary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  And it was nothing to come home and see the mayor sitting on the front porch.
Speaker 1: The mayor of Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now that would have been a white man in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so it would have been nothing to see him sitting on the porch.
Speaker 2: When I was a little girl, yeah.  Was nothing to see him sitting on the--
Speaker 1: What was the mayor's name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't--Kelly [sic. James L. Key], I don't know.  I--something like that, Kelly I think, I'm not--I don't remember so well now.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but my father and Dr. King and, and Dr. King's brother were inseparable in the ministry.  William Holmes Borders and Reverend Ellis [ph.] and that was Wheat Street Baptist Church and Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], King's church, and Greater Mount Calvary Baptist Church, my daddy's church.  And I grew up with M.L. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M.L. King and [HistoryMaker] Christine [King Farris].
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams King].  The whole King family.
Story_ID: 252127
Speaker 1: Did you grow up on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] too or close by (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I grew up on what they call King, Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive now, which was Hunter Street.  And my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] and father [Benjamin Johnson] had a couple of houses on that street.  And I grew up there.  But I grew up with them, the Kings.  We were very good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, right across, or nearby anyway.
Speaker 2: No, I'm way on the other side of town.
Speaker 1: On the other side of town, okay.
Speaker 2: But we grew up together 'cause our parents were friends.  And so that was it, you know.  I knew M.L. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] like a brother, you know.
Speaker 1: Well tell us something about him.  What was he like when he was a little boy?
Speaker 2: He was wonderful.  He was always quiet and unassuming.  He did not carry any arrogance, anything, although he was very brilliant.  He could get you in an argument in a second and lose you.
Speaker 1: And beat you.
Speaker 2: Lose you.
Speaker 1: Lose you in the argument, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He had a great admiration for Mohandas Gandhi, and so did I 'cause I thought he was just the angel on earth.
Speaker 1: Even as a child?  Really?
Speaker 2: See we came up in a different atmosphere.  We as children came up respecting the church and respecting God.  We all came up that way.  And so it was not hard for us to appreciate authority.  We appreciated authority, we respected authority.  And it was a village in those days.  If your parents or somebody else saw you doing anything, you got reported, you know.  We were ver--I was very different in my family; I was the oldest and M.L. was very different in his family, you know.  He was a thinker.  And I always wanted to be a missionary and go to Africa and help everybody.  And we grew up like that, you know.  So it was a different--there was a respect for authority, which is gone now.  There is no respect for authority now.  And the whole problem is that people don't realize that when a child is born, a child is the only entity that cannot stand on his own.  That horse can stand on his own when he's born.  That elephant can stand on his own when he's born.  But that child cannot stand on his own.  His brain isn't even fully developed.  It takes a few years before he's able, so he became a creator of him own self.  And as a creator, he's got to have a god, a guide.  And when we lose the process of motherhood and fatherhood, and we leave it up to everybody else except to us in our natural, the natural line that the child came from, then you have to hope that by twelve years old the child has guided himself into something that is decent.  Because he needs it until he gets twelve years old.
Story_ID: 252128
Speaker 1: There's an aspect of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] that--it seems almost contradictory to respect for authority, but it's really not.  I understand what you mean about the respect for authority, but there's an aspect of him that would challenge injustice and--
Speaker 2: Well that is because there is a great respect for authority.  A great respect for the law that you would challenge misuse and disrespect of the law.  And that's what he had.  He was magnificent, he was brilliant.
Speaker 1: Even in school as a little boy?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was at fifteen he could outthink everybody at Morehouse, Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  He was just different, that's all, he was just born to do what he did.  I wrote a song called, "If they ask you why he came, to show mankind how to live here below.  Been guided from above.  He taught brotherhood and love.  The world took note of his path people trod.  Marching hand in hand trying to do their part.  Up the pathway to freedom and justice for all, he was sent from God above to teach brotherhood and love.  And that's the reason why he came.  Martin Luther King was his name."
Speaker 1: Now you're a--some would say you're a brilliant woman yourself.  And did you feel when you were coming up--I mean how did you feel about Dr. King in terms I mean you said he was smart, but did you have a sense that he had a--there's something bigger going on there than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you felt it.  He felt--when you were around him, you always felt like he was bigger than a human.  Almost like an angel.  I don't know if I--almost like an--kinda ethereal like, you know like he's here but he's not here.  I don't know if you can--you had to talk to him to do that; he's quiet spoken, quiet.  If he walked in this room now, he would walk in and wouldn't--and if you didn't know him, he would never let you know who he was.  And if you knew him and you said, "Hello Dr. King," he would say, "hi, how you doing," reach his hand and shake your hand, and unassuming.  Really in the vernacular of today, laid back, but there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There are stories of--people talk about the energy that he had when he was active in public life.  Did he exhibit like an uncommon amount of energy as a youth?
Speaker 2: Well he was, he read everything.  He was a reader, wow.  That's what we used to discuss, everything he read.  You couldn't just sit down and talk to him about the ballgame, you know you had to be a little heavy.  And I loved history, so I enjoyed talking to him.  I minored in history.  And so--
Speaker 1: So who would he--who were his friends and who were your friends when you were growing up?  Did you have like a group of youth?  I mean like a group of kids that really--
Speaker 2: Well I had mostly adults who were my friends, and I think M.L. had mostly adults, except you know we would interchange, [HistoryMaker] Christine [King Farris], and I didn't have too much to say to A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams King] his brother, 'cause his brother was more my brother's [Benjamin Johnson, Jr.] age.  That crowd, they were more together, you know.  But Christine and M.L., we were together.
Speaker 1: Okay now Christine writes about some of the mischief he got involved in as a youth, you know.
Speaker 2: See I don't know about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she wrote that he didn't like taking piano lessons, now this is--
Speaker 2: Oh no, now I imagine he didn't.  He was a thinker, he didn't want nobody popping him on the knuckles and--
Speaker 1: Well she tells the story, I think he and A.D. unscrewed the seat to the piano stool.  When the teacher sat down, she fell off the stool.  That ended the lesson.
Speaker 2: Now that sounds more like A.D. than M.L.  But I guess she would know.  But that sounds just like A.D.  He was the joker.
Story_ID: 252129
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I have is when I was three.  And I remember my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson], she would play the organ at church, direct the choirs.  And I remember her getting spiritually happy, and she had me sitting on the side, and then I tried to play the piano and carry on.
Speaker 1: You tried to play the piano at three years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and carry on.
Speaker 1: So you did an imitation of what you thought your mother did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that.  I remember that.  I don't remember anything else.  But I remember that.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church, there?
Speaker 2: Greater Mount Calvary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My daddy's [Benjamin Johnson] church, my brother [Benjamin Johnson, Jr.] is now the pastor.
Story_ID: 252130
Speaker 1: Tell us now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well it was rough, because near election times you would hear Eugene Talmadge.  And he would get on the radio and say some very treacherous things.
Speaker 1: Now Talmadge was one of the white politicians from Georgia that--
Speaker 2: From Georgia, yeah.  And he advocated segregation.  And then--
Speaker 1: Those were the days that they didn't bite their tongue about that, did they.
Speaker 2: No, and then you'd go downtown to Rich's [Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia], Rich's was a big store.
Speaker 1: What kind of things, just before we go to Rich's, what kind of things would Talmadge say on the radio?
Speaker 2: You're gonna allow your beautiful blonde daughter to be touched by a black ignorant nigger.
Speaker 1: This was on the radio.
Speaker 2: And this would come on the radio.  And you would be appalled.  And I remember when Joe Louis was fighting and I couldn't get my breath during the fight because I wanted him to win so bad.  And he won, and when he finally won my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] and them had to hit me in the back 'cause I was just frozen.  I was so tensed.
Speaker 1: Why did it mean so much to you?
Speaker 2: Because I wanted some accomplishment of some--I wanted somebody in the world to be proud of black people.  And it meant a lot to me, 'cause the water fountains would have black and white.  If you want a sandwich, you'd have to go around to the back.  You get on the bus, you had to take the back seat.  See this generation doesn't know anything about that.  That's why [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was like he was.  They'd have one day a year when blacks could go to the amusement park.  And if you were sick on that day, you had to wait till the next year.  Everywhere you went, you were constantly reminded that you were nothing.  And our parents would teach us you are something, in spite of that.  And so would Dr. King's parents [Alberta Williams King and Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.].
Speaker 1: So that made it--it kind of made the Joe Louis fight more important.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did the whole family gather to hear those fights?
Speaker 2: Yeah, gather round the radio.  There was no television.  Those were the days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] where I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Well I was referring to when you were a little kid, you know, in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: When I was a little kid.
Speaker 1: We'll get to Spelman.
Speaker 2: When I was a little kid.  Well I was up here a lot, you know.
Speaker 1: What was Chicago [Illinois] like?  Did you--what did you notice as the difference between Chicago and Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't hear that language on the radio, as prominently.
Speaker 1: You didn't hear of segregation.
Speaker 2: And I would go to Pilgrim Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] where my uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey] was the choir director of the gospel choir.  And he was director there for forty years just like [Joseph] Haydn was over in the Esterhazy family, you know.  And it was just nice that you know, I remember I was scared of Boris Karloff, 'cause he would play in those scary movies and oh gosh, I would come home and I would be really scared, you know.  And I remember an ice cream cone was five cent and ten cent, and you got big scoops.  And they had nice ice cream stores and people were nicer.  People were just nicer, except there was a lot of segregation.  You couldn't go to the Tivoli Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] unless you got behind the white people 'cause they wouldn't let you buy a ticket in front of a white person.  And the same thing that existed in Atlanta sort of existed there.  But you ignored that and went anyway.
Story_ID: 252131
Speaker 1: I lived at 6520 Vernon [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] with my uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He had a house there, it's torn down now.  I think it's a shame that they didn't keep it 'cause it should have been a landmark.
Speaker 2: It should have been, right, you're right.
Speaker 1: And he had a--like I said, he had a studio, a publishing studio [Dorsey's House of Music, Chicago, Illinois], I mean a publishing house on 43rd [Street] and Ellis [Avenue].  And a lady owns that now, and my aunt let it go.  She should have made it a landmark.  But I hope one day to get a statue of him.  The Gospel Fest was named the Thomas A. Dorsey Fest[ival].  And I started that when I asked George, I mean Mayor [Harold] Washington to do a tribute to my uncle, and he did.  But then it was taken downtown and called the Chicago Gospel Fest [Chicago Gospel Music Festival].  It should be the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Fest.
Speaker 2: Right, now that's interesting 'cause you're absolutely right.  When it started, it was the Thomas Dorsey (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Fest.
Speaker 2: Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Fest, and now it's just the Chicago Gospel Fest.
Speaker 1: And it should be the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Fest.  And I would like to see a statue of him because he's the father of gospel music, and everybody's singing gospel now.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's basically universally recognized.  Everybody knows that, and yet--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but there's nothing of him, you know, so I'm doing a CD this year with about five of his songs so that people will know, you know.  Because his songs haven't been carried on except for '[Take My Hand,] Precious Lord,' 'Peace in the Valley.'  Tennessee Ernie Ford used to close all his shows with 'Peace in the Valley.'
Speaker 2: You're right.  This is true.
Speaker 1: And 'Precious Lord' has been song by Leontyne Price, everybody you can name, just about.
Speaker 2: So now in Chicago [Illinois], what was your--did your uncle like, did he reap the rewards of being the father of gospel music when you were coming up, when he was director of the choir over at--
Speaker 1: I think he was recognized, but I don't think he was fully as recognized as he should have been.  He did, he does, he is in the Hall of Fame, the Nashville [Songwriters] Hall of Fame [Nashville, Tennessee].  He did receive a Grammy Award for 'Precious Lord.'  And he's in a lot of other--he received I think three or four doctorate degrees from different colleges.  So he, you know, has some benefits.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did he make his living full time as a musician?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes he did.  He trained Mahalia Jackson, Sallie Martin, Willie Mae Ford Smith.
Speaker 2: Mahalia Jackson is the queen of gospel music, everybody knows that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Queen of gospel music.
Speaker 2: All over the United States.  My aunt used to keep her records like gold.
Speaker 1: They try to say somebody else is now, but she is the queen.  She is the queen.  And Willie Mae Ford Smith is the one who took gospel music all over the world.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was out of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: And Sallie Martin?
Speaker 1: Well she wasn't, you know, too much of a singer like those two.  But she worked with my uncle and I think they were, you know, close.  She took his music around and everything.  And she had her a lovely group, and it was a lovely group.  They could really sing.  But she wasn't much of a singer--
Story_ID: 252132
Speaker 1: So you went to school here in Chicago [Illinois].  You started--did you start school here?
Speaker 2: No, I started school in Atlanta [Georgia], but then I came up here.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you came to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, it must have been about six, five or six.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you were born in '28 [1928].  And it say you moved to Chicago in '33 [1933], so yeah about five, you're almost five, right.  So did you stay up here for ten years straight?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Well I would go back, back and off and on 'cause my mama [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] would wanna see me.  So she would send and get me.
Speaker 1: Well how did you feel about that?  Being, you know--
Speaker 2: Well I didn't feel bad, because I was taught to obey and do what your parents tell you, you know.  And then my uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey] hired a professional musician to come to the house all the time and teach me piano, so I was getting the same thing I had been getting from my mother, you know.  So I felt all right about it.  You understand me?  I didn't feel you know--but then he sent for my sister and she came up here, Velma [Johnson].  She was wild, you know, but anyway she came up here and I was, I had company, you know.  And grandmother [Etta Plant Spencer Dorsey] kept us, you know.  And grandmother was a big access because she used to get up every morning at five o'clock singing spirituals.  She wake you up.  And we'd say, "Grandmamma sings too much," you know.  We couldn't sleep because she'd wake us up.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that that's a tradition in black community at one time for that to happen, because I've heard other stories.  In fact I had a grandmother to do the same thing, would get up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was a habit.
Speaker 1: For something that probably everybody did?
Speaker 2: When I got to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I knew more spirituals than anybody.  And Dr. James was very pleased with that.
Speaker 1: What Dr. James, what's his full name?
Speaker 2: Willis Laurence James.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he the director of music at Spelman?
Speaker 2: No, but he was one of the great teachers there, voice teacher, theory teacher.  And Kemper Harreld was the director.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to school--what were the names of some of the schools you attended here in Chicago and in Atlanta?  Can you think of the names of some of 'em?
Speaker 2: I think that school was McCosh [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's it, you're right.
Speaker 2: It's over on, it's over on 66th [sic. 65th Street] and something [Champlain Avenue].  I went to McCosh.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then when I got ready--graduated from there, got ready to go to high school, I went back home because my uncle had married again [to Kathryn Mosley Dorsey].  And he had a baby.  And so he didn't have the need to have, you know, me around.  And I was thirteen I think or fourteen, and I went back home and I went to Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where I graduated, and then went to college.
Speaker 1: That was 1947 that you graduated?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947] I graduated, went to college.
Speaker 1: Now I don't wanna take you too far, but were there any teachers at, at McCosh that recognized your musical ability?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The teacher I had recognized my musical ability.  And, but I didn't like McCosh 'cause they were always prejudiced I felt, because the teacher would go out the room and say now nobody talk.  And then they would come back and tell her that I talked, and I didn't talk.  And I didn't like it.  But they wouldn't say anything to my sister because my sister was real fair and so they would say, "Is that your sister?"  And they say, "Is that your sister, the black girl?"  And so I didn't like McCosh so well, you know.  Because they all made a difference until they heard me play.  And then when they heard my sister couldn't play, and when they heard me play they would say, "Lena," you know, they would get real nice to me.  And I always remembered that.
Speaker 1: So there weren't that many black students there then, I take it.
Speaker 2: They were, yeah they were mostly black, but they were mostly white teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were--did you have a favorite--was music always your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said earlier you liked history too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I minored in history in college.  But music was my subject.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was just devastated my freshman year 'cause I got a tumor on this hand and it ate up this bone.
Speaker 1: I see the scar.  Now you have a scar on your hand, right between the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and so they had to take a bone, piece of bone out of this leg, if you look at my feet, they swell a little bit.  Had to take a piece of bone out of here.  I don't know if you can see it now.
Speaker 1: I can see the scar, right.
Speaker 2: And put it in here.
Speaker 1: There's a scar on your shin.  So they had to take a--take bone out of your leg to--
Speaker 2: And then they told me I would never play.  So they--I was at Spelman, I couldn't take notes and I was a freshman, you know and I had to hobble around on crutches.  It was an awful time for me.
Story_ID: 252133
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington [High School, Atlanta, Georgia], do you remember any teachers or students or any significant events there?
Speaker 2: I remember the music teacher, and she was very nice, and we did beautiful music with her and she was very beautiful, she was very influential to me, although I didn't talk to her that much.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: I can't think of it.  I can't--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: I've been trying to think of her name.
Speaker 1: That between '43 [1943] and '47 [1947] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask for a yearbook and then if I get a yearbook, I could remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything memorable happen in high school that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to always tell the teachers about being unfair.  And so I always had this ministerial thing, been around it so long.  And when I felt that the teacher was being unfair, I would wait until after class left and say, "Ms. so-and-so I think you were unfair to that student and I think you owe that student an apology."  And she would say, "Who do you think you are?"  I say, "Well I'm not being disrespectful, am I?"  She said, "Where did you come from?"  So that's what I used to do.  I used to preach to people.
Speaker 1: Preach about the gospel, I mean the--
Speaker 2: Tell 'em the wrongness, wrong things they were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I saw a student steal something, I would say you shouldn't do that, that's dangerous.  I think about it now I get tickled, but that's the way I was.
Speaker 1: So you were a teenager of principle.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.  And when I got to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], they had an election and they had called us in there, say don't vote for her, don't for her, vote for so-and-so, so-and-so when they got ready to vote.  And they stood up, I stood up and I said, "This election is fraud because you've already had a meeting and said don't vote for this young lady over here.  And therefore it cannot be an election."  Those people say, "Where did she come from?"
Speaker 1: Now where did you come from and it's not--where did you get this sense of fairness?
Speaker 2: I just always had this.  I have always had this.  Do you know why all my students are successful?  All of 'em are successful when they first walk in the room in high school, I tell them welcome, this is a dictatorship.  There are no freedoms until you learn what I know.  And if I catch you cursing, smoking, doing anything you shouldn't do, be aware that I'm going to tell your parents.
Story_ID: 252134
Speaker 1: When you were at Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia], now did you--were you a--did you consider yourself a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you run for any class offices or anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  Only things I ever dealt with were religious things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't the most popular girl on campus or anything.  You didn't do that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: They would say I'm like the missionary, the churchperson.
Speaker 1: So like the missionary of Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you say your sister [Velma Johnson] wasn't like you in that respect.
Speaker 2: No, she was very animate and social and all that.  I didn't believe in shows, and if I went to the show, I would call my mother [Bernice Dorsey Johnson] and tell her what time I was going, and then I would call her and tell her the show was out and I'm on my way home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you do the normal things that kids do in school, like go to the prom and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No.  The--I didn't go to a prom till I was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they had to call my mother to make me go.
Speaker 1: They had to make you go.  Okay now well Spelman's right there in Atlanta [Georgia], so was there any--was--so when you graduated from high school, what--did you see yourself then as a musician in the future?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were pretty much set.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 252135
Speaker 1: Did you have a scholarship to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or anything when you went?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have a scholarship, I just went to Spelman.  I won a lot of--I wrote music, won a lot of scholarships when I was there.  But I didn't start out, you know, with a scholarship.  But my daddy's [Benjamin Johnson] church [Greater Mount Calvary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] paid for it because I had played for Sunday school, eleven o'clock service, three o'clock service, six o'clock service, BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] and eight o'clock service for years.
Speaker 1: So you were quite a piano player.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what was your impression of Spelman?  Did you know a lot about--I suppose you did before you went, being there in Atlanta [Georgia], but what was your impression of Spelman?
Speaker 2: Spelman was--Ms. [Florence M.] Read was the principal [sic. president], and we called it the intellectual prison because you had to wear black stockings on Thursdays, and if you didn't have a class until five o'clock, you had to report to a vesper at eight o'clock.  And very disciplined, very disciplined.  She had a book and she could look down and see if you were in your seat, and see if you were talking or anything.  You didn't dare talk, you know.  And then Kemper Harreld would play that great organ, and it was just so thrilling.  Was just thrilling.  And the beautiful voices of the girls' chorus.  And I also belonged to the mixed chorus, that was Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman.  And I came up under that great man over there at Morehouse, something.
Speaker 1: The choral director there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The president.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: Benjamin Mays, yes.  An orator from the oratorville [ph.].
Speaker 1: What are some of your memories of Benjamin Mays?  You have any stories about him?
Speaker 2: Great speaker, great speaker.  And you just loved to go, I did at least.  An orator, an orator.
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything he said that, anything he said that sticks out?
Speaker 2: Well he was always very encouraging.  And his thing was that it's not you, it's not somebody else's fault, it's yours.  Are you doing what you supposed to do?  Then that's the key.  If you hadn't been there, wouldn't have happened, you know.  And he was just, he was so much to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in school?  He wasn't Dr. King then, but was Martin Luther King, Jr. in school with you when--or had he moved on?
Speaker 2: He had moved on to another school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he probably was at--
Speaker 2: He didn't stay.
Speaker 1: Theological school [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania] I guess by the time that you--
Speaker 2: He was super smart.
Speaker 1: I think he attend--he started Morehouse at age sixteen I think.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm telling you.  Something else.
Speaker 1: So did he come back?  Did you all get together when he would come back into town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came to my wedding, when I got married [to Nathaniel McLin] he came.
Speaker 1: Now did you get you married while you were still at Spelman?
Speaker 2: No, I got married after I graduated from Spelman.
Speaker 1: Okay, it didn't seem like you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't look at no boys when I was in Spelman.  You couldn't know it, 'cause they sat out across the hall, send across the yard and say the dean said report.  After four o'clock you couldn't talk to boys.  Not on that campus.
Speaker 1: Now we live in a day today where children go off, I mean young adults go to college and they have like co-ed dormitories.
Speaker 2: No, see that's what--that seems ridiculous to me.  I wouldn't have that.  I wouldn't send my child to nothing like that.  See I think freedom has been stretched too far.  See and they can't bounce.  See when the--when you're within the circle and you get this far out and it bounces you back, it teaches you how to live.  But when you stretched and stretched and stretched and it can't bounce back, then it's out of control.
Story_ID: 252136
Speaker 1: Are there any particular instructors at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] that stand out or students when you were--
Speaker 2: Instructors, yeah I loved Willis Laurence James, Kemper Harreld, let me see.  Can't think of her name now, Jesus.  I had a German teacher who had just come--just gotten here from Germany, just escaped the Nazis.  What was her--Ms. Boynton, B-O-Y-N-T-O-N.  And also what was that other teacher's name.  Can't think of her name.  These were outstanding teachers.  And this one, I can't think of her name.  I wished I could.  Can't think of her name now to save my neck.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were writing music while you were a student, right?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I just wrote--they had a contest.  I was supposed to be a piano major and a voice major, but they threw me out because I couldn't play.
Speaker 1: When, when did your hand develop this tumor?
Speaker 2: My freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's just at the very beginning.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947].  And so they put me out of there and I tried to play the violin 'cause I could hold the violin like that with this hand.  It was disgusting.  'Cause it wasn't my instrument, it would take me a little while to get into it and I really didn't wanna do it, 'cause I loved the piano so.  And so then Ms. Boynton worked with me, worked with me.  She had me squeezing balls and everything and I finally got to playing.  But I was playing the church with two fingers.  I would play with two fingers on the left hand.
Speaker 1: So did it ever get to the point where it works pretty good?  I mean it works--does it work as well as it did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I play anything I want to play.
Story_ID: 252137
Speaker 1: Well when you graduated from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], you came out of Spelman in, was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], okay.  What was your next move?  Where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you come back and live with your uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, stayed over there, stayed over there with my grandmother [Etta Plant Spencer Dorsey] and my uncle for a little while.
Speaker 1: Okay now why did you come back to Chicago?
Speaker 2: I went to get a master's at American Conservatory of Music [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the most disappointing thing in my life, 'cause after spending the money and everything there, found out they were not accredited by North Central [Association of Colleges and Schools] after they had taken all that money and all that time.  Because they didn't have their own building.  And so at least I had a degree, but the other kids, some of the other kids didn't have degrees, and they had--they couldn't--had to go back to school.  I was so angry with that school.  Had some good, good teachers too, but they weren't accredited, but they didn't tell you that.  They didn't put it in the catalogue.  So then--
Speaker 1: That's a tough thing to happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were there for a couple of years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Till '53 [1953] I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then I got married and--
Speaker 1: Now how did you meet your husband [Nathaniel McLin]?
Speaker 2: He was a friend of my uncle's new wife [Kathryn Mosley Dorsey].  He--friend to that family.  And that's how I met him.  And he was a--had a fabulous baritone voice.  And I taught him opera and we started the McLin Ensemble opera company.
Story_ID: 252138
Speaker 1: Now did you study opera at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Is that where--or American Conservatory [of Music, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not just opera, I studied music, you know.  I was a music major, studied it all, you know.  And I always loved opera, though.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite opera?
Speaker 2: Well a lot of 'em are my favorite, but I think if I liked one short major opera, it would be 'Cavalleria rusticana' by [Pietro] Mascagni.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is it about that particular one that moves you?
Speaker 2: It's so true to life.  It's so true to life.  It's what can happen to you.  That's why I had my high school students do it and everybody was stunned and shocked, talking about you teaching too hard, too far advanced.  Now they're all out there opera singers, now they're saying, well she must have known what she was doing, so that's the way it goes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what happens in this particular opera anyway--
Speaker 2: Well it's just a rebel girl named Santuzza and she's a country girl, and Lola, she's kind of a classic, glamour girl.  And Santuzza likes a guy named Turiddu and he's a single man of the village and then there's Alfio, he's a merchant of the village.  And Mama Lucia, she runs the wine shop across from the Catholic church.  And it's Easter Sunday morning and everybody's going to church, and Santuzza the country girl, comes up and she sings an aria right at the beginning.  First she comes to Mamma Lucia's wine shop.  She says, "Tell me Mamma Lucia, where is your son?"  And Mamma Lucia says, "I don't know, I want no trouble."  And she tells Mamma Lucia that Santuzza, I'm Santuzza and I cannot go to church, I cannot do anything because Turiddu has caused me to sin.  And she gives the implication that she's with child.  And she's looking for Turiddu.  And so the story goes on, Turiddu comes and he rejects her and Lola comes along, the girl that he's been going with.  And see Santuzza tells Mamma Lucia that before Turiddu went to war, she was going with him.  And Lola was going with him.  But then Lola married Alfio, the merchant, while he was at war.  And now she's coming back, and she said Turiddu is going with me and Lola has taken him away from me.  And so that's the gist of it.  And then Turiddu shows up and Turiddu and Lola get into a heated argument, real heated, get into a little fight.  He knocks her across the street.  And because he and Lola are going into church and Lola comes in and flaunts herself in front of Santuzza.  Santuzza tries to beat her up, but Turiddu steps in front of 'em.  So they go to church and after church they come out and sing the great drinking song, you know.  And everybody's meeting together and Lola is telling Turiddu she'll see him later and all this.  And Santuzza is steaming.  She's mad, you know and then after everybody has gone, Alfio the merchant that Lola married, comes along.  And Santuzza is mad because Turiddu just slapped her across the street.  And she says, "I got something to tell you Alfio.  Turiddu is not going with me, he's not making me honorable now, and it was your wife who stole his love from me."  He says, "What do you mean?"  And then they get into it, she tells him.  He says his blood shall flow before the sunset glow.  So you know, then Turiddu comes out of Mama's wine shop, giving wine to everybody and he offers wine to Alfio and Alfio knocks it out of his hand and says he does not drink with snakes.  And then the guys who are for Alfio line up on his side, and the guys who's for Turiddu line up on his side, you know.  They 'bout to have a brawl.  And they have this big argument, you know.  And before that Lola has sang with, has sung with Alfio rather, what have I done?  I take it back, I take it back.  What have I done?  You know, but it's too late.  And so he tells Turiddu, I'll see you down at the duel station.  And then Turiddu sings his song and runs back and calls Mama.  Everybody leaves then, breaks up the crowd, you know.  He says Mama, if I don't return, take care of Santuzza.  And then you hear a scream after he leaves.  Somebody says Alfio has killed Turiddu.  And Mama Lucia faints.  And Santuzza faints, and that's the end.
Speaker 1: Wow.  That's, wow that's a lot of--now did--
Speaker 2: That's grand opera.
Story_ID: 252139
Speaker 1: Do you sing yourself?  Do you sing the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What part do you sing in the--?
Speaker 2: I'm a soprano.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay so it sounds like--let's see to make a compare--like--but it sounds like the theme of that opera ['Cavalleria rusticana,' Pietro Mascagni] sounds a lot like something that might go on today in any neighborhood.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's why you use it to teach kids with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And yet let them appreciate great music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it's a tendency of people to think that opera's about something that's high blown and--
Speaker 2: Well it is often.  It is--they have some crazy plots sometimes.
Speaker 1: But this story by itself is pretty, is pretty ordinary, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very nice, yes, ordinary, yeah.  Can happen to anybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 252140
Speaker 1: So here you are, you're at American Academy of Music [sic. American Conservatory of Music, Chicago, Illinois] and you find out they're not--they don't have accreditation.  So, so what did you, what did you--now while you're going to school, are you teaching or anything else, or doing anything?  Okay, so you just going to school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what did you do after you found out that you didn't have any accreditation?
Speaker 2: I didn't do nothing, nothing.  I just stopped.  I'm sure they wanted to give me my diploma, but I don't want it.  And so--
Speaker 1: Are they still in existence?
Speaker 2: They moved out of town now.  They stayed in existence about ten years and then they moved out of town.  Then a girlfriend of mine was going to--about a year later, she was going to look for a job over at [Julius H.] Hess Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois], and she asked me to go with her.  So I went with her.  And after the school day, she was supposed to observe the school, you know.  We went in the office and the principal came up and said, "How do you do?"  And we said, "How do you do?"  He said, "How did you like our assembly?"  I said, "I thought it was terrible."  And so the clerk kept trying to wink at me to tell me that he was the principal, but I didn't know what she was doing.  I didn't know what she meant, you know.  And he said, "Well what do you mean it was terrible?"  I said, "Well they don't have any discipline in this school."  And he said, "Well what do you mean?"  He said--I said well I thought the assembly was terrible.  I said, "The kids were noisy," and I said, "the kids on the stage couldn't sing."  And he said, "Well who are you?"  I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Lena McLin."  He said, "Well who are you?  Are you a college graduate?"  I said, "Yes I'm a music major."  He said, "Well do you think you could have done better?"  I said, "Oh, definitely."  And so he said, "Well if I get you over here, will you show me how much better you could do?"  I said, "I'd be happy to."  So he called the board and they gave me a temporary certificate, and then I went there and he gave me six classes.  They were packed, you know.  He said, "Now since you think you can do better, St. Patrick's Day is coming up and I want an assembly, and I wanna see it better."  I said okay.  So I put all my classes together, taught 'em how to sing.  I told them they'd have a green skirt, a white blouse and a four leaf clover.  And since I didn't know which side of St. Patrick's--how she was on, I said--I went to the gym teacher and I had a dance from both sides.  And then I got a little boy who had a radio voice and I let him read the meaning of St. Patrick's Day.  And I got a little ten-year-old who had a high soprano voice and I let her sing, sing 'Oh Danny Boy.'  And then I went to every teacher in the school and I dropped them a note in their box and said, "If your class comes in noisy, I'm sending them out.  You keep your class quiet."  So when the assembly started, you could hear a pin fall on cotton.  And Dr. Connolly [ph.] said, "What?"  And then they got up and did their program and they were so beautiful.  And Dr. Connolly said, "Are those the kids' voices?"  I said, "Yes sir."  So he said, "You'll never get out of this school."  And so he kept me there.  Then he got sent to [John Marshall] Harlan High School [Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and he took me to Harlan High School.  And I had every choir at the school, and they got superior for ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what years are we talking about, from what, '55 [1955] to--
Speaker 2: Something like that.  Up to about '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Now Harlan in those days was quite a high school.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Honey listen, if you hear my choirs from that school you would not believe it.  It was just amazing.
Story_ID: 252141
Speaker 1: And then they started a new high school in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and the principal [Elizabeth Jochner] had a right to select her teachers.  And everybody told her well the hottest teacher in Chicago [Illinois] is [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Lena McLin.  So she said, "Well I'm gonna take her."  So she took me from [John Marshall] Harlan [High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was sick.  So they sent me a telegram from the [Chicago] Board of Education say you no longer report to Harlan.  You report to Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I said, "I don't wanna go to Kenwood."  They said, "You don't have any choice."
Speaker 2: So you really had no choice.
Speaker 1: So I went to Kenwood.  They had one grade, eighth grade.  I said, Jesus.
Speaker 2: You only taught one grade?
Speaker 1: No, they only had one grade in the school the first year.  The sec--I mean ninth grade.  They only had one grade, ninth grade.  The next year they added tenth grade.  The next year they added 11th grade.  The next year they added twelfth and became a fully-fledged high school.  They hadn't built it yet.  We were in that old building up on the third floor.
Speaker 2: The old Kenwood Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] building, yeah.  Okay, now you became a pretty popular teacher at Kenwood from what I've read.
Speaker 1: Popular teacher at Harlan.  They got plaques all up and down the hall.
Speaker 2: Now we touched on it some, but what's your teaching philosophy and where did you learn it?
Speaker 1: I don't know if I learned it, it's just me.  It's just, you just can't disrespect me.  I'm the teacher.  I'm not your big sister, I'm not your big brother.  I'm an adult and I'm the teacher and I run it.  And you must sit down and learn or you will totally depart.  And I have certain rules.  You know if I find cursing, or find out where they smoking dope or anything like that, I make you come in my office.  And then when you come in my office, I say, "Now you tell God why you are acting a fool."  They say, "What do you mean?"  I say, "Tell God why you are acting a fool."  They say, "Tell God?"  I say, "Yeah, pray."  They'd rather do anything.  And then if they, if they're, you know too bad, I sentence them to church.  And then I pick them up on Sunday and I put 'em on the front seat of the church.
Speaker 2: So you'll actually pick 'em up at home and take 'em to church?
Speaker 1: Pick them up at their house.  You don't have to do it but twice and let it get around, it gets around all over the school.  They say she's a fool, she's crazy, you can't--
Speaker 2: So you really enjoy this kind of reputation, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, 'cause I make people, I make people, you know, and then they--
Speaker 2: Well tell us about some of your students.  Now you have a--it's a long list of successful students.
Speaker 1: It's just so many of 'em.  Well I'm proud of Mark Rucker at The Metropolitan Opera company.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How, how old is he and where did you teach him?  Did you teach him--
Speaker 1: Kenwood.
Speaker 2: Was he at Ken--okay.
Speaker 1: Four years at Kenwood.  After four years at Kenwood, he went to La Scala [Milan, Italy].  Now tell me who--what high school students can do that?  Because he had the bel canto school of singing.  That's what I teach.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bell, B-E-L-L, Cando, C-A-N-D-O [sic.].
Speaker 2: Now this is what you learned when you were in school or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then I studied voice with a lot of people, you know.  And I--these kids would be singing opera like mad.  'Cause after I stopped using my opera company [McLin Opera Company], running around all over the country and not getting paid nothing hardly.  I just took it to the high schools.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now we skipped your opera company, you know.
Speaker 1: Well the opera company was going on when I was at Harlan.
Speaker 2: Okay, you started that--
Speaker 1: And also I was, I was with--do you know Reverend Kenny Smith [HistoryMaker Kenneth Smith, Sr.]?  Used to be president of the [Chicago] Board of Education.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He and I started Trinity [United] Church [of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  You know Trinity Church down there?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, we started that church.  We started that church in the little church.  And the Harlan High School people were my singers at church.  They were the choir.  So they got great experiences, you understand me, singing every Sunday.  Like I told you, it wasn't nothing for me to sentence a child to church.
Story_ID: 252142
Speaker 1: I was asking you about some of your students and yeah, you mentioned William Rucker.  What's his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mark, M-A-R-K, Rucker.
Speaker 1: Mark Rucker, okay.  And I know Mandy Patinkin.
Speaker 2: Mandy Patinkin.
Speaker 1: Famous actor and musician, he sings a lot of Jewish songs, classical songs.  A man by the name of Robert Kelly, who's known as R. Kelly.
Speaker 2: R. Kelly.
Speaker 1: He's one of the most popular musicians in the United--in the world right now I guess.  Was also one of your students, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I taught Mary Lano [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I see there's platinum record on the wall there.
Speaker 2: I got about ten of those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those are from your--those are from R. Kelly, right?  From--
Speaker 2: His company sends me a platinum record every time he goes platinum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why do they do that?
Speaker 2: They say they--it's--they say if it wasn't for me, he wouldn't be in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they send me--they put my name on it, just read it.
Speaker 1: I saw that.
Speaker 2: No, you didn't see the ones in the room back there--they're all the way around the wall in my son--grandson's room.  He takes 'em.  And my other grandson in that room there got 'em around the wall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And I have a little girl at the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York], Nicole Heaston.  And in Chicago [Illinois] I have Jonita Lattimore.  She's fabulous.  And also at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] on the sixth of next month will be Robert Sims.  His picture's right up there too.  So I'm going to see him at Carnegie, at Carnegie Hall.  He's a great singer.  And he teaches at that college out--Northern, you know.
Speaker 1: Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And then there is Susan Korhonen, K-O-R-H-O-N-E-N.  She's in Vienna [Austria].
Story_ID: 252143
Speaker 1: There's an article that you gave us too by--written by--I think one of the students [Linda Winer] at Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] about your popularity as an instructor.  Written about 1967 I guess I saw.
Speaker 2: I didn't see that.
Speaker 1: Well there's one--you know we have it here.  But they discuss all the types of music that you expose the students to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe firmly that the teacher should not teach personal preference.  See if I taught personal preference, they'd never get anything but opera.  I don't believe that I have that right to do that, 'cause I don't know who's in front of me, see.  There may be a Stevie Wonder in there.  There may be a Ray Charles.  There may be somebody else, you know, maybe a [Thomas A.] Dorsey in there.  I don't have the right to teach personal preference, so I teach it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the writer of the article says that it's not unusual to be exposed to the blues and opera and gospel and jazz (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything.
Speaker 1: Everything in the same day, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right, everything.  They come twice a day.  That's the way I set it up.  One day is for practice, like if you're in the chorus or the orchestra or the band, you just practice that.  The other day is theory.  To learn what it's all about, harmony, counterpoint, you know, theory.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard the freshmen on the first day of class are asked to write a poem.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Why are you here?  You wanna get focus, you know.  And if you chew gum, then you write a gum work.  You write the music in the gum.  You pass out gum to everybody and let everybody chew the gum at the same time, have rhythm, everything.  'Cause I've asked you not to chew gum, so you work for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are the techniques--you kind of shake 'em up a little bit.
Speaker 2: You gotta keep 'em involved.  I wrote a textbook and I--and my textbook has been used all the way around the country.  I start with the beginning of America.  And I tell what was going on musically in America, at the same time what was going on in Europe.  First chapter is America, that's where you live.  Second chapter is Europe.  It's called 'Pulse: a History of Music' [Lena McLin].
Speaker 1: Okay, now when was this published?
Speaker 2: Well it was first published sometime ago, I have to get the book and look up on it.  But it's in most schools and colleges.  I'm in the process of redoing, doing the next edition now.
Speaker 1: Now how many pages is this book?
Speaker 2: It's over there, somewhere, I show, I'll show you.  I don't know how many pages, but it's--I don't know about--at least four or five, I don't know, five hundred, four or something.
Speaker 1: So as a full time teacher, you also wrote a book.
Speaker 2: Textbook I wrote, that was my lesson plan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wrote my lesson plan.
Story_ID: 252144
Speaker 1: I was doing the opera while I was teaching (laughter).
Speaker 2: You're composing songs too.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right now you said off camera we were talking about the famous African American composer, William Grant Still.  And you met him at a meeting of the--
Speaker 1: National Association of Negro Musicians [NANM].
Speaker 2: Okay now, when did that--how did that organization get started and can you tell us something about that and how you got--
Speaker 1: That's been going on, that's going, on right after the Emancipation Proclamation.
Speaker 2: So it's old--
Speaker 1: Kind of down in the '20s [1920s] or somewhere up in there [1919], yeah.  Yeah they--the serious musicians.  I mean musicians who are classical, you know.  Just like that book there.  That's a book of songs for voice and piano by me.  You can take it down and--
Speaker 2: You wanna hold it up for the camera for a second.  This is one--
Speaker 1: That's my latest, that's my latest book, you know.  And this book is in all of the music stores, around the world, you know.  And it's art songs in there, arias, folk songs, spirituals, and light songs, and there's an album out by Mark Rucker of the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York, New York].  He sings a lot of the songs.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Right, it's on CD or compact disc, right.  So this was produced in 2002, right, okay.  So how many songs have--now you said William Grant Still encouraged you to compose.
Speaker 1: He just told me that he thought I was a prolific composer, and to really compose.
Speaker 2: Okay, now had you composed before you met him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I composed a few little things, but not that many.  I would just write--in school I would write of my--if my choir didn't have anything, I would write the music.  And if the church choir didn't have nothing at Trinity [United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], I would write the anthem, hymn and the spiritual every Sunday for four or five years, and didn't realize I was writing a lot of music.  And the only time I realized it was when Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] came out and they say, "We hear that you write the anthem," and I said yes.  And they said, "Where is the music?"  I said in the basement.  So they went down there.  They said, "Do you know how much music you've written?"  I said no.  And so that's the way that started.  Now I wasn't trying to write a lot of music, I just did it because we didn't have the money to buy it.  And when Kenny Smith [HistoryMaker Kenneth Smith, Sr.] left that church, I left it.
Speaker 2: Okay now, how did you come to found a church with Dr. Kenneth Smith?  How did that happen?
Speaker 1: I was the minister of music.
Speaker 2: All right now this is United--
Speaker 1: Kenneth Smith, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is a United Church of God.
Speaker 1: United Presbyterian.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We were Presbyterians.
Speaker 2: Okay, when you founded Trinity?
Speaker 1: Trinity.
Speaker 2: It's called the Trinity United Church of God now.
Speaker 1: Yeah well that's--he changed it.  It's quite changed now.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's changed from what, what it started out as, okay.
Speaker 1: Our service was about an hour and ten minutes long, very efficient.  Kenneth Smith can really preach.  And the choir from [John Marshall] Harlan [High School, Chicago, Illinois] would sing there.  But not--I don't mean the choir actually, but I had enough people from Harlan, sopranos, altos, tenor and bass, and they can sight read.  I taught 'em every day.  They could sing, you know.  And I would write the music for 'em every week.  Now I got it, Lenora Hall Brown [ph.], she was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and she moved here and she would run off the music for me.  I would write the music.  She would run off on those old ditto machines, you know those purple ones.  She would run it off, I would pass that out and we would sing that music that Sunday.  And that went on for three years.  I wrote for everything, wrote an Easter cantata, wrote a Christmas cantata.  Wrote everything for that church.
Speaker 2: For ten years, okay, all right.  Okay, how many compositions have you written (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I saw a list--you gave us a list.  It seems to be hundreds of 'em.
Speaker 1: That's the truth.
Speaker 2: If not thousands.  I don't--it's a lot of 'em.
Speaker 1: Just a lot of 'em, I don't know.  I used to write all the time.
Speaker 2: Now do you write basically in one genre?
Speaker 1: Uh-uh.
Speaker 2: So you write different kinds of songs, music?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: For instance, do you write any blues?
Speaker 1: Not blues, but jazz.  I write mostly vocal things.  I wrote a tribute to Gwendolyn Brooks that was very beautiful.  And I'm sorry I didn't play it for her before she died.  I should have, but I just didn't--I stay so busy, I don't get around sometimes to doing everything I should do, you know.  Because I have the church [Holy Vessel Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] too, and I preach every Sunday--
Story_ID: 252145
Speaker 1: Now that's another aspect of you.  Now, you started this church in '82 [1982] I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, now what's the name of your church and what compelled you to start your own church?
Speaker 2: Well the Lord told me to preach.  It's called Holy Vessel [Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And is it any particular denomination?
Speaker 2: It's Baptist.  It's not screaming Baptist, it's Baptist with intelligence, you know (laughter).  Sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Where is it?  It's here in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1448 East 53rd [Street].  Right there in the Methodist Church [United Church of Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois] at 53rd and Blackstone [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We rent from them.
Speaker 1: So you're the founder and the pastor of this church, and do you also direct the choir?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I'm the minister of music.
Speaker 1: You realize you're cutting out a job for someone.
Speaker 2: No, I realize I'm keeping music alive in the right way.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: There will be no rap in my church.
Speaker 1: Now, you dislike rap music?
Speaker 2: I didn't say I dislike it.  I like everything in its place.
Speaker 1: So what would you--
Speaker 2: There's a time and a place for everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, but rap is not a church music.
Speaker 2: Not to me.  Maybe to some people, you know.  And God bless 'em if it is, you know, I'm not criticizing.  But as for me and myself, we will serve the God, the Lord our God with proud vigor and apparition and he can hear us.  We don't have to scream at him; he can hear us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now am I missing something?  Now these are all occupations and all the triumphs here.  We've got--it's quite a bit.  Now you've--how do you, you must be very disciplined in terms of your time to be able to do so much.
Speaker 2: What do you mean, like--I never looked at it like that.  Tell me what you mean.
Speaker 1: Well you know you just, you seem to be very busy all the time, you know, for involved in a lot of different things, and mostly music of course.  But you know I was wondering how you have the time to do as many things as you do.
Speaker 2: Well I never thought about it, but I just do it, you know.  I go to church on Sunday and I have Bible classes during the week and I have meetings with organizations and see about sick people, and hungry people, and young people, what have you, you know, at all times.  Now on Monday I rest, but on Tuesday through Saturday, I'm available for those because I also teach students up here slightly, you know.  They don't want you to have a business, they say in here.  It's not a business.  I just teach students on Saturday, you know, and Thursdays, and I'm trying to think what else I do.  Then I write music.  And so I don't, I do, let me see, I write music.  I run the church.  I teach students.  I run the house.  I mean that's all.  I don't do but four things.
Story_ID: 252146
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite musician yourself, or a favorite music?  Well you said opera was your favorite, but do you have a favorite musician or singer?
Speaker 2: Well it's, it's opera is not my, just my favorite, you know, I like cantatas, oratorios, motets and all of that, you know.  As a matter of fact, I published two cantatas this year, the Christmas cantata and the church cantata.  But do I what?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite musician or singer?
Speaker 2: Favorite singer, yes, yes, yes, yes.  I have a lot of favorite singers.
Speaker 1: Who are some of them?
Speaker 2: But the most golden voice, beautiful control, elegance and delivery, understanding of the musical content is Leontyne Price.  She is fabulous.  Just breathtaking.
Story_ID: 252147
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to I guess the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] when--as a fan of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was growing up.  I mean, what were some of your feelings about the Civil Rights Movement when it was going on?  How did you--
Speaker 2: How did I feel about it?
Speaker 1: Yeah and did you, you know, most of us didn't know him and we didn't--we were trying to figure out who Dr. King was as it was going on.  But as it unfolded, but you know how did you--coming from Atlanta [Georgia] and the South and then being here in Chicago [Illinois], you know here in--
Speaker 2: I was thankful to him.  I knew he was called to do that.  That's when I wrote 'If They Ask You Why He Came' in 1971.
Speaker 1: Can you remember where you were when he was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was an experience.  I will never forget it.  I was--I had told my Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] students the day before that Dr. King would be killed the next day.  And they just couldn't believe that, you know, and it happened.  And I was at home and I was just upset, 'cause my sister [Velma Johnson] was talking to Coretta [Scott King] at the time the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] broke in to tell her about Dr. King.  And I went upstairs and got in bed and I couldn't sleep.  And something came in my room.  It was not a physical being, it was a spirit I'm sure.  There was no physical appearance, but I knew it was Dr. King and I knew it was the Lord with his arm around his shoulder.  And he said, he walked with you and you didn't know it.  I told--what do you mean?  And I was on the bed and he said, "You must write about him and put him in his proper light."  And I said, "I can't."  And I was laying on my back, you know, lying on my back.  And he said it again, "You must write about him and put him in his proper light."  I said, "I can't."  And then I had this feeling like I was way up here above the bed.  And my husband [Nathaniel McLin] was right next to me, but I couldn't touch him.  And you know that feeling you have when you falling in your sleep?  That's the feeling I had.  It wasn't very comfortable.  Said, "You must write about him and put him in his special light," and I said, "I can't."  And then I said, "Well I'll try."  And then look like I came down and then all at once this cantata went through my head.  And I got up and I started writing.  And I wrote this 'Free At Last!, [A Portrait of Martin Luther King, Jr.'] which was premiered at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] with the Carnegie Hall symphony and in Italy and in Germany and in France and every place.  And I didn't--there was nothing on his tombstone when I got to the end of it.  Something said write "Free at last."  And I wrote 'Free at Last!.'  And that's what's on his tombstone.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That was an experience I will never forget.  And this fella wrote about it in the [Chicago] Sun-Times.  That's that picture up on the wall you see.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get a copy of that too.
Story_ID: 252148
Speaker 1: Now as a reverend, do you have a certain theological philosophy?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So what is your theology?
Speaker 2: The Bible as it is.  That's the word.  Not my word.  It's not for my glory, it's not for me to be seen.  We take up one offering, one offering, one.  Did you hear me?  That's it.  Not after your money.  You give your tithes if you wanna, it's up to you, between you and God.  It is a Bible congregation [at Holy Vessel Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you think, now there was a, sort of theological debate going on when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was active.  And it was with a man here in Chicago who was a leader of the entire National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 2: You talking about J. H. Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson]?  I used to go down to his house.  I used to know him.  My daddy [Benjamin Johnson] was in his convention.
Speaker 1: So what did you think about the controversy between Dr. King and Dr. Jackson?
Speaker 2: I think Dr. Jackson should have sealed his lips.  I thought he was just off base.  Had no understanding.  I used to play at his church, Olivet [Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right, it's one of the biggest Baptist churches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was, it's, it's a--I'm not at liberty to say that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You can say whatever you'd like.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: This is for history.
Speaker 2: I don't wanna criticize nobody, you know, but--
Story_ID: 252149
Speaker 1: --Ma'am, when you look at the world today and what's going on, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting question.  My hope, you know for almost any community, but especially for the African American community, is taking it back.  Take me back to the place where I belong.  Where there is respect for parents, where parents merit the respect.  Where children are taught the difference between wrong and right.  And where there can be an understanding, meaningful understanding, of how to think.  Because right now we are not thinking.  We are not thinking, you know.  There's no way in the world that you can disrespect everything and have love for anything.  Until we learn that, we are lost.  And we need to go back.  We had it at one time.  But we lost it.  We really lost it.  And when I look at some of these television stations where some of these black people are dancing with vulgarity that is just obscene, completely obscene, cursing the women and doing all of that, have mercy.  You know, you can't make it that way.  And I do think that it's being promoted by other races and we don't see it, you know.  You know this is the age that's trying to have your inner on the outside and your outside on the inner.  You know it's almost like wearing your bra on the outside.  You understand, wear your slip on the inside.  In other words, we wanna expose too much.  We wanna give away too much.  We don't wanna preserve anything.  We wanna badger, just badger, right.  And we want right to be down and wrong to be up.  And it's sad.  It's sad.
Story_ID: 252150
Speaker 1: --We were talking about some of the celebrities that you would bring to Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] to inspire the students.  You said you brought the Jacksons to Kenwood and [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  Who else, can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Yusef Lateef, wait a minute, everybody.  Let me see.  I had the Institute of Black American Music [sic. Institute for Black American Music] there, which I was the executive secretary.  [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson was the founder, Quincy Jones was the president, and I was executive secretary.  So we brought everybody there.
Speaker 1: Now were, were you a member of the black musicians' union here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know one of your students was Maggie Brown, right.  [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr.'s daughter.  Chicago--what's your assessment of Chicago as a, I guess a nurturing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chaka Khan was in my class.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  She went to Kenwood, she sure did.  Chaka Khan, right, who has a beautiful voice.  I think she probably has one of the strongest voices of any pop star.
Speaker 2: No, I think she had to be knocked by you-know-who though.
Speaker 1: Who is that now?
Speaker 2: Patti LaBelle.
Speaker 1: You think Patti LaBelle got a better voice?
Speaker 2: She beat out--voice is not better.  Everybody's voice is great within itself.  There should never be a contest because everybody has a voice that's theirs.  But when it comes back to just taking over the stage, it's Patti LaBelle.  She'll take it from you in a second.
Story_ID: 252151
Speaker 1: What's your assessment of Chicago [Illinois] as a nurturing ground for musicians and stuff?
Speaker 2: Well, you say nurturing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Does Chicago really--is a good place for a musician to be born and raised?
Speaker 2: Well any place is a great person, place, if the musician has it within them, you understand me.  It's not one of those jumping off places so much, you know, like New York [New York] and California and Atlanta [Georgia], you know.  But it's a great place to learn.  It's all kind of theaters here, all kind of museums, all kinds of dance studios.  Everything, if people just want to take advantage.  And now that that new crazy park downtown that the mayor [Richard M. Daley] did--what's the name of it?
Speaker 1: Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Millennium.  Well it's a chance for some people to get up there and, you know, clown a little bit.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay now, I had a good question too and it just slipped me.  We were talking earlier about the Thomas [A.] Dorsey Gospel Fest [Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Festival; Chicago Gospel Music Festival].  And how it's--it started off as the Thomas Dorsey Gospel Fest and changed.
Speaker 2: Shouldn't have been changed.
Speaker 1: Now how, how did that happen?  How did they just change it and not--
Speaker 2: Well they had a lady in charge and I guess she went down there and I guess she wanted to cater to the mayor.  So she changed it.
Speaker 1: Do you think your uncle [Thomas A. Dorsey] will ever get his recognition?  I mean the--
Speaker 2: Well I think that I haven't had time, but I think we're gonna fight to get the title back.  We'll see if we can get that back to the Thomas A. Dorsey Gospel Fest.  And see if they can't put a statue of him somewhere downtown because he deserves to have that.  He's the father of gospel music.
Speaker 1: Right.  You would think if there's one for W.C. Handy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: There should be one for--
Speaker 2: They got one for W.C. Handy, right.  So that's something we're gonna kind of fight for.
Story_ID: 252152
Speaker 1: Now have you ever been tempted to become a secular performer and really perform for pop culture, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I love some secular things, I really do.  And my grandson is the one who's just fantastic now.  William Kurk Leathers.  He is just tearing up the charts writing great music, and it's really wonderful, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Who does he write for?
Speaker 2: He writes for himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Plays the piano, and plays for most shows downtown and every place, and very gifted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Extremely gifted.  Seem like all the talent in the family fell on him.
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on all the things that you've done, all the various things, and roles you've played and things you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know why?  Because I have a set philosophy.  You know I have a set philosophy.  And that philosophy is to honor God, honor my savior, Lord Jesus Christ.  Respect people, love people, teach people, be an inspiration to people, respect my family, help my family and nurture my family, support my family, support my church.  And I'm contented, I'm contented.  I think what does shock me sometimes when I look back and see how many centuries I been here, you understand me?  And how many things I have experienced.  And I would like to pass them on.  You understand me?  Because they are worthwhile and I thank God for the opportunity.
Story_ID: 252153
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think people will decide that, or time will decide that.  You understand me?  I don't think that I can, I can do that because I'm an actor in the play and I can't see the play.
Story_ID: 252154
Speaker 1: Well this is a similar question, but not quite the same.  And that's, how would you then like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a moral, Christian person who believes in the decency of mankind, and the respect and admiration of God, and the love of country, but with the proper leadership and the proper guidance.  And I'd like to see families become closer knit and more together like they used to be.  Where home is a utopia.
Story_ID: 252155
Speaker 1: That's me at my seventh year as minister [at Holy Vessel Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that would be 1989.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: What about this photo?
Speaker 1: This photo, this photo is 1971.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This photo is when I was fifteen or sixteen, I'm not sure.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular occasion or--
Speaker 2: No, just somebody just took it at--
Speaker 1: School picture or--
Speaker 2: No, after church.  After I finished playing.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: That's my daughter Beverly [McLin Jones] after her wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's my daughter and myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.  Tell us who this is what--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.  Tell us again.
Speaker 1: That was two, three years, three years ago.
Speaker 2: That's you and your daughter?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, we just wanted you to state it again.
Speaker 1: That's, that's my daughter and myself three years ago.
Speaker 2: That's Marcel [Leathers] on the left, Beverly and [William] Kurk [Leathers], that's my daughter and her two sons.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good, next.  When was this taken?
Speaker 2: That had to be when Kurk graduated from--doesn't he look like he has on a graduation robe?  Graduated from Hales Franciscan [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He's graduating in June, so that had to be, what, four years ago, three years ago.  Three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's, that's me and the oldest grandson, Marcel, when he was, looks like he's about eighteen months.  He's twenty-eight now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me when I first came out of college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  In my uncle's house, that's Thomas A. Dorsey's piano I'm on.
Speaker 1: Right, next.
Speaker 2: That's William Kurk, that's the one that's the writer, that's the baby grandson.  William Kurk, William Kurk Leathers.
Speaker 1: That's me at Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] after a concert encouraging parents to support their talented students.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's me at a concert in Savannah, Georgia, just coming out of the rain.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's Thomas A. Dorsey, an early picture.
Speaker 2: Now did the newspaper trim his picture?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now that's his mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That must be 1938.
Speaker 2: This is a very fragile picture.
Speaker 1: That's Etta [Plant Spencer] Dorsey.  Look over there on the piano, it's one on there that's better, right on the end.  That's the mother of Thomas A. Dorsey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Her smiling, and I like that one.  She's smiling.  Now that's her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Now that's her mother.
Speaker 1: This is your--
Speaker 2: That's the one that was a slave.
Speaker 1: Now that's your great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: That's the one that was a slave.  That's Etta's mother.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: It's on that picture, I don't know.  Well my grandmother is Etta Dorsey, E-T-T-A.
Speaker 1: And this is her mother.
Speaker 2: That's her mother.
Speaker 1: Okay and the name's on the--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Is that Silvia Plant?
Speaker 2: Plant, yes.  That's right, P-L-A-N-T.
Speaker 1: Silvia Plant.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we thought we were related to the Planters.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Planters peanuts?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Really?  Could be--they're in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's, that's my husband, Nathaniel McLin on the left, me in the center, Beverly my daughter in front, and I can't think of his name, he was my, my stage prop man.  He built all the props for my opera.  We were doing 'Suor Angelica' [Giacomo Puccini] and 'Il tabarro' [Giacomo Puccini].
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: That had to be--let me see, how old does she look there?  She looks six.
Speaker 2: Six, seven, eight.
Speaker 1: Six, seven, yeah.  Well then she's got to be forty-five now, so--
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Early '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Now that's my mommy and my daddy.  Dr. and Mrs. B.J. Johnson [Benjamin Johnson and Bernice Dorsey Johnson].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my daddy and myself.  That had to be 1972 or '3 [1973].
Speaker 2: Okay, great.  Any particular occasion or event?
Speaker 1: No, it was just visiting.  We did that already.  We did a big picture of that.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is me at a convention.  Let me see.  How--Jesus, say about 1975.
Speaker 2: Okay, good enough.
Speaker 1: This is the Kenwood choir, me on the end.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty something.  Nineteen eighty-two [1982] or '3 [1983].
Speaker 2: Very good.
Story_ID: 252156
Speaker 1: That's my brother [Benjamin Johnson, Jr.] and myself, 1989.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's, those are my choir singers, 1990.
Speaker 2: All right, next.
Speaker 1: That's myself and Susan Korhonen, she's in Vienna [Austria], the opera singer.
Speaker 2: She one of your students?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: K-O-R-H-O-N-E-N.
Speaker 2: That's me and Redd Foxx, and what's this guy's name.  He's a musician, wait a minute.  Can't think of his name, Jesus, you know him?  Frederick, Frederick Young.
Speaker 1: What year?  Is that the trumpet player?
Speaker 2: No, he was just a musician.  What year.
Speaker 1: Or about, '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: About '78 [1978].  Is that about right for Redd Foxx?
Speaker 1: Did you know Redd Foxx well?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I know they called him Chicago (unclear).
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, Nathaniel McLin, my husband, and then that guy, I don't know his name and I don't know her name now.
Speaker 1: Were they a part of the McLin Opera Company?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's my--Dr. Connolly [ph.], principal and three teachers, I'm one of 'em in the plaid.
Speaker 1: Of what school?
Speaker 2: Of--
Speaker 1: [John Marshall] Harlan [High School, Chicago, Illinois] wasn't it, or was it the school before that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, that was that [Julius H. Hess] Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and is that you at the piano?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's you at the piano.  About what year is this?  Is this--
Speaker 1: That's about--during that time.
Speaker 2: Somewhere between '57 [1957] and '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  About '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay, and right below her--a rehearsal.
Speaker 1: Rehearsal, all these are rehearsals.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Can you identify any of those?
Speaker 2: No, I'm looking now to see.  I'm--
Speaker 1: Well that's pretty good.
Speaker 2: I can identify Edward Pierson here and Ernestine C. Smith, and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Ernestine C. Smith there, she was really golden.
Speaker 1: Were you all doing [W.S.] Gilbert and [Arthur] Sullivan here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Gilbert and Sullivan.  Looks like 'H.M.S. Pinafore.'
Speaker 1: That captain's part is the funniest thing, he's hilarious.
Speaker 2: What year?
Speaker 1: Where are these people today?
Speaker 2: What year, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Mrs. [Lena] McLin?
Speaker 1: That must be '64 [1964] or '5 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: Now this is the most important one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: You have any remarks about this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's that business, he built homes up there in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] and produced--gave us the money to produce operas.
Speaker 1: What paper is this?
Speaker 2: This was in the [Chicago] Defender I think, I don't know, or [Chicago] Sun-Times.  [Chicago] Inquirer, Inquirer.
Speaker 1: Inquirer.
Speaker 2: I don't know what paper that is.
Speaker 1: That's, that's Harry Pryor and Ernestine C. Smith.
Story_ID: 252157
Speaker 1: (Reverend Dr. Lena McLin plays the piano)
Speaker 2: That's 'Fun in C minor.'
Speaker 1: What's the name of that one again?
Speaker 2: 'Fun in C minor' (laughter).  Just something for my little kids to get C minor together.
