Story_ID: 203462
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns and observing is Rae Parr Moore.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My name is Curtis Morrow, Curtis "Kojo" Morrow, my given name. My adopted name was, actually, it's Kojo Achampong so for short, because a lot of Americans find it difficult to pronounce Achampong, so, just Kojo, but that's my name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell Curtis Morrow for us--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Curtis--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and Kojo Achampong?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, Morrow, M-O-R-R-O-W.  Kojo is K-O-J-O, Achampong, A-C-H-A-M-P-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Achampong.
Speaker 1: --and do you have any other nick names or any other names?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well, my mom [Clere Smith] (laughter).  They used to call me Sonny [ph.], that was my family nick named, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Jimmy [ph.].  Jimmy, mostly, my brothers and sisters, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And they still call me Jimmy.
Speaker 1: Why would they call you Jimmy if your name is Curtis?
Speaker 2: Well, James, Curtis James Morrow.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't tell us about the James--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I left out the James, yeah, I left--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: James, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's on your phone number, yeah, Curtis James Morrow.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth was March 27, 1933, and place was here in Chicago [Illinois], Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--oh, you want the date?  Did I give you the date?
Speaker 1: --Yeah, 1933.
Speaker 2: Thirty-three [1933], right, okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: March 27, 1933, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, at the time, I'm re--presently, I'm retired.  I'm a jewelry designer, jewelry, model maker.  That was how I've been earning my livelihood for the last thirty or forty years.  Artist, originally, I'm an artist, fine artist, and from fine art, I went into carving and jewelry designs and model making, lost wax casting.  And now I'm trying my hand at writing books about my experience and also photography is my latest.  So now I'm doing some freelance photography.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is eleven, well, November 3, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time, we're in my apartment, which is 1105 North and the building is 400 East 41st Street, and it's called the Paul G. Stewart Center.  It's a senior building.
Story_ID: 203463
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish, lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require and deserve a short answer.  All right (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, beans and rice and more beans, greens, and those are my favorites, beans and rice and greens.
Speaker 1: What kind of bean?
Speaker 2: Red beans is the favorite.  Oh, man, I forgot to put my pot on.  Red beans, anyway, they're soaking (laughter) and rice, brown rice and greens. I like all kind of greens, but mostly I usually tend the mustard greens and spinach and occasionally cabbage too, but greens, I like greens, period.  And fish is my favorite.  I'm not a meat eater and fruits and vegetables.  I'm just sort of a semi-vegetarian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite color for wearing is like brown, gray.  I guess brown and gray really, probably,  my mostly, yeah, brown and gray, my favorite color for, for wearing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Un-uh.  Yeah, summertime, when it's warm, hot, nice weather, that's my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation destination?  Oh, yeah, of course, Ghana, West Africa, Ghana, Africa, yeah, Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have one.  Take care of yourself, you're all you got (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, bottom line when it (laughter) comes around to it, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 203464
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  How--I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Curtis Morrow] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's full name is Clere Smith, that was her name, Smith. And that's C-L-E-R-E, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't recall right off hand, but she's like sixteen years older than me, so that's like sixteen off of 1933, would be what, you got a pen?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixteen minus thirty-three (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's a shame I'm not--
Speaker 2: Sixteen, yeah, (laughter), you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, we might be able to figure that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Whatever, you know, yeah, so that's her date of birth.
Speaker 1: About 1915, what, (unclear) four from--seventeen.
Speaker 2: Seventeen, okay, 1917, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can't trace her part, her part of her family back too far.
Speaker 1: Are they from Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, they're from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, what part?
Speaker 2: My mother was, near Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Well, do you know the name of the town?
Speaker 2: Town, yeah, I recall them talking of Clarksdale [Mississippi], 'cause my mother came up here, she was a pretty young girl, young lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was Clarksdale, I know it was Clarksdale is what it (unclear), um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any, any people from that side that you remember or stories about ancestors, what your ancestors were doing in Mississippi or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not from my mother's side, but my grand--my father, yeah, quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Well, let's stay on your mother's side for a minute.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Let's try to 'cause there's got to be something that you remember about that side.  Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my grandfather's side, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, no.
Speaker 1: Or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: In fact--I guess it was so like intimidating, that they, she, I--they very rarely spoke about, talked about it, even back in those days, you know, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Do you have any reason why?  I mean, do you have any--
Speaker 2: I guess it was such a horrible experience, you know, being chased around by white mens, and, you know, all the different things that they went through at that time, plus she was like thirteen years old when she came north here, and she was the youngest sister.  Her elder sister, my uncle's wife, well, one of my uncle's wife, was the, you know, brought her up, because she came to live with her sister.  And that's where she met my father.  So she very rarely would talk about her side of the family except, you know, she very rarely.
Speaker 1: So, but your impression is that they were glad to get out of there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were glad to get out of there, yeah, um-hm and glad to get up here and, you know, and have a family, make a family, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were they sharecroppers in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all came off of some farm back there, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't know your grandparents on that side?
Speaker 2: Not on my mother's side, no, un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any sisters and brothers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she had one brother, George, and one sister--two sisters, three sisters--wait a minute, yeah she--I think it was four girls and one boy.  It was. Four girls and one boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she had three sisters and a brother.
Story_ID: 203465
Speaker 1: Did she [Morrow's mother, Clere Smith] talk about how she moved up here [Chicago, Illinois] in the first place?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they brought her up here.  My sister, or at least my auntie, brought her up here, and I think she came alone, if I'm not mistaken.  I don't recall her saying she came with her other, either of her two sisters--her three sisters that I know of, that I remember meeting.  Like I say, she was like the youngest one, see, and, but she never talked too much about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was thirteen--
Speaker 2: I say around twenty--she could have been twelve, thirteen years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about 1904 or so, I guess, when she had gotten up here?
Speaker 2: Somewhere around there, when she came up here?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was later than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, no, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  I'm adding on the wrong end (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, because she was here--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That would have been thirteen and so, 1930?
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was like sixteen years before--no, she was sixteen years old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1930, I guess, when she came up.  I guess she was thirteen--
Speaker 2: Twenty-seven [1927], that's what, I remember that.  I think it's, yeah, 19--I think it was '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: When she--
Speaker 2: When she came here.
Speaker 1: --got here, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, like, yeah, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's six years before you were born.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  So she would have been about 13, 12, 13 then 'cause she's sixteen years older than I am.  I was born when she was sixteen.
Speaker 1: She would have been about ten, I guess, when she came up, yeah, right?  Yeah, she would have been about ten, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well somewhere--yeah, yeah, okay, yeah, six years, right, okay, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, okay.
Story_ID: 203466
Speaker 1: I'm gonna get back to her [Morrow's mother, Clere Smith], but can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his first name is Curtis, C-U-R-T-I-S, last name, Morrow, M-O-R- R-O-W.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, his date of birth was, if I'm not mistaken seem like I recall--I have my birth certificate, but, you know, it's in there someplace.  Well, he's like, he was twenty-five years older when I was born, 'cause he was older than my mom, mother.  So where would that put him?  Twenty-five years, so that mean he would be a hundred if he was--I think, if I'm not mistaken, my father seem like he might have been twenty, in his twen-- he was in his twenties when he, when he married my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now where is he from, where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was from Mississippi.  Mississippi, they all was from Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 1: The same area of Mississippi or a different part?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact area, no.  It could, because I know they lived in Memphis [Tennessee] for a while and also in Mississippi, but I think my daddy was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my--his father, my grandfather [George Wash Morrow, was living like in Memphis, Tennessee area, you know, so they're like back and forth.  I think those borders were more or less connected and so that's how--that's far as I can recall, back and forth, you know.  I know, yeah, he was in, yeah.
Story_ID: 203467
Speaker 1: Now, do you have, are there any stories from that side of the family or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a lot of them, it's a lot of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: --about people?
Speaker 2: I remember them.  See, 'cause with him, with my father [Curtis Morrow], they were the storytellers, my grandfather [George Wash Morrow] was the storyteller.  Like my grandfather, every summer he would come north.  And at that time, you know, we're living over here on 545 East 34th Street, that's like in Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois] now, see.  And we really looked forward to his visits, you know.  He would come over and he would, you know, there was no television or nothing.  I think we had radio, I don't know.  We--I think there was a radio in the house, you know.  So storytelling was the, you know, like that was, that was the best time of the evening.  So grandpa would always tell us stories about when he was our age.  And my grandfather was born in 19--he was born, he was twelve years old when the Civil War began.  He was born in 1849, man, this guy died in 1951.  I was in Korea when he died.  He was 102.  And he would tell us stories about what happened when he was into like when he was twelve years old and the war started between the states, he and--this is one of the stories that I really liked.  He would--he and three other young boys ran away.  They were looking for the Union Army.
Speaker 1: So they were slaves at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were slaves.  He would tell the stories about what he had to do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so they, they--
Speaker 2: --'cause he was a little kid.
Speaker 1: --ran away from the plant--from the farm--
Speaker 2: Ran away from the planation.
Speaker 1: --or the planation or whatever.
Speaker 2: Plantation, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And heading north.  And he would tell us how they found the way north because of the moss, the way the moss grow on one side, certain side of the tree and the stars, he understood that and also (unclear) they understood that and they was making their way north.  And seem like it took 'em a while, a couple of weeks or two or three weeks or whatever.  And they finally found or walked into a Union Army camp and they became part of that camp, you know, and they was like--he was too little, too young to fight and he would--they kept him as a water boy.  His first job was a water boy and then he became a laborer.  And at night they would have classes, teaching this newly, you know, slaves how to read and write.  And they taught him his alphabet and he was a quick learner.  So by the time the war ended, he was teaching other freed slaves how to read and write.  So he became a teacher and a preacher, you know, that was the line then, back in them days, and he became a preacher.
Speaker 1: What denomination was he ordained?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baptist and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And did he remember what Union Army he wandered into?  Did he know who the commander was or what the Army union was?
Speaker 2: No, you know what, that's one thing.  I never told (unclear), no, he never, he--if he did, if he mentioned it, I don't, I don't remember it, you know.  I remember--but I remember the name, I remember him talking about names, how he got the name.
Speaker 1: Oh, what, well, how--
Speaker 2: Yeah, how he got the name--
Speaker 1: Tell that story.
Speaker 2: --Morrow, yeah.  They had name-giving day.  This was after the war. And he said, told us there was a long table and officers was sitting right off to the, you know, sitting behind that table, Union officers.  And they were giving the freed slave names, 'cause everybody had a first name.  Most peoples had a first name, but no one had a last name.  And some of them would take the slave name of the master.  And he wanted the name of [President] George Washington.  But when he got up to the table, there (laughter) was too many peoples that had chose the name George Washington.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And the officer said, "No, no, you can't have that name, too many peoples got that name already, take another name."  And my dad, grandpa was saying he was standing around scratching his head and other peoples behind him trying to hurry him up, you know, and he says, he made a statement, "Well, I'll come back tomorrow."  Now, his name was--they would call him George.  Everybody was already calling him George, see.  And he said, the officers told him, "No, tomorrow will be too late, you gotta take a name now."  And some kind of way somebody said, "Take Morrow and then you can have George Washington."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So he settled for George Wash--he cut the Wash off, I mean Washington, he called his self, and his name was George Wash Morrow instead of tomorrow, you know, and that was the way we got our family name, George Wash--that was his name, George Wash Morrow, so that's our family name, George Wash--Morrow is the last name.
Speaker 1: That's a good story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: It also explains how we have all these Washingtons.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, you know, and that was it.  It (unclear) many Washingtons.
Speaker 1: There're more Washingtons in the black community than anywhere else, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 203468
Speaker 1: Well, tell us some more, what else did he [Morrow's paternal grandfather, George Wash Morrow] have to say?
Speaker 2: You know, what in that house too, I remember we had a globe, we had one of those global maps, you know, that I would spin around and everything.  And I was, I probably about eight years old, six, seven years old some, you know, in that area.  And I remember one summer grandpa came up and I was playing with the map, and I would spin the map around and when it stopped, I would point to a certain areas and grandpa would tell me where it was, you know, what continent, et cetera.  And I remember spinning and it stopped on Africa.  Now, at that time they had areas in there called unmapped territory in the central part like Congo area and even in Ghana, all over Africa, there was unmapped, unmapped territory.  And I would point, and I remember I made a statement to grandpa, I said, "Grandpa, I'm going there one of these days.  I wanna go there, I wanna go there."  It were two places I wanted to go.  I wanted to go to Japan, and I wanted to go to Africa.  Those were the two places that I had decided at that age that I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Well, why?  Why those two?
Speaker 2: Well, those two because grandpa, that was the first guy I ever heard, the first man I--the first person I ever heard, you know, he told us that he wasn't no slave.  He didn't want to be no slave.  He was an African.  And that's what he would tell us kids, you know.  Well, the older peoples, you know, my aunts and--aunts and uncles, you know--not uncles, aunts, they would say, told grandpa, "You shouldn't be telling them kids stories like that," you know, because, you know, they had a sort of a problem with Africa like a lot of our peoples did, you know, about them, by them being--he'd--at the time, see, grand--my uncle was a sanctified minister too and his wife was both, they were sanctified holy rollers, I mean, real ones, you know.  So to them Africa was like a forbidden name and people just didn't talk about Africa, it was like a--it was an uncivilized place and, you know, those different tales that we heard growing up.  But grandpa, he just insisted and he would tell us, you know, about his father being a runaway.  He only seen his--saw his father about two or three times he said in his life, because his father ran away from the plantation.  And on a couple of occasions, he would slip in.  In fact, his father was living with the Choctaw Indians [Native American] there, which was his wife, one of his wives, you know.  I think that was the uncle--the mother to my father [Curtis Morrow] was one of the Choctaw Indians, woman that he lived with them.  And, yeah.  But anyway, that's what, you know, grandpa tell us stories like that and so he never really actually remembered his father so much.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about how he, why he was proud of being an African?  Did he ever--did he meet any other relatives in his family that could remember Africa or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Un-uh, no, he was the only one that I've heard, and he never--I don't recall him ever saying how--but he was a proud man.  He would always--I remember he always wore a suit.  This guy, I got a picture of him, you know, he always wore a suit and a vest, and he had a watch, you know, a little silver watch.  And I used to be amazed when he pulled out the little silver watch, you know, and, and he taught me how to tell time, he taught us how to tell time and how to tie our shoe laces.  I didn't think I--I didn't think I'd ever learn to tie my shoe laces (laughter), you know, it seemed like I was the dumbest guy when it come to tying my laces, you know, but he never gave up patience, you know.  He would always, you know, and to tell time was something else, too.  I never thought, but, you know, in the beginning, it was kind of hard to tell time, see.  And grandpa would take patience, like my father would do it the same, you know, and mother's [Clere Smith] too, but grandpa.  I think I got my first lesson from him.
Story_ID: 203469
Speaker 1: --He'd [Morrow's paternal grandfather, George Wash Morrow] tell us stories about what they done on the plantation, you know, like they would straighten out nails.  That was one thing they had to do, those rusty nails.  When people built houses there, they would collect the rusty nails and slaves would collect nails, spin nails and rusty nails and then it was their job to straighten them out and clean up the chicken coop and, you know, things around, working in the garden around their house until they get big enough.  Then they go out to the field, you know.  And he would tell us stories too about whipping, how sometimes that some of the young boys would be sort of slow on reacting or maybe they do something that's sort of mischievous like, their father, I mean, their slave master or the overseer, whichever one, any white person can do it, would tell the guardians or the overseer, the mother, the woman, who was in charge, used to be some older, elderly woman to whip that boy.  And they have to whip him hard.  You know, they would sit there and watch them whip their kids, you know.  And they have to be until they see whips of blood come from them, you know.  And that was the first time I heard that, you know.  So I see where that comes from now, you know.  Because he say he never saw a white whip their children, they just didn't whip them, you know.  So he had a thing against whipping children even at that age.  And I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's something that we still see a lot of in the black community now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we see that now, we see that now, you know.  And so my father [Curtis Morrow], I don't think I got but maybe one spanking from him in my life, maybe two.  My mother [Clere Smith], (laughter) you know, I don't think I ever got a--maybe one from her, you know.  And, but, you know, that was something--
Story_ID: 203470
Speaker 1: Well, any other stories about your ancestors on that side?  Did your [paternal] grandfather [George Wash Morrow] ever--he never knew his father, right, you said?
Speaker 2: No.  He didn't know, he never knew his father.  At that time they had peoples--they just, you know, they--anybody could be your father, you know, they just sell 'em off fast as they can get, you know, on their feet.  He never mentioned it to us.  He didn't know.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, except the fact that his father was, yeah, the only, like I said before at the beginning, you know, his father ran away and were living with the Choctaw Indians [Native American] there, and that's all, you know, that's as much as he knew about it.
Speaker 1: So his father ran away and really never came back?
Speaker 2: He never did come back, no.  I don't think--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Choctaws in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was the Choctaw Indians, Choctaw Indians live there.  And they was, you know, they're pretty protective once you get with them.  And then they moved them out of Mississippi and they went to--that could have been the town, I don't know, but they moved them out of Mississippi, you know, down to, I think it was Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Yeah, most of 'em--there's still some Choctaws left in Mississippi now, but, yeah.
Speaker 2: In Mississippi, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They moved most of 'em, right, to Oklahoma, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.  So he could have been caught up in that group or whatever, yeah, 'cause that was after the Civil War though, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: No, that--
Speaker 2: Before?
Speaker 1: --was 1930s [sic.].
Speaker 2: When they moved them out?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, 1930s or '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, well, that was before, because, you know, and that was way before then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what they called a Trail of Tears.  I believe it's '40s [1840s]--'30s [1830s] or '40s [1840s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was before then because, you know, like he was, 'cause he was born in 1849.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so it could have been when he about three or four years old when he was finally separated from his father.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about his mother at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I never heard him talk about his--I can't recall that.  Maybe he did, but I just don't remember.  Yeah, because, see, there was like overseers, over women, the older women that's too old to work in the field.  They were taking care of him, so that was his mother, you know, that's like big mama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they had--actually, you know, a lot of times they didn't really know who their mothers was, nor fathers, except, you know, there was, on some occasion when you're lucky enough that they would keep the family together long enough to that they to get to know, you know, who their parents was.  But anyone older than them would be--could be their overseer, could be like their father, or mother, particularly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you know your grandmother at all?
Speaker 2: Never met him, never knew a grandmother, un-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she die early or something?
Speaker 2: I think--I don't really think he really knew because that would have been--
Speaker 1: Well no, I was talking about your grandmother, I mean, his, would be his wife, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his wife, nah, nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well did she die early or something, like what happened?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think grandpa had about four or five wives, you know, (laughter), back in those times, you know, wherever they stopped, see.
Speaker 1: But your father [Curtis Morrow] didn't keep in touch with his mother at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think grand--my father knew, because see, there were several brothers, and, you know like ministers and preachers, deacons or, you know, whatever, preachers, they would move from one city to another city or one village to another village and they would have wives or they would have women there and their woman would get pregnant and women would catch up with 'em, that, yeah, you got a son, they always acknowledge their childrens but, but the kids didn't have to know who--
Speaker 1: That's the--
Speaker 2: --their father, I mean, who their mother was.
Speaker 1: That's the 'C.C. Rider' of the song, country circuit preacher.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah that's what it was, you know.  And they--you know, I don't think they were that sophisticated 'cause I never heard--well, I've heard my uncles talk about their mother, you know, and I never--and I'm the oldest one, see, and I was pretty well--I don't recall them--I don't--I've never seen a picture or photo of any of them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the mother's side.
Speaker 1: That's sort of unusual, that your father really knew his father but didn't really know his mother or didn't know much about his mother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he knew, yeah, because he would come in through the plantation and--well, he must have knew her, you know, he must have knew her, but I don't, I don't recall, because when this father, his father would come to, I mean my grandfather's father, would visit the plantation, he would visit his wife or the woman of his children, which was my grandmother, would have been my grandmother or is my grandmother, you know, my grandmother.  So but, you know, after at least so many years, it's just something that I don't know, but I'm quite sure they knew, my father knew too, and knew their mothers.  And my uncles knew their mother, but I can't recall them talking about--you know, other than just, what I just said, you know.
Story_ID: 203471
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that your [paternal] grandfather [George Wash Morrow] told you that you think is significant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he told us one story, we used to kick up laughing when he told us this story (laughter), and this used to really upset my mom [Clere Smith] and my auntie (laughter), you know.  He told us that during the, the journey to join the--to find the Union Army, there was, you know, they'd pass whites, but they'd stay hid, because if some whites caught 'em, you know, they would make them, you know, kept them to do whatever they were doing, you know.  And most of them was trying to get away, see.  And he said they was--they came to a river and they was following this river, 'cause the river was going north.  It could have been Mississippi River, I don't know.  And he, they heard a horse and buggy and there was a bridge and they saw (unclear), and this horse and buggy was crossing the bridge in a hurry, some kind of a way.  And one if the wheels ran off the side of the bridge and the buggy tipped over and it, you know, it went in the river.  And it was some peoples in there, you know.  And, and they automatically, by instinct, you know, they went to--a couple of the guys broke, made a motion to go and rescue, help to rescue them.  And my grandpa said that the biggest boy, among the group picked up the stick and said "No, if you do, we gonna crack your head with this stick," or something.  They were afraid that if they had went to rescue them then they would have made him pull the buggy out of the water, you know, and they probably would have kept them, you know, until they finished doing, you know, whatever.  So they kept going.  And, we never knew what happened to 'em, but I mean the peoples that went off the road, but they just kept going, him and the other three boys, they kept going north.
Speaker 1: Kind of a matter of priority.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) that's what it was, that's a matter of priority, yeah, sure.  I remember when he would tell us that story.
Speaker 1: Well, how did he feel about it at the, you know, at the time he told it?  Did he feel like he should have went back or did he--I mean, he should have gone back to help or did he feel like he did the right thing?
Speaker 2: I don't--no, he didn't feel like he was any--they--didn't none of,  any of them didn't feel like that 'cause they witnessed a lot of horrible scenes, you know, like beatings and how they would tie em up and tie 'em to trees and be, see when they whipping, the whipping day--
Story_ID: 203472
Speaker 1: Oh, he [Morrow's paternal grandfather, George Wash Morrow] would say something about whipping day.  They just snatched some guy out, some slave out, tie him on a tree, or on a log and just whip him.  And they would, the overseer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is not for any special infraction--
Speaker 1: No, just to keep 'em in line.
Speaker 2: --this is just something called whipping day?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter) they had a whipping day.  And then, you know, everybody be sitting down, the wife sitting there sipping their mint julep or whatever the drink was and they would just sit there, and all the slaves had to watch.  Yeah, they had to watch, you couldn't go away.  They would have to watch to see, and they used to hate that days, those days, you know.  And it always come as a surprise too, you know, there's no announcement, okay, well, tomorrow we gonna have a whipping day.  They just, you know, snatched someone out like that, you know.  So, you know, like they was--yeah, it was like a horrible nightmarish situation, you know, tough then to be living in something like that, see.
Speaker 2: He was grateful to be out of slavery, I guess, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was grateful, all of--they all were, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was he--how did he feel about it politically?  Do you know, was he--
Speaker 1: I don't know about political (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was he a life-long Republican or--
Speaker 1: No, I doubt if he--if he did, then they didn't discuss that with, with us kids, you know.  But I know he was sort of, in favor of Garveyites too, what I remem--I recall that 'cause, you know, everybody in our family, more or less the man sides, would talk about Marcus Garvey, you know, 'cause he was so well known anyway.  So I think grandpa had a, a bit of association with them.
Speaker 2: Was he a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]?
Speaker 1: I don't know if (unclear), you know what I mean.  I don't know exactly, but I know he was influenced by them. His son wasn't, not that I know of, especially not the uncles that I know because they was mostly on the religious kick, bit, see.  They were following that line.
Story_ID: 203473
Speaker 1: So like, he [Morrow's paternal grandfather, George Wash Morrow] became a minister, right, your grandfather became a minister?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was something like a deacon too.  I don't think he pursued that so much as, you know, (laughter) some means.  It was a means, you know, of doing that, getting around and to eating, you know, plus he was like a teacher too, you know, traveling around teaching.
Story_ID: 203474
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother [Clere Smith] and father [Curtis Morrow] and about their lives.  Tell me about your mother.  Now, she came here [Chicago, Illinois] when she was ten, I guess, as we calculated, but did she have a chance to go to school and everything here and to do much--
Speaker 2: Well, she went to fourth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --sixth grade, either fourth or sixth grade, and she met my dad and they got married.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The story was she was living with my uncle, my father's brother and that's how they met because when my father--I don't know which one was--I think my father was here first.  He came up north first and then my mother came up because my father's brother's wife is her sister.  So it was like two sisters married two brothers, see.
Speaker 1: Okay, so our--her sister had already married your father's brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and her sister was older, much older than her, probably about ten or twelve years older than her, see.  And so that's how they met.  And her sister was sanctified, so she had a lot of restrictions, you know.  You can't do this, you know how that is, and you can't do anything (laughter).  So I guess my mother and father got together, I guess, you know, just to get away from that.  I think they really liked each other, they really loved each other, too.
Story_ID: 203475
Speaker 1: Now when you say they [paternal uncle and maternal aunt] were sanctified, I mean, just for the benefit of those watching this, that may not know, I mean, instantly I get a picture in my mind, but can you explain what that is to people?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Man, we couldn't do anything, you couldn't shoot marbles, you know.  We couldn't--movies was out, you know, so that's the sort of a house that we were living in--not us so much as after, you know, once my mother [Clere Smith] and father [Curtis Morrow] married, so we were living away, but yet and still, we were still like maybe two or three blocks apart [in Chicago, Illinois], see.  And those were some of the restrictions that, you know, sanctified peoples have.
Speaker 1: So if you were sanctified, you were in a, were you a member of a particular denomination or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, First--
Speaker 1: --what was it called?
Speaker 2: Pentecost Church of God in Christ or, that was their church.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  [HistoryMaker Curtis] "Kojo" [Morrow]?
Speaker 2: So I, I just wanted to get away from it myself.  I mean, my uncle and aunt they was good, they were nice people, but I didn't too much go along with their religious orders and so forth.  You know, I was, I mean we stayed in church twenty-four hours (unclear), well, you know what I mean, seven days a week, every day.  In fact, you know, and they were part of the church.  They lived in the church, you know, and that was their apartment in the church.
Speaker 1: What, above the church or--
Speaker 2: What they call it, a rectory?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so they had like a house adjacent to the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's the house adjoined to the church for many years.  That's the one they had over on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was it a big church?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a big church, yeah.  They started off, they started off with a tent.  Yeah, I remember the tent.  They had it right around here on thirty-- figure around Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] over in there, some, some vacant lots, you know.  They set up a tent and then they would have revival services and so we had to--we kids, you know, we had to go there, you know.  And so we was sitting up there listening and so you're sort of like being indoctrinated all the time too, you know, like, "If you don't do this, you're gonna go to hell, you're gonna die, you're going to hell.  The devil gonna get you, you're gonna be burned in eternal flames," and all.  They scared me to death, man.  I couldn't--at one time I was having nightmares, you know, like I had--I was seeing devils come up from behind the radiator, you know, and so my uncle finally got the clue, I guess, when he said, "Look here, we gotta stop doing this because we just causing this boy to have nightmares."  He would have to sleep with me some nights (laughter), man, I was--I was horrified of the night, of the dark.  So that was when we was staying with, you know, with my uncle in his house, see.  And so I said, "Wow, I can't wait till I get old enough to get (laughter) out of this stuff here," and I did too.  Not that I--I still respect their religion, but I think it was--that was my tape there--it was like, it's a way of intimidating peoples, you know, like if you don't do this, you know, like, you know, you're gonna--this is the only way.  This--their way was the only way.  There was no--any other religion was not right.  They wasn't right with God.  They weren't gonna get to heaven.  They were gonna, you know, all this (unclear) stuff, you know, and, of course, you know, then I didn't know.  I was just a kid, you know, a kid, but--so anyway that was the, we--up until the time my mother and father separated and divorced, see.
Story_ID: 203476
Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother [Clere Smith] do for a living?
Speaker 2: I think that was one of the biggest arguments they had too, 'cause mom wasn't, you know, back in those days, the husband didn't want his wife to be working, and mom wanted to work because that was back during the [Great] Depression days.  Things was hard back in those days, you know.  Of course we kids, we didn't know (laughter) it.
Speaker 1: You being born in '33 (1933), that was right at the beginning of the Depression--
Speaker 2: The--right--
Speaker 1: --middle, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, I think it was, stock market falling, (unclear) in '29 [1929], yeah.  That was in the heart of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And so it was pretty--pretty, but, you know, we kids, we was happy, we never missed any meals or anything.  It seemed like, you know, we just--everybody was uptight, you know, was poor.  And I didn't know what poor was.  But my mom and my father [Curtis Morrow] knew and so my daddy, he was like, he wasn't educated.  So he was getting those jobs that other people didn't want, white folks didn't want.  And like he worked some two or three months here and then they get rid of him, and they get some, you know, so he was going from job to job.  So my mother, she, she wanted to help out and he didn't want her to work.  So I remember her working in a laundry, and I remember her coming home crying.  I never knew what it was, but she would come home 'cause she tried to hide it from us kids, you know, she would come home crying.  And later on we found out later, after I got to be grown, what was happening, you know, on the job.  She was catching all kind of hell from her employer, you know, and 'cause they didn't have any kind of respect for her, for a woman and for a black woman, in particular.  So they could do or say anything they wanted to say to them.  And so that was the only job that I remember her having.  I'm quite sure she had others, you know, like little, or cleaning houses and things, domestic work.
Speaker 1: Day work, as some had called it, that sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 203477
Speaker 1: What about your father [Curtis Morrow], now, what did--what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Sure.  He was a great guy, man, this cat was.  He was, like I said, he was a storyteller to us kids in the evening, especially if we'd been good, you know, during the day.  And 'cause we stayed--you know, we was pretty good kids, you know.  It was four of us then.  And he was sharp, man, I mean, they were always clean, my fathers and uncles, they was--I always remember them with a suit on (laughter) and to this day, you know, I remember them with a suit of clothes on.  My dad liked brown and--maybe that's why I like brown and gray.  That was his favorite color and a white shirt and tie.  And they liked the vest, the three-piece suit, you know, and his shoes was always shined, you know.
Speaker 1: So even during the [Great] Depression they stayed sharp?
Speaker 2: Even during the Depression, they only had one or two suits, but they would still be clean, my uncles and my father.  You know, now working something, you see 'em with their overalls on.  But then they finished work, and they'd come home--I mean, they eat dinner (laughter).  Those guys would sit up there, they would take off--they'll go wash up, cleanup and take a bath, whatever they do and then come in for dinner.  You know, we all sit at the table together then, you know, and daddy grand-pop [George Wash Morrow] and all, you know, uncles, they would all have their, you know, they may not have on a suit.  They have on a white shirt, you know, with their tie.  So they were always gentlemens, they always--they was gentlemens.  And so they taught us to be gentlemens too.  I guess it rubbed off.  And it was a big help to me when I, you know, during my life and also in Africa too, you know.
Story_ID: 203478
Speaker 1: Tell me now, as you reflect back on your childhood, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, in Chicago, it was (laughter), you know, horse and buggies.  Oh, man, we used to run behind horses, you know, and try to catch his tail or something.  They still had horses and buggies.  Streetcars, that was one of the fascinating things.  I'd get on the streetcar and I'd ride, you know, until, you know, when I reached a certain age.  Ice man, we used to sell ice, well, my uncles, he would--my uncles was hustlers, you know, like them guys who was always doing something, cleaning out chimneys or hauling ashes out of peoples' basements or painting, you know.  So if you go around them, you gotta be prepared to work, you know, whatever.  So, I had one uncle, he was--Uncle Burt [ph.], he would sell watermelons.  He had a horse and a buggy, and I remember we used to love to get up on the back of the truck, you know, right around here and he'd be hollering (singing) "E-o-a watermellow, yeah."  And then me and my uncle--me and my brothers and my cousin, we sell the Chicago Defender, we'd get out and say (singing), "Lady, lady, lady with the bald headed baby, stick your head out the window, buy Chicago Defender," and the peoples be stick their--"Hey, Defender, bring me a paper."  We'd say, "Yeah," and we go running up there selling them (laughter)--you know, it was, it was a fun like childhood up to a certain point, you know.  And, yeah, so it was like--those were some of the most impressionable times of my life, you know, growing up right around here in Chicago here.
Story_ID: 203479
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: There's five boys and two girls.  I have four brothers and two sisters.  Well, four, and--well, actually, four and three, 'cause we have a--well we never did--they still my brother and sister, you know, like, had a--my father [Curtis Morrow] and mother [Clere Smith] had three boys and one girl.  And then my mother, after my father passed and they divorced, my mother had three other children by my stepfather, and it was two boys.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, what are their names?
Speaker 2: Okay, my brother, that follow me is Irvin [ph.] and then there's Herman [ph.], that's my youngest brother on my, you know, father's side.  And then I have Vic [ph.], he's a minister over there in Gary, Indiana, and Tyrone [ph.].  And then I have sisters, Marcella [ph.] is the youngest one, she live in Gary.  And my oldest sister, she's a--her name is Marilyn Jean Morrow [ph.], she lives in Benton Harbor, Michigan.  So we all still here, we all still alive and kickin'.
Story_ID: 203480
Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a young man, you know, what were you like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was adventurous, man, I was always like--school was one of the most boringest times of my life sitting up there in school, especially after I learned to read.  That was when--and I would be, I would be somewhere in a closest somewhere, you know, reading.  I had me a book somewhere with me.  And they always would be adventurous books about travel and history or something, or mostly adventurous books, you know.  And I would spend hours doing that, and I couldn't wait until I reached the age that I got, that I was old enough to travel.  And so that's always been my--on my mind, 'cause it's something that stuck with me from, you know, from grandpa [George Wash Morrow].  People tell you what you can't do, and that was something that--that was the worst thing, somebody tell me what I couldn't do.  And, I was determined to make my mind up to do it.  I 'member I used to tell my mother [Clere Smith] and, you know, family that, they ask me, you know, kids asks, "What are you gonna do when you grow up?"   I say, "Oh, I wanna travel, I wanna to go to Africa, I wanna go to Japan, I wanna to do this."  They said, "Ah, you can't do that, son, because you don't have any money and, you know what I mean, you're a black man.  You--black people don't do that," you know, or "you don't wanna go to Africa 'cause those peoples are not civilized.  They live in trees," or something like that, you know.  And they say, "How you gonna make a living?"  I say, "Oh, I wanna be an artist."  They say, "Oh, you can't do this because artists don't make"--starving artists, you know.  I say, "Oh God."  And I started drawing too around that age, around eight and nine years old.  And so I was determined to be an artist.  That was gonna be my livelihood.  So I set out to convince them that that's what I was gonna do and they would tell me I couldn't do it.  So far I've been doing it, (laughter) eighteen--I've been doing it ever since 19--the last time I punched a time clock--that's what you see on that app--that form you gave me.  The last time I punched a time clock was in 1965, and that's when I went to Ghana from the post office, and I've been self-employed every since then.  My arts, drawing and painting and then I got into the jewelry making business.  But so that was my thing, like I was--and during the summer months, I would--I'm jumping ahead, I didn't mean that.  I would--during the summer, after we went to live with my mother, when my father [Curtis Morrow] took ill and he passed on, we went to live with my mother who was living in Michigan then.  And during the summer months, you know, you can--we'd go out and we'd pick apples and cherries, you know, and follow the fruit harvest in order to earn money, you know, to help with our school expense and so forth.  And that was one of the greatest times--and fishing, up in Michigan, we can go out fishing and hunting.  I never did any hunting 'cause I didn't have access to, to a rifle then.  We didn't have a, you know, a little 22 [caliber rifle].  But we'd we go fishing, me and my brothers, and we'd go up north, the northern part of Michigan and I'd go out in the forest, you know, and just, my imagination would run wild, man, I'm out there, you know, great Indian [Native American] fighter or scout in the Africa jungles, you know, and, you know, just my imagination would be going wild.  And I start telling my mom, you know, what I was gonna do when I when I was fifteen.  I knew it before then, but I told her what I was gonna do.  And, of course, they always tried to encourage us to stay in school, and so at the age of sixteen is when I began to tell her that I was gonna go, that--I knew I wanted to join the [U.S.] Army then, 'cause I figured that'd be the only way I'd be able to travel.  And--
Speaker 1: So that's like 1949, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I was seventeen in 1950, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 203481
Speaker 1: So that's what it was.  I was--I started trying to persuade her [Morrow's mother, Clere Smith].  I needed her signature, you know, at the age of sixteen.  And I was in the--I think I passed to the ninth grade and on my seventeenth--I was behind.  And on my seventeenth birthday I had just about convinced her.  There was, there was no war or anything going on, so I convinced her that if I joined the service, I would be able to send money home to help her with my other sisters and brothers at that time, you know, like she was--
Speaker 2: Well, the Korean War was still, was going on by that time, right.
Speaker 1: The Korean War started, yeah, shortly after I joined the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So what--there was a conflict going on, but it wasn't an official war until--
Speaker 1: Un-un.  It wasn't going on when I joined the service.
Speaker 2: There's no--okay.
Speaker 1: And I joined in '50 [1950], 1950.  I joined--my seventeenth birthday was on the 27th of March, and April the 6th, I was being sworn in.  And the war started in Korea in July of 1950, so I had just about finished basic training when the war started in Korea.  And I was in Fort Belvoir, Virginia.
Story_ID: 203482
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we get too far away from school, I just wanna to just go back to school for a minute and ask you if there were any, any teachers or librarians or any figures in the community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --that kind of inspired you to read and to, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and to pursue, like, that kind of life?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, there was two peoples in my life that sort of played a major part on my--influencing me, you know, and that was a brother by the name of William Powell.  He was, he was--he had graduated from the--I don't know whether he really had graduated or not, but from Insti--[School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause they was just allowing blacks to come in, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: That's P-O-W-E-L-L, Powell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was an artist.  Of course, he couldn't get a job as an artist then, but he would (unclear) doing, you know, freelance art work for peoples.  He was working at, where everybody else was working, that was at Clark Equipment Company, where they make those, I think, houses for automobiles up there.  And so I would stop by his house and, you know, 'cause he was painting and drawing.  And so, anyway, he would encourage me, he'd give me pencils and, you know, and correct my little drawings, and stuff and he gave me my first lesson in sign painting.  And I would go off to, you know, sometime he'd get a job for painting signs, and I would, you know, I'd hang out with him, see.  And I'd paint signs with him, you know, he let me help him.  And then the teacher we had was a Mr. Berger [ph.], Berger, I think, yeah, Mr. Berger, white teacher.  He was teaching, I think he was teaching arithmetic, yeah.  But this guy impressed me, he had been in the service, see and he was wounded, so he was in the [U.S.] Air Force too.  And he was a captain because he would wear his uniform to school.  He was so well erect and disciplined like, you know.  I admired him.  Most of all the guys did, we all admired him, you know, he was a ex-soldier, ex-hero and all that, see.  And so he sort of, he was like played an impression on me--made an impression on my life.  And there was another person who made an impression on me, a guy by the name of Mr. Ross [ph.]--I don't know anything except Mr. Ross.  He was a Pullman porter and he'd go out and he'd stay two or three weeks, you know, traveling around the country and he'd come back and he would tell us, you know, about his travel and, ah, man, we used to love to hear this guy tell stories about different cities and different states that he went to, you know.  And so that helped reinforce my idea, yeah, you know, that's what I wanna do when I get grown, you know, I'm want to travel too, see.  And so those two, two peoples, but the teacher was like Mr. Berger, I remember him.  And so that actually, that played a part and, you know, that sort of directed me in the service.  I knew I was going anyway.
Story_ID: 203483
Speaker 1: Now, you start off at [Wendell] Phillips High School [sic. Wendell Phillips Elementary School] here in Chicago [Illinois] where at that time, I think, black people were going to Phillips and DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], I guess, or had they built DuSable? Yeah, DuSable was up, yeah, Phillips and DuSable, I guess for the most part.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to several schools here, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you, okay.
Speaker 2: [James R.] Doolittle [Jr. Elementary School], Phillips, Douglas [ph.], Drake [John B. Drake Elementary School] because, you know we moved, see, Drake and I think that was here in Chicago area.  Then we moved out to Robbins [Illinois] so I went to school out there.  I don't recall the name of that school.  And from there, we went to Michigan to Buchanan [Michigan], Buchanan Elementary [ph.], and Buchanan High School [Buchanan, Michigan] there.  That was the last school that I attend, you know, public school that I attended, was in Michigan up there in Buchanan.  That was segregated, but then, you know, up in Michigan too, and Buchanan there it was--there wasn't too many blacks live there.  I think if I'm not--correct, if I'm correct, there was like six blacks in my class.  And, but it was like integrated and in this classroom.
Story_ID: 203484
Speaker 1: I don't know whether--in the school, you know, in the city [Buchanan, Michigan] there, we all lived in a community there, you know.  We (laughter), we enjoyed it, you know what I mean.  And, and probably (unclear).  The stores was white-owned mostly and there were, you know, maybe there's a little neighborhood store that was black that I recall.  I don't--they never had too much, you know, they didn't have that much in there.  Then the theater, the movies in town that we would attend.  But I don't know, some kind of way we seemed go to the balcony.  I don't know whether someone told us to go there or it was just something that our black people would step off and let the white folks walk, you know, it's something that's sort of like embedded in you, you know.  I don't know, I never heard anyone say that we had to do it, you know, any other--the whites that lived there.  So all in all, the whites that I knew there they was like (unclear).  I remember my first crush was on a little white girl with red hair until I think I was about eleven or twelve years old (laughter) or something.  We was swinging together and her mother came out, and she said "Look"--she called her--it probably was her daughter or her granddaughter one.  I don't know, and Barbara [ph.], her name was Barbara, and she called her in the house, said, "Don't you never do that no more.  You shouldn't be swinging like that"--you know, you know (unclear)how you (unclear) when we swinging, like I'm sitting in her--she's straddle me, you know, and we're pushing, someone push us, you know, so we pumping each other, you know.  I don't know if you ever did that or not, but anyway, that's what we kids used to do (laughter), you know, two in a swing, right, facing each other.  And you know, we just innocent, we just swinging.  I mean it wasn't nothing else, I didn't think of anything else.  So, so that was, but, you know, anyway I wonder whatever happened to her.  She's a--we just friend like, you know.  And, yeah, so where, where were we at?
Story_ID: 203485
Speaker 1: Well, trying to get you, now, you, just to the [U.S.] Army, I guess we're right to the Army, I guess, now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you joined in 1940--
Speaker 2: I joined in 1950.
Speaker 1: --fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Yeah, April, and my birthday, like I say was on the 27th of March, and I got my ma [Clere Smith], I finally persuaded her, you know.  I had talked her into it, and she, after she consult the ministers and all that 'cause, you know, and the elders in the, in that little village [Buchanan, Michigan].  Really, that's all it was, a village.  And they all agreed that it was, could be a good idea, you know, since it was peacetime and that I would be able to help out with the family.  That was me and her and the other two, which I did, you know.  And I'd be able to further my potential, continue my education, you know, and so she signed for me.  And I went in.  I was sworn in and--it was two of us.  I met some guy there--oh, we had to go to Benton Harbor [Michigan] 'cause that's a larger city, see.  And we went there and that's, that was where we signed in at, me and another guy that I had never met before.  But he lived in the same area.  And, you know, well, let me tell you how that really worked out too.  We were sitting out in a apple field.  We were picking apples.  It was about four or five of us, you know.  And we start talking about--I don't know who brought this conversation up, let's join the Army, and it stuck, you know, 'cause I knew I wanted to do it anyway.  And I was just, you know, I was old enough.  And it was another guy, a brother by the name of Texas, his name is Fred Wynn [ph.].  He live right--I think he still live over here in Park--Lake Park--South Commons [Chicago, Illinois].  And he says--anyway, Tex joined the [U.S.] Air Force and I joined the Army.  And one of the guys joined the [U.S.] Navy.
Story_ID: 203486
Speaker 1: Where were you stationed first when you joined the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Well, I took basic training in--I was sworn in in Indianapolis [Indiana] and from there we went to Fort Riley, Kansas, and I took my basic training, that time we were like sixteen weeks of basic training.  And--
Speaker 1: That's like four months of basic training?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And so let me see that was April--I wonder if I could count April, yeah, I should count April, yeah, because that was just around the first, yeah, April, May, June, July until, yeah, so that was July when I completed basic training.  Basic training was, you know, it was hard, you know, I mean, (laughter) it's just, you been in, so it's kind of, you know how basic training is the Army, [U.S.] military and stuff.  I enjoyed it, it was fun.  It was fun because of that time I lived up in Michigan, you know, we had a lot of outdoors, we had outdoors a lot, you know, and the rest was like P.T. [physical training], that's all it really is, physical education training.  And by me being a little guy too and you know like I would try to run down the big guys, you know, (unclear) look man, I'm a run this dude in the ground (laughter), he gonna crack 'cause he got mo' weight to carry than I, you know, you got to psyche yourself up.  And so basic training then we had--now, at that time the Army was, was integrated, basic training was at that time.
Speaker 1: It had just become integrated like a couple of years before, right?
Speaker 2: Just become--um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: In '48 [1948], I guess?
Speaker 2: Right, just becoming integrated.  So that was about, I thought it was over ten blacks in that basic training--in my basic training counted--company.  So there's always a bully, you know, a white bully, you know, 'cause they just usually pick out the littlest dude, and then they start whooping on him, you know and stuff.  So I had to deal with that.  It wasn't, you know, I had to deal with it, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: How did you deal with it, I mean, what happened?
Speaker 2: I had to fight him.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: I had to fight him.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it's different from--
Speaker 2: And I told him, (unclear) fight everything.  You gonna have to kick my ass (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you might, when you say you had to deal with him, a lot of people might not know what you mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you, I said, you gon' have to kick my ass every time you see me, every time you fuck with me, you know, excuse me, you gonna have to--and I think after the second time or so--there was other blacks there, you know, but them guys they looked the other way, you know.  And so we sort of resolved that like, you know.  And then the officers stepped in, you know, after, they stepped in after a while and they just wanted to--they see if you're gonna fight back, I guess, you know.  So then I finished basic training there and which was pretty (unclear) you know, I hadn't heard of Korea then.  And from there you have choices, you can continue your military training, education so forth, (sucking candy) but there was a list of openings and I think what was--one of the things that was available was demolition training (laughter), you know.  And by me being a little daredevil, you know, like I decided that I wanted to become a demolitions specialist, that's booby traps, and ground mine layer.  So I signed up for it.  And I was sent to Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  The course was actually a nine month, you know, that--like the fundamentals of it.  I guess the rest would have been field training.  You don't make but one mistake, right.  But the training they give you really was mostly about, you know, well, demolition training, setting explosives and stuff.  Just--but we heard about the [Korean] War, some way, word hit us about the, well, it wasn't called the war, it was called a police action then.
Story_ID: 203487
Speaker 1: And, you know, we sitting around peeling potatoes like on K.P. [kitchen patrol] duty, it was about six or eight of us together, two blacks, I know me and another black guy and the rest was like Mexican, I believe, Mexican Americans and a couple of white guys, you know, we sitting around peeling potatoes.  And somebody brings up the subject of Korea, some kind of way, that's when news hit us.  And it spread like wild fire through that training battalion, and everybody decided that--we all decided that we wanted to go to Korea.  I might have been one of the first ones that say, "Yeah, I wanna go.  You wanna go and see some action, man," you know, we like seventeen years old, right.  Our interpretation of the [Korean] War was like John Wayne movies and so forth, so we volunteered to go.  And I remember one guy, he was a major, really, he, I don't recall his name, but he was head of that engineer training battalion.  And he, well, he was a pre--Second World War [World War II, WWII] veteran too.  And he said, "Look, he said, are you sure you wanna do that?"  And I say, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Why don't you--you know, you could stay here, you could continue your training here or you could--I see on your records here you're interested in sign painting"--'cause that's one of the things I listed.  And they needed sign painters too, which mean I would have been in, transferred over to a quartermaster 'cause there was a demand for sign painter, sign writers, I think, they called them.  I say, "No sir, I wanna go overseas to Korea."  He said, "Okay," 'cause they needed peoples over there.  They getting killed so fast over there, you know.  So I signed up to go.  So I just, I didn't complete that demolition training.  I think I was there about two months or something, maybe three.  I was so anxious to go, man, I had eight days' furlough time, and they were trying to encourage us to take the eight days.  And I didn't even wanna take it because I was afraid that if I went, I would--no, I took five days.  I went home for five days, and I cut my leave time short 'cause I was--I got to thinking, I said, damn man, this is just a police action.  This is gonna end before I--
Story_ID: 203488
Speaker 1: We, everybody--I just--I cut short my leave time, and went and I signed up and I went to, where did we go, we--by train, at that time, it was by train.  But let me tell you first, let me back up a bit.  Man, my first time of being involved or being or witnessing racist and segregation.  When I finished basic training, which was in Fort Riley, Kansas--and we never got furlough or anything there, you know.  At the end of basic training, I think if you wanted to, you could take a, you know, you had a little overnight pass, but most of the guys wanted to go home, you know, so we came home.  And, and I was being shipped from Kansas, Fort Riley, Kansas to Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  Now, I heard about the Mason-Dixon Line you know, 'cause we used to hear about that when I was a kid, you know, and father [Curtis Morrow] used to--uncles used to tell us about the Mason-Dixon Line, how they run away and they would, you know, and they'd be safe once they reached the North.  I didn't, I didn't talk about that part, but, you know, that's what was happening, 'cause when my old man used to tell us how he made it up North and this person that he was working for there, you know, he didn't want him to go 'cause he say he owed him money.  So he had to run away from that sharecropper, see.  And he managed to get on the train.  But he didn't get on the train, he got under the train, some kind of way he was under the train or something, you know.  They could tie themselves on or something.  And he could see the boots of the white guys, the overseer of the plantation owner, (unclear)--well, it wasn't plantation so much, you know, at the farm.  He could see his boots, you know, he could see his boots and the white horse.  And anyway, he wasn't discovered, so that's how he came north.  That's my--was that my father?  That's my uncle, sorry, that was my uncle.  Okay.  So now, I'm on my way to Fort Belvoir, Virginia and we rode--now, on the train it was white and black, we all mixed together, right.  The train stopped in Baltimore [Maryland].  We had to transfer from Baltimore, Maryland up--yeah, Baltimore, Maryland to Fort Belvoir.  I forget the name of that little city.  And, you know, everybody get off the train and everybody high spirit and everything, 'cause we had about a ten minute or fifteen minute break and all that.  Comes off, you know, okay, we're loading up, you know, comes out there.  And I noticed we were being separated.  The whites was put in one car and we was being, there wasn't anyone but me at that time, that was, you know, designated for Fort Belvoir, Virginia.  And I remember this porter there, a black porter, you know, had my duffel bag, 'cause, you know, your name is stenciled on the outside of the bag.  I say, "Hey man that's my bag.  What you going with my bag?"  He say, "Well, you gon'-- we're gonna have to move you."  I said, "What, move me--we all going the same place."  He said, "Yeah, but son, you can't ride in that car."  I said, "What do you mean, you can't ride in the car?"  You know, I was challenging the guy.  He said, "Well, you know, that's the way it is."  The guy felt--I never will forget the look on his face when he had to tell me that it was against the law for me to ride in that train which was all white, you know, and I would have to move up to behind the caboose.  And that car, that particular train, you know, it's just a short trip, had a coal burner, you know, not coal burner, you know, and it burned coal, see.  And I noticed all those peoples on the, you know, black peoples on that, in that one car behind the caboose, not the caboose, you know, behind the engine.  And they saw me standing, I'm standing there with a little uniform on, had my sharp shooter badge (laughter) (unclear) you know, I had qualified.  And the one (unclear) came down and they start talking to me, and they said "Well you new around here, ain't you?"  I said, "Yeah, I'm new here."  And they said, "Well, you come on, come on, we gon'--this shit ain't gon' last too long," you know, something like--they was encouraging me.  And I was sitting down.  Man, I'm burning up, right, but that was the only way I'm gonna get there.  And I remember them feeding me some fried chicken.  Man, that was some of the best fried chicken you--I was sitting there eating fried chicken, you know.  They was--like I say, it was a short trip to Fort Belvoir.  So anyway, I jumped back ahead, right.  So anyway, I went to Fort Belvoir, well, from there, you know, from Fort Belvoir when the [Korean] War started, we all volunteered.  And I cut my leave short.  So we went to Camp Stoneman [Pittsburg, California] and took a train, that time, it's mostly trains across, you know, the country.  That was a nice trip.  I met a nice girl on that train.  She was in the WACs [Women's Army Corps], you know.  And there we went to, you know, from there to Camp Stoneman and, all mixed, right.
Story_ID: 203489
Speaker 1: Then we took a boat--the ship, from there to Camp Drake [Japan].  We were there for about three days.  Now, at that time, you know, more and more talk is coming in about the [Korean] War, you know.
Speaker 2: Where is Camp Drake?
Speaker 1: Camp Drake, that was in Yokohama [sic. Saitama], Japan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And from there--now, we all integrated, right, and there we took a small boat or ship, whatever, LSD [landing ship, dock or dock landing ship] I think it was, landing craft, and from there we went--no, not LSD, anyway it was, it was a ship, from there to Inchon [Incheon, South Korea], you know, we sailing around the tip of Seoul [South Korea], I mean Korea to Incheon.  That was in December.  So I landed in--we landed in December of, December the 4th was when I landed in Korea.  Now, we're in Incheon.  That was shortly after the [U.S.] Marines had invaded, you know, by the Inchon Landing.
Speaker 2: Now, that, that was like one of the, I guess, the most talked about battles of the war where the Koreans came in like human waves or something--(simultaneous)--just a lot--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that was when--
Speaker 2: --lots of people.
Speaker 1: --yeah, well, that was when to go to (unclear) North Korea had just about whipped the Americans all over and United Nation [UN] troops are all the way, just about to tip of, out of Korea.  So [General Douglas] MacArthur come up with the idea to pull an invasion between, you know, back behind their line which would have been up near Incheon.  So, that's like cutting off their supply line, see, and at the same time that would give troops a chance to push, you know, north.  So they had made the landing and they had succeeded in pushing the, the North Koreans back across the 38th parallel into the northern parts, see.  They had fought their way all the way up to the Yellow River [China], up near where the border meets Cana--China.  So I come in, at the time that I got there was the time that, the time that the Chinese had entered the war, and they were, they were kicking butts, man.  They wasn't taking names.  They had pushed the whole United Nations forces back south.  So we was being sent there as replacements, right.  And so that's the--(laughter) that was just sort of the situation when I landed in Incheon.  There was nothing standing there.  There was--man, you couldn't see--there was no buildings standing there.  The skies were black and everything and, you know, looked like smoke or whatever.  No buildings, you see chimneys, sometimes you see chimneys standing.  But, you know, we looking at each other, you know, everybody looking at each other and you lined up waiting for your orders to be dispatched to whatever unit you're gonna go to.  And we looking at--say, "Hey, man, this, this don't look too good here," you know.  Then we saw some white WAVES [United States Naval Women's Reserve, Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service] there, WACs [Women's Army Corps], I guess they was.  They were serving hot coffee (unclear), well, it couldn't be too bad, you know, they still got women here, you know.  And, but they pull right out, right.  Then we noticed some trucks coming back, you know.  The trucks was bringing back wounded and dead bodies.  And I remember this one truck that has--we thought it was duffel bags, you know, covering up some kind of material or something, 'cause, you know, you just get rid of stuff.  The first thing we got rid of was our gas mask because, you know, there wasn't no use for it, so we got rid of it.  And so we got a big stack of gas masks, you know.  And so we thought it was something like, I don't know what we thought it was, that was covered.  So anyway the wind was blowing.  This was in the winter time and the wind blew up part of the canvas that was covering bodies, American soldiers' bodies, you know.  And we looked at each other, "Oh, man, this is serious."  You know what they doing, they taking those bodies back and, you know, shipping them out, maybe sending 'em back home, you know.
Speaker 2: How many bodies were on that truck?
Speaker 1: We couldn't tell.  They was just stacked up in the truck.
Speaker 2: So it was a truck full of 'em?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, not full now, you know, it was probably--it could have been about two piles, you know, from what we could see, you know, you got a tailgate on that, and the tailgate was up, see.  And there was an open back too, it wasn't a canvas, and I think maybe they had taken the canvas.  Anyway, that, it was an open-back truck, two-and-a-half ton truck.  And that was the first hint we got that this is serious stuff.  Then they began, you know, they call you out, everybody lined up and they began to calling out names for the people that they gonna to send to different units.  And I noticed that in my group, the group that I was joining, was all blacks and then we started looking at each other, hey, we had been mixed all up till that point.  So we figured that whitey's got something up his sleeve (laughter), you know, that was the thought that went around--
Story_ID: 203490
Speaker 1: It's been said, I've heard others say that a lot of the officers in the [U.S.] Army at that time were southerners, you know, southern white men, based on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, most of 'em, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that true for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was true.  As a matter of fact, my company commander and platoon leader was from the South, from--and my platoon leader--my first platoon leader was [Second] Lieutenant Harold [P. Mueller] (coughing).  He's from Oklahoma, uh-huh, he's from Oklahoma.  And so anyway, so they separated you out, right.  And then we got on trucks, some of the trucks that came down bringing the wounded from, you know, you ride a certain ways.  And then we ran into a lot of wounded people.  Now, we're going north of the 38th Parallel, you know, to get to our unit.  And so we meeting peoples coming back, mostly refugees, Korean refugees, and we seeing trucks and tanks and different army just blown up, you know, pushed to the side of the road, you know, that's what we're witnessing, right.  And then we began to see wounded coming down, walking wounded.  So then, you know, we get off the truck, we off the--get off the truck, you know, and the walking wounded they get on the truck, and then we begin to walk then.  Then we began to meet some of the, some of the troops that was coming back south, you know, some of those guys.  Now, look, it's about 25 [degrees] below zero, right, and some of them guys were dressed like, you know, maybe they may have a T-shirt on, they may have a field jacket or something on, you know.  They cold, you know, and some of them maybe one shoe on or something, you know, no socks or something.  But they beat a hasty retreat, you know, like you be surprised, you never get a chance to dress.  And so we were asking, you know, you get a chance, you know, yeah, say, "What's happening up there, man?"  Them guys say, "Man, shit, Joe Chink is all over the place, man, them people is hell up there," you know, just different comments like--and finally I was, I was joined up with my outfit, the 24th Infantry Regiment, which was all black, the last all-black regiment combat team is called--we called ourselves, you know, it was called the Deuce Four which was the 24th Infantry Regiment, which was the last unit of the Buffalo Soldiers--of course I didn't know that then.  And I was sent to my platoon, first platoon, George Company, well, actually George Company, First Platoon, and I was assigned to the first squad.  And I remember when I met them guys--we was up about eight miles north of Pyongyang, which is the capital of North Korea.  And we sitting in this little, it used to be, what used to be school.  They had about two walls standing, I think.  And in the middle of that, some guys from my squad was sitting there.  You know, they had a fire in the center and, and everybody crowded around it, you know, trying to keep warm.  And, and by us being, it three of us that came in--wait a minute, one, two, three--three of us that came into the first platoon, myself and a brother by the name of Maxwell [ph.] and Albert Simpson [ph.].  And actually, it was six all total, you know, but they went to other platoons.  And so they began to ask, "Hey, what's happening in the [United] States [of America]?" 'Cause we been, we began telling 'em what the latest in the states, you know, what's the jazz, what Duke [Ellington] doing, what, you know, and we'd, you know, we talking about the different music and, you know, the things of that nature, you know.  And we sitting there with our shiny uniforms on, you know, and boots are still shiny and everything, you got clean weapons, you know, (laughter) and them guys looked like they just came out of a rag house, you know, damn man.  And I noticed in the center of the fire it was something like a peanut butter can and every so often everybody, you know, they had those fur-lined hats on and then you put your helmet over it, you know.  And they would reach up, you know, when you get warm, you know, your body gets hot, you know, and they reach out, man, they'll pull something out and then drop it in the tin can, you know.  Finally, I said, "Hey, man, what you, what are you doing there?" You know.  There was lice, you know, they're--when lice start crawling around, you can reach up and pull 'em out and drop 'em in the tin can.  That's what they was doing, you know.  This brother said, "Oh, don't worry, you'll have some soon."  And that's a fact, you know, you get 'em.  They get on every, they get on everybody.  And that was my first--that was my introduction to the Deuce Four.
Story_ID: 203491
Speaker 1: And then at night, you know, there was, you know, in my unit [24th Infantry Regiment, George Company, First Platoon], we was set up to be in a blocking position and so to give the others, you know, the retreating forces, chance to get back, to get out of there.  And that's when you start hearing artillery, boom, boom, boom way in distance, you know.  Well, actually you start hearing that when you first moving up, you know, you hearing it faintly.  And, but it began--by then it's loud, you know, you hear it loud.  Then we began hearing machine gun fire in the distance.  And at night I recall we was--we was moving, well, actually we were moving to another position and. And we discovered, at least the--actually, (unclear) the brother leader, my squad leader at the time was a brother by the name of Milton Beldin [ph.].  He was from Pennsylvania.  And, you know, and like you take your--(laughter) he's sort of like a mother hen (laughter), you know what I mean.  You try to protect your, your flock or your, you know, your underlings, see.  And so everybody's protected because, see, they can't tell you nothing but once.  "Hey, look man, you know you don't make noise," you know, or something like that.  Or--don't make noise, that's one of the most important things at night because the Chinese then, they was pushing everybody back.  And I remember that night, we could see 'em running across the ridge lines, 'cause we was sort of like in rice paddy, you know, and look (unclear) to the--and every so often the moon would come out from behind the clouds and we would see their silhouettes, you know, if they running cross the ridge line, I mean up on the mountains like, well, hills see.  But we didn't shoot at 'em, you know, 'cause that give way your position.  You try to keep, you know, quiet.  That wasn't our mission to shoot at them.  We was--and but one of the guys, you know, always you have one person up in front like a point man.  And the point man discovered a--but let me tell you before we did that point there.  Actually, you know, we (unclear), you know--when you're going across rice paddies, they have the little ridges in there, you know, like it's sort of like a checkerboard and the line in between be like a ridge so you could walk up and down, well, it would be mud--it would be the water where the rice grows, you know.  But then it was froze up.  Everything's, well, you know--and I'm walking, you know, you get sleepy, man, you're tired, you always sleepy, you know, so sometimes you may be able to catch a nod, you know, walking.  I didn't know, know you could do that, but you could.  We were warned not to do it, you know, 'cause you slip and you fall and you make noise, see.  And I'm walking and all of a sudden, I don't know, I must have dozed off or something, next thing I know I had a boot full of water, you know, I broke through the ice and everything.  And everybody, "Shush," you know (unclear).  They didn't say anything then.  And we walked a little further and then I heard shots up there.  I felt--and then everybody started shooting at one time, you know.  And by the time that--including me, we all shooting in this direction, you know.  And we get up there and I saw those three, I think they were Chinese.  They had been completely surprised some kind of way, you know, we had just walked right up on 'em, 'cause the point man had saw them and came back to the platoon leader or platoon sergeant, you know, and pointed out, (unclear) you know.  So it's like something like ambushing an ambush, you know.  And that was my first time of seeing, you know, dead people, dead enemy soldiers at night, you know.  And I remember them, looking at 'em, you know.
Speaker 2: How'd you feel about that?  I mean how did you--
Speaker 1: I didn't feel anything.  You know, you don't feel--you know, at that time, I didn't feel any--you know, you just glad you got them before they got you 'cause they would have got you, you know, they would have got us.  They wasn't--there's no mercy, you know.  So we were lucky, we felt lucky that we was--that we had been in a position where we discovered them first, you know.  And, well, that was my first like, really, like a combat experience there.
Story_ID: 203492
Speaker 1: I stayed on the front line for nine months [during the Korean War], and I was there four months before I made my eighteenth birthday.  Well, by then if you survived sixty days, you know, then you become sort of like a seasoned veteran, you know, sixty days and more, you know 'cause you be sort of tuned in to a bit, you know, like, you know, like the only way you gonna get out of there--matter of fact, let me tell you about that though (laughter), you know, just what happened the next day after really when we had, we, you know, had some time to get some C-rations and stuff, you know, whatever.  You always hungry, 'cause that time it was like impossible for you--they get supplies up to you.  And I remember my platoon sergeant, he was blessing me out for making noise the night before, you know.  And he told me, he said, "Look, you forget about all that patriotic shit, man, all that red, white and blue, fighting for liberty and justice, say forget that crap, man.  You fighting for your life here, we fighting for our life here.  And the only way we gonna survive here, one of the only ways, the only chance you got to survive in here is teamwork and fire power.  I mean they don't be--this is serious stuff, right.  And you go making that noise, noise travel a long ways at night, and you could have got all of us killed if they had heard that noise.  So keep your f'ing mind on what you doing," you know.  And it sunk in.  Of course it was an accident, you know, you slipping and sliding some--it happens all the time, you know, but it's something that you have to be conscious of.  But that, those words stuck with me and that was--and we realized the fact that we had no ships, and we had no airplanes so we couldn't leave.  You can't just jump up and leave once you are there.  You might as well blow your own brains out really 'cause where would you go?  (Laughter) You know what I mean.  And so that's the way it--and that applies to every soldier in all different wars or in the different conflict, you know, once you're there.  Only when you come back and you survive, yeah, yeah, yeah, I was fighting for my country, you know, and all that, see.  That's wolf, woofing, you know, trying to--making that impression.  But when you're there, only a crazy man, or crazy person will wanna stay in a combat.  It's, it's, it's something, man, that--it's undescribable, you--your whole personality change.  You become a different person to the sense of a warrior, to the sense of like when you fighting for your life, you know.  And your best friend become your fox hole or your immediate, your buddies, you know, and your weapon.  A nightmare would be if you wake up saying you don't see your weapon (laughter), and your weapon is cold, oh, gosh, or to run out of ammunition in the middle of an attack, or to have your weapon jam up on you, you know.  You're--just something you just don't want to happen.  And that war too was a, you know, it was like a conventional of war.  It was the last of a, it was the last conventional war.  You know, like in Vietnam [Vietnam War], it's sort of like a guerilla-like style for fighting and all that.  Not to take anything from it, but, you know, it was different.  Like every day a daily routine would be in the mornings you, you'll go to another position.  You--this could be your area, that could be your objective the next hill, (unclear) the next hill.  Korea is a mountainous country.  So you got to fight your way up that hill.  And you could--they wait till you get about half way up the hill or maybe sometime even two thirds the way up, and they're up looking down and they start opening up on you.  Now, the night before artillery come to land on the hill, and the day before, you know, we got our jets flying over dropping bombs or, you know, et cetera.  But those guys was master, the Chinese North Korea was masters when it come to digging holes, fox holes and trenches, you know.  So they, some kind of way they always seem to survive the air attacks.  And they wait until you get right up there and then they open up on you, you know.  That's it.
Story_ID: 203493
Speaker 1: So like I said, I did the nine months on that [front line, Korean War].  I was hit twice, sort of minor, minor the second time.  The first time was here, I got some shrapnel here.  It could have took my eye out and--
Speaker 2: Just like from a grenade or--
Speaker 1: That was from shrapnel, yeah.
Speaker 2: --a bomb, I mean that's the flying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was from, it was a fuse really, it was a mine fuse--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, that went off.  We was in the middle of a mines field.  I don't know why--see, no, things happening, man (laughter).  You go damn, I'm alive, made it out of this, you know, be in the middle of the mine field and those, I think, those was our mines too that had been planted and they had been dug up, you know, 'cause then (unclear), knew, you know, exactly where they was, the location.  And they had markers on them, had markers on them.  And, you know, I think a little a blue ribbon or a red rib--yellow ribbon or something, so you know that's a mine.  And then there was--so, by me getting that little bit that I did get from the demolition school there, I was pointed out, I think I was squad leader or assistant squad leader then or something.  So I was pointing out to one of the guys, said "This little fuse here is what sets off the mine," so when they--when they dug 'em up, you know, to remove the, the fuse, you know, they removed the fuse and they put the fuse in one place and the mine in the other place, you know.  And so, you know, you shouldn't touch 'em.  And I was pointing it out to them that this is what happen, you know, when the fuse is in the mine and you could step on it and set it off or you could pull that cord, you know, a little strip cord and you would set it off, you know.  And at the moment I said, I don't what happened, somebody said, "Oh, you mean that," somehow I think someone said, "is that what you mean?"  I said, oh, you know, pointed at it, and some kind of way they pulled a wire, 'cause wires was all around there, you know, and the fuse went off in my hand, see, but it was high enough, it didn't, you know, affect the mine or nothing, so I got some shrapnel here and then I got some in my hand here and also one of the guys got some in his face too from the--but it was minor stuff, you know.  So I pulled out most of it, I pulled out one piece and then there was one piece I couldn't get out, so they sent me to the aid station.
Story_ID: 203494
Speaker 1: And I got a chance to--I figured I'll at least get twenty-four hours down there [aid station], but that night--well, the day actually, we had--there was one person, a white member of the 27th [Infantry] Regiment, you know.  That's our sister regiment, you know, we fight side by side, and he was brought in, and this guy had half a--you could see his brains, you know, laying out.  It's nothing nobody could do for him.  And he was moaning, had a sickening moan like, you know, begging for somebody to just relieve him.  You couldn't give him anymore morphine, you know, 'cause it just wasn't working.  And then chaplain was sitting there.  Chaplain was sitting, you know, praying, these prayer beads and everything.  And other guys, couple of other guys, "Why don't you kill him, you know, help him you know, relieve him," you know, (unclear), but you can't do that, you know, like they couldn't do it, you know.  And anyway the next morning he had, you know, he had died during the night.  And I said, "Hey man," I just--I got up and left (laughter).  I was still patched up, I took that patch off, you know, and got my weapon, you know, another M-l and some C-rations and hitched a ride and went on back up and joined my outfit [24th Infantry Regiment, George Company, First Platoon].  I didn't wanna spend another night down there. I could've got twenty-four hours.  Man, other guys got on me, said, "Ah, man, you crazy, you could've got twenty-four hours down there," you know, observation, you know.  I said "No way."  That's one job I don't think I would ever want to be working in a aid station as a medic and all that, too, that's one thing.
Story_ID: 203495
Speaker 1: You know, the combat part [during Korean War] was, it was, you know, mostly a civilian--that's why I hate when I hear things what's going on now, most veterans do, but nobody gonna to listen to us, right.  It's the civilians, it's the women and childrens that die.  They always--they're in the way, you know, when they--first thing, you know, like if you--we're here, now, we're here on the southeast side of Chicago [Illinois], right.  Now, say if our objective tomorrow would be downtown, the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], which is, I don't know, what's that about, well, forty-one blocks from here, okay.  So now at this time, we'll be bombing that area, night fighters bombing, and the next morning we have heavy artillery would be pounding the heck out of it.  And the closer we move, when we get closer then we got heavy mortar, you know, when they get into range.  There we got tanks and everything is going off, right.  And then we get to light mortars, you know, by that time you right upon it.  So all those civilians there is dead in between.  The soldiers is dug in, you know, they in trenches or fox holes, so they're there to meet you, you know, just like what we see happening in Iraq [Iraq War], man.  Peoples don't, they don't realize, and no one even, they don't even talk about the collateral damages.  There's probably thousands of Iraqis, innocent.  You know, sometimes we'll come through villages, you know, and we see a table set as if someone was just about to prepare their dinner, or was eating dinner when all of a sudden hell break loose, you know, and we see, of course you know, we see the remains of what was a dinner, or you see lil' babies crawling over bodies looking for their mothers in burned out villages, you're seeing tanks rolling over a corpse, you know, and you're running behind 'em with your weapon, you know, to your next--to your objective.  And you take fire, you--sometime you get incoming fire, and most of the time you get incoming fire, and you take shelter, you know.  You fall down and you hit--sometimes you find yourself behind a body, returning enemy fire, you know, and they got maggots and everything on 'em, you know, in the bush and stuff, you know, and you just, you know, you're fighting, man.  And in the winter time, it's not that bad because in the winter time, you know, the bodies are frozen, you see, but in summertime they don't be frozen.  And, you know, you dealing with that, you know, see people with no arms and stuff, you know.  See your buddies get blown away, right, you looking at 'em, and all of a sudden, you know, you don't see 'em, they're just gone, man, you know.  And, you know, usually, you know, when you're fighting up--you're attacking a hill, you know, like--
Story_ID: 203496
Speaker 1: I'll just give you another example, like the 24th Infantry Regiment had a regiment strength which is what, eighteen hundred men, you know, a third of them was killed.  We talking about, about, what's that, nine hundred peoples killed out of 1,800.  Nah, or a third of, wait, let me see, a battalion is--it's three battalions, three, six, nine, yeah, about 1,800 men, I think that makes up a full strength.  I could be off a couple of hundred.  But one third of them, that's during the course of the [Korean] War was killed in action.  And they wounded probably about 75 or 80 percent of us suffered some kind of wound (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Six hundred men in all?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that was actually kilt in action, see.  And so those percentages just about applied to all the other combat units that was up there at that time, see.  Some units were just wiped out, like the 24th Infantry Division, 'cause they were the first one to go in.  That's the one that [Major] General [William F.] Dean, the one that was captured, was in, you know.  And like this man was roaming around.  Now, he was like out of it, you know.  You know, they don't talk about things of that nature, because the whole thing is to instill courage, you know, (laughter) into, in, to soldiers, 'cause everybody out there, we knew exactly what was happening.  Nobody wanna be doing that stuff, man.
Story_ID: 203497
Speaker 1: In the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], there are movies about the Korean War.  I think there's one called 'Pork Chop Hill'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And there was one called, they made a movie in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Hamburger--oh, not 'Hamburger Hill.'
Speaker 1: 'Hamburger Hill,' was it?
Speaker 2: I think that was in Vietnam [Vietnam War], wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vietnam, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was a Pork Chop Hill [Battle of Pork Chop Chill] though, in Korea, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pork Chop Hill was there.  I remember that one for sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then there was, what? 'Inchon.'  They made a movie called 'Inchon' about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Iron Triangle up there, yeah--
Speaker 1: --about the Battle of Inchon [Inchon Landing] (unclear), you know. Well, in--you never see black soldiers in these movies--
Speaker 2: No, they weren't in it.
Speaker 1: --and it seems strange 'cause a lot of black veterans, it seems to be a surprising number of them have been wounded in the Korean--I mean the vets of the Korean War have all been shot or picked up, you know, some kind of wound (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of them, you know.  So was, were black soldiers in the thick of most of the fighting in Korea?
Speaker 2: Not, I couldn't say that.  I couldn't, I don't think so.  No, it was like--'cause see, now the 24th Infantry Regiment was, like that was all black.  The only whites we had in there was officers and that was like from platoon leaders up.  And after I got there--before, you know, in the beginning of the war like, it was like a pretty chaotic scene because you got new fresh troops going into, up against some seasoned fighters, you know, like North Koreans, so, and they were kicking butts, you know.  And then there was also the--that was in the beginning and that was when we had some, they had some left over officers, white officers, you know, southerners (unclear) were sent in, you know, from the South that was really racists, like see.  But they was like old timers, old, old peoples, you know, and they got them out, they got 'em out, you know.  Most--many of them were sort of disgraced too, you see.  But when I got there they would bring, they had brought in something like a new crop of soldier--
Story_ID: 203498
Speaker 1: Like I said, my first platoon leader [during Korean War] which was [Second] Lieutenant Harold [P. Mueller] from Oklahoma.  It sounds strange, I have to say it, 'cause it's the truth, you know, man.  I would have followed that guy to hell, you know, and all of us would have, you know.  He was a leader, but he led, you know (laughter).  We had a name for him, oh, "Let's go."  And he always said, "All right, you guys, hitch up, let's go," and he'd be first.  Yeah, that was something else, man, he always be first, you know, he'd take off first.  He couldn't stay out there because, you know, as a commanding officer, you know, he got to be back where can observe and give--but he was, he was always right there and he's white, his skin is white, you know, and he's with a lot of black soldiers.  So we were hard to--it's hard to kill black peoples, you know, 'cause you can't see 'em, you know, (laughter) like, you know, but he stand--he stood out.  And in the beginning, I think they was wearing their bars, but I think they took those bars off, they stopped wearing those bars 'cause, you know, it reflects light, see.  But in a war, you know, in a combat situation you're gonna go for the lightest complexion person you see 'cause--especially in a unit like that because you figure that that is a leader, you know, a co--you know, a commander, leader and a commanding officer.  That's, the enemy would do that, and we'd do the same, you know, you sort of single out the person that you see in command, you know.  It's just--everything happens so fast, but that's your focus like, see.  And, of course, you knock out the leadership sometimes the others would panic and pull back, you know.  And so that was his, sort of--I mean he had courage, he had courage.  And even our regiment commander which was a Colonel Cory [ph.], I believe it was, he was the most decorated officers in the Korean--and during the Korean War.  The guy just didn't have, you know, he just, they say, "Fuck it, man."  You know, you get attitudes, just like you play football, when you're playing football, you know, you say, "The hell with it."  You know, you just go in there, right.  Well, you keep that same--you get so you psyche yourself up.  You know, you say okay, if I'm gonna die, I wanna  die like a man, like a soldier, like a warrior, you know, like everybody, we all had that same feeling at one time or the other, you know.  The last impression that you gonna have--that you'll say if it's four of us, you know, and I get killed and maybe you three will survive, and it's a chance that you my meet some of my family someday, maybe 10, 15 or 20 years.  They, "Oh, yeah, I remember [HistoryMaker] Curtis ["Kojo" Morrow], yeah, yeah, he was--we was in the same outfit.  I was there when he was killed."  And they gonna ask, "How did he die?"  And you would tell them how I died.  It seemed like that was very important to us, you know, how you die, rather than you would have to tell a lie, or you have to say, "He ran away," or that, "He was crying."  Of course, crying is okay, but you know what I mean, "He was a coward, he left his own mens," you know, or, "He did a bush act," you know what I mean?
Story_ID: 203499
Speaker 1: Of course, you're not pushing nobody to go in the war, you know, like that's the worst thing that I feel that that's the worst thing that could happen to a human being is to be in a war.  It's nothing glamorous about--I've never seen a movie that actually give a real description of a true war.  There's no smell to it, they're too clean.  You look at--they have T-shirts, they have white, clean T-shirts on, you know.  They're shaven, you know, they have teeth, their teeth (laughter), man, you don't brush your teeth, you don't take a bath.  Out of the nine months that I was on the front line [during Korean War], I had seven baths, yeah, seven showers.  Most soldiers, well, it's been times--I could tell you how many times they had a shower while they on the front line, you know, you get a, occasionally, you get a change of clothes, you know.  Or you might, in the summertime, you know, if it's warm and everything, you might come to a river or something, you know, you can go in there and take a douse or something, a shower.  But we didn't get chance to do that too much over there.  And, you know, you may get chance to get some clean clothes, everything, every so often you get a change--the most important thing too would be your socks, yeah, because, you know, like wearing socks for two or three weeks, man, you know, they stick to your feet and they sweating, and in the wintertime there's raining all the time, and you got lice over you, crawling all over you, and the cleanest thing about you would be your weapon (laughter), something, well, you always keep that weapon clean 'cause that's the only chance you got, really, for staying alive, you know.  And so it was really a horrible picture.  Like I said, it was thirty-five years before I even talked about my experience.  I know when I came home, my mom [Clere Smith], she asked me, we sitting in the kitchen and she says, "Son, how was it"--when I would write letters, I would never tell her what happened.  I couldn't tell her that, you know, I couldn't tell her that her baby was over there killing people, other soldiers, you know.  I mean, I can knock on wood, (sound) I never killed any civilian and the ones that I fought was people who was fighting each other.  But some guys actually, I don't recall anyone in my outfit, you know, but you can't help it, it's, you know, and sometime you don't know where your bullet go when fire it.  You know, it goes--see, you got over a thousand yards on some of them--a round can travel especially the M-1.  And so it's like you don't really get too much of a--you'll be glad it's not you, see.  And if you stop to think about it, you're finished anyway, you know.  You just don't--you can't think.  You gotta react, man.  So you carry it around with you, what would I do if, you know, we asking you and we quiz each other, you know.  What would you do if you, all of a sudden you're fighting and all of a sudden you look up and you don't see nobody but the enemies that, you know, facing you with their weapons, what would you do?  What would be the first thing you do, you know?  So you, you won't have time to think about it, but there's only two things you can do.  You could surrender and hope they accept your surrender.  In most cases, they're not gonna accept it, you know, unless there's some officer around, 'cause prisoners, they are valuable 'cause, you know, you get information.  But if it's a bunch of, you know, regular soldiers and maybe two or three of our peoples done got killed, you're not gonna let that guy sit back for the rest of the war out in a prison camp, you know.  He, they're gonna get him.  And they're not gonna shoot you.  They're probably gonna bayonet you 'cause they were kind of, you know, careful about their ammunition.  They ain't as wasteful as we were.  And, so those are some of the things you have to do--
Story_ID: 203500
Speaker 1: So I'd be amazed when I--like this last, this little thing that going on over there in Iraq with the POWs [prisoner of war] that was treated well by the Iraqis.  Most of us vets [veterans], we say, "God, dog," and I know a lot of VFWs [veterans of foreign wars] too, I mean are prisoners of war, you know, 'cause, you know, we still have our 24th Infantry Regiment Association, and we meet once a year, you know, just reunions and so forth.  And we have several guys that spent two or three years in the POW camp.  Hey, man, it's no such thing as treating your enemy, prisoner, right.  And you could imagine say if you was a pilot, flying and you bombing villages and your plane gets shot down and you're captured and some of the same people that you, that's your captors would say, "Well, look you just wiped out my whole family."  I mean, you, I--you can't expect anything but a hard time from them.  Like we would do it to you, we do the same, we would all do the same thing, you know.  So it's one thing that I see a lot of peoples, peoples here is sort of--they don't want to know certain things, you know, like it's kind of difficult for us to talk about, or our families to talk about slavery or racism that we had to endure.  That's something that we just don't wanna talk about.  But if you don't talk about it, I mean, it's a chance that it can repeat itself.  That's why really I admire the Jews for that, you know.  No, they shouldn't let something like that die no more than we shouldn't let slavery issues die either, you know.  No more than we should let the horror of war die too within us.  And I think it's up to us veterans, although it's difficult to do like I'm doing now, sitting up here talking into a microphone, you know, about the horrors of war.  And a lot of guys just can't do it, man, it's difficult, 'cause you start remembering things, you start seeing faces, you know, faces that's not here and their family, there's no family here, their whole family is gone.
Story_ID: 203501
Speaker 1: How did you--did you adjust, or was it a slow adjustment when you got back [from the Korean War]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a slow adjustment for me.  Hey, I stayed drunk for about two years, man.  I mean, I had to--I just--(laughter) it didn't think that much, you know.  I never have been a--but I stayed drunk, I was like--I was self-destruct.  I was actually--I worried the hell out of my family.  And it was like something--I remember the first movie I went to and it was 'To Hell and Back,' Audie Murphy, right.  I was in Detroit, Michigan then.  I had this--me and my girl, we decided to go to a movie and--
Speaker 1: That's a famous movie where he's in World War II [WWII], right, I think he was?
Speaker 2: That was World War II.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he goes, and he's a--he saves his company or something.  He does something.  He wins the Congressional Medal of Honor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a true --
Speaker 1: --right, yeah?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah that was a true--his story, too, they probably fixed it up in certain areas, you know.  But it was a true movie, and Audie Murphy, yeah.  And so I went out--she went in to get the seat and everything and I went out, you know, I stood back.  I was bringing some popcorn in.  So by the time I walked in to the seat, it was like--it was in the middle of an attack, nothing but ta, ta, ta, ta, machine gun fighting, you know.  And I had just sit down and that's when I--and all this went off, and I just stood up and turn around and walked out.  And she got up and walked out, and we just left.  We never did--I never did go back.  We never saw it, we just left the movie.  I think she understood, you know.  When she didn't like it, I didn't like it, I couldn't--I couldn't sit through that.  Now, you know, you know, now, 'cause that's been a long time ago, but you still think about it.  And also just think about--but there are guys now and, like I'm seventy and there's guys right now that's going for post-traumatic stress syndrome [sic. post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)] now, treatment now.  It's difficult to keep a relationship.  One reason is, you know, say about--after you take your objective over in Korea, say around three o'clock or something like that, sometime two o'clock, depending on what kind of resistance you have and the next thing would be C-ration, water, ammunition, you know, they get you that stuff up there to you.  And then they bring in replacements, if there are any replacements for you, they'll bring the replacements up.  So maybe it'll be about two or three guys assigned to your company or maybe to your squad so you got to get them settled in and everything and, you know, kind of clue 'em in.  And, and then at night, usually we attack during the day and the Chinese would counter--and North Korea, they would counter-attack at night.  They usually hit you around twelve [o'clock], between twelve and two o'clock, you can count on 'em, you know.  And they get pretty close, they crawl right up on you, you know, get up on you, maybe about, let's say here, maybe about twenty yards or so, about twenty yards, depending on if you got barb wire in front of your position, if you have time to do that, you know, they get up to that barb wire.  And then that's when they actually, everything break out, you know, you start seeing flares flying, and you hear a bugle or something like that.  The next thing everybody's shooting, you know, it just, a series of hand grenades and everything.  And they usually--by that time, they fall--they be about as close as we are here.  You know, they fall about where Scott [Stearns] is sitting here, that's close, you know.  And so you continuously just shooting, you know, you're not focusing on no one person, you just firing.  Usually you shoot at the blast, the muscle blast, and sometimes you see barb wire, if you have time to spread, you know, to string barb wire, you'll see that front roll, run that, and they drop across the, they drop across that barb wire, man, and then you see that back roll run across their back.  You see some guys if they don't have weapons and they waiting for someone to get hit and then they'll pick up their weapon, you know, it was--sometimes they be coming so fast you see 'em running right by you.  You know, you don't usually have time to turn around and refocus.  If you did, it probably be, you know, you leave yourself open.  It's usually two mans in a hole and we--you time it, you know, like, like maybe if he pop off the first two rounds, then I pop off the second, so by the time I'm out, no doubt, he'll have two rounds left, and that give me chance to jam another clip in.  So you have a continuous fire, and your hand grenades, you know, you dropping hand grenades out too, and--
Speaker 1: Would that last like from, you know, for a long period of time or--
Speaker 2: Oh, usually about maybe forty-five minutes or an hour, if it's a hour 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Just people coming, one group after another?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they be coming, man, they be waving on you, you know.  And so you gotta stop 'em, you know.  And you just stop and then you got artillery following behind them, you know, trying to disillusion them (laughter) (unclear), you know what I mean, you know, cut 'em off, whatever.  And also sometimes short rounds would fall right in your midst too.  But our artillery was pretty good, you know, it was very rarely that they would--but sometimes mortars would fall short, and they fall right in our position, kill up our own people.  And they called it short rounds.  Now, they call it friendly fire.  And some days, even--and, okay,  then that next morning, the guy that the new replacement is not there, you know, he's dead, you know he got killed during the night or maybe he, maybe he panicked, you know, and jumped up, you know, just jump up and to get shot, you know (unclear).  You know, he just don't be there.  So after a while you just stop remembering names, I guess.  You know, you don't--it's kind a hard to get close to anyone because, you know, you don't wanna witness their death, you know--
Story_ID: 203502
Speaker 1: And it hurts, especially you notice the guys, you know, you been in company of another guy, you know, another brother, you know, for two or three weeks or maybe a month.  And, you know, you sharing everything, you sharing C-rations, you sharing letters from home.  Maybe you don't get letters.  I get a letter, I read my letter to you, when you get a letter, you read your letters to me.  Mail from home mean a lot too.  And you got a box with (laughter) some cookie crumbs or cake crumbs, that's what it is by the time it gets to us (laughter).  And, so, okay, crumbs, crumbs, you know, you share 'em out, share that.  And then, you know, the next day, hey, what happened--after a fight, you know, I would say, "What happened to so-and-so ?"  "Oh, man, he got it, you know, or he got hit," you know, or something.  And you see some guy walking down--coming down the hill with this hole in his intestines (unclear) where he got his belly shot.  One guy holding his arm, you know, he think it's, you know, he's just holding his arm, ain't nothing holding that arm but a shirt sleeve, you know.  He's still in a state of shock, you know, yeah.  So, you know, you witness how, witnessing women having babies on the side of the road and get up and walk off, the baby's dead, born dead.  Those are some tough people, man.  I tell you something I remember one day we was on this mountain and it was during the summer too, and it was real--peace talk had started, you know, so that mean everybody at Panmunjom [North Korea] (unclear), where people was--both sides was negotiating or trying to negotiate some peace treaty arrangements.  And so they fighting for high grounds then, see, the North Korea, the Chinese and, and the United States, the United Nations [UN], and that night I remember that we could hear people singing, "Swing low sweet chariot, coming for to carry me home," that was the first time I heard that.  Well, it wasn't the first time, I mean over there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was singing it, I mean--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The Koreans.
Speaker 2: --our song, the Koreans are singing it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Koreans were singing it.  They was were refugees.  They was on their way south, you know, they trying to get away from the North, you know, they're trying to get out of the fire power--the war.  And they wanted to let peoples know, us know, where they were, in order not to be shot at or shelled or bombed.  And they was singing that song in Korean.  And every--occasionally, every so often, a shell would hit right in their midst and you wouldn't even hear peoples cry out, they wouldn't holler, scream, panic or nothing.  They would just pick up their bundles and keep walking south, you know.  So that was curious to me, I always wanted to return--
Story_ID: 203503
Speaker 1: --We used to always say about returning one day.  And two years ago, 2001, I finally scraped up enough money and I went back to Korea.  I wanted to see if they was--all I could say, I'll just say it, if they welcomed us, us black soldiers, back as they do, as they did then, as they--did they--would they welcome us as much now as they did then?  And they did.  I was very impressed with the Koreans, you know.  They are strong people, they are very orderly.  They're very well disciplined, they're clean.  I didn't see one piece of paper on the ground since--all though my whole eight days.  I stayed with a Korean family, you know, in the heart of Seoul [South Korea].  And the city, thirteen million people, there is hardly no crime there and no guns, that's what they would tell you, "No guns, no crime."  And it was, it was just, it was--I was very impressed with them.  They're very together.  They're business people and they remember the [Korean] War and they remember what we did for them.  So they really benefitted from the war.  And I really think that we could have just pulled our peoples out of there, 'cause I believe they could take care of themselves over there.
Story_ID: 203504
Speaker 1: Well, you came back from Korea [Korean War], you say you spent a couple of years getting readjusted or trying to readjust to life.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did things over here surprise you when you came back?  Did life seem a little bit, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, when I came back too, I had, I still had two more years.  I had another, oh--that was one year, I had two more years to go on my enlistment.
Speaker 1: Oh, when did you come back, I'm sorry, when you come back, what year was that?
Speaker 2: I came back from Korea, 1951.  I was here for Christmas, I got home for Christmas because when I got hit too, and that was a concussion thing, it was like, yeah, a concussion.  That's all it was, you know.  And I was sent to Pusan hospital [ph.] there for about, about a week there.  But at that time I had nine months, and that's when they was talking about, you know, deactivating the 24th [Infantry Regiment]--the last all-black regiment, the last all-black combat unit.  See I had enough points, you know.  I actually had enough points at the--I think it was four months, and you have enough combat time that you could be rotated off the front line.  But there were people--when I had four months, there was guys who had six months, you know.  So they was taking the first, well, first come.  So I, so anyway I had enough points.  And so I was stationed there in Pusan [Busan Metropolitan City, South Korea] for about, about, about two months, you know, until I got my--they got my records and everything, caught up with my records.  During that time I was with (laughter), I was with a demolition specialist down there, you know (laughter).  You know, they assigned me to a unit just to, you know, to keep you busy and everything.  And only thing we were doing was working at rock quarries, you know, black--that time they was rebuilding [South] Korea, the roads and so forth and sometime we do under, underwater demolition, you know, to get rid of those old beams that they used, so they can rebuild the bridges that's (unclear).  So that was, it was like a easy job.  And I could have made some rank there too.  But anyway, I, you know, I came home and I had, you know, thirty days and--I had forty-five days, I think, yeah, forty-five days.  And, man, I couldn't stay home that forty-five days.  I left early too.  I stayed, I think, about thirty-five days, because that time my past had caught up with me, right.  Here I was, a combat hero and I had ribbons and all that stuff.
Story_ID: 203505
Speaker 1: I had a Bronze Star too, I won a Bronze Star [for service in Korean War].  I didn't tell you about it?
Speaker 2: How did--now, what do you have to do to win a Bronze Star and how did you win it?
Speaker 1: You gotta kill somebody.  You gotta actually be--kill someone in combat.  In my particular incident, when was, we had took that hill that day.  Nah, we (unclear) fighting our way up a hill, a mountain really, and, you know, it was just, this guy was dug in in a position where the only way you're gonna get to that, the peak of that mountain to secure your own objective, you would have to pass him.  And he had a, a machine gun, or we call a bird gun, you know, like a sub--comes with the magazine on top.  And he shot about three of our guys, could have been four, I know at least three, 'cause you got to come up that one little narrow trail, see, to get up there, you know.  And everybody back pushing, "Ah, let's go, get them guys up there."  You gotta take the hill because if you don't you gonna have to dig in where you stop at.  So at least, in--if not, the next day you gonna have to go through the whole thing.  You know it's no playing around, right.  And so we had got up there, and sometime, you know, I just got--me and another guy by the name of Red [ph.], we called him Red because he had sandy hair.  (Unclear) (laughter) His name was Leon Warren [ph.], and we in the same squad.  And I said, I said, "Shit," I said, "let's"--I don't know whether I said or Red said it, say, "let's get him."  I said, "Yeah, let's get him."  So we devised a little plan where Red was gonna go along on this, crawl on his side--that's the only way you can get on, on the side of the hill to get up there close enough to throw a hand grenade.  It might have been a stupid plan, you know, 'cause see, this dude was dug in up under a big border, so it's kind of hard to get to him.  And I was going to attract his fire, I'm walking up to the ridge line.  It was a lot of shrubbery, you know, and stuff on there, trees that hadn't been shot down, whatever.  And I'm going up there in a crouch position, I, just tipping up, you know, going up the hill looking.  And then all of a sudden, he was like, well, from here to there, I say about--let's see, what is that about, about five yards, I think, four or five, maybe six yards.  I think it's from here to that bookcase, probably about eight yards, about eight yards, you know.  And I remember him, and he had a little gap between his teeth.  And he had on a--he had on a G.I. [General Issue] helmet liner, you know, one of our helmet liners there, and I remember there was a little weave in the, right in the middle of it, right in front of his hole like.  I guess it could have been for his field of fire adjustment, you know.  And I know we, I remember we both start shooting at the same time.  And I remember some heat going through my pants legs where some of his bullets was passing through my trouser leg fatigue, trouser leg, you know, and I had a semi, you know, I had my regular rifle, semi-auto--semiautomatic weapon.  And I--then I heard someone say, "Get down, get down, get down!"  I thought it was Red, you know, getting ready to throw the hand grenade, something, I just fell backwards, I jumped backwards.  But I got chance to shoot off three rounds.  And I was laying on my back and some of the guys ran up to me, they say, "You all right?"  I say, "Yeah, I'm all right."  They thought I was hit, you know, but I wasn't hit.  And then I got up and I looked and then the guy was laying down, the Chinese, he was a Chinese.  He had one little hole right here, the center of his head.  So it must have been the first one that I popped off that got him.  So they put me in for a Bronze Star for that, you know.  And, you know, you don't think about it, that ain't nothing, you know what I mean.  You know, see--but I, I remember standing there looking at him for a few seconds, and just wondering that it could have been him looking at me, you know, looking down on me, you know.
Speaker 2: That close, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I had a lot of--I really admired him, you know, 'cause he looked like he was about thirteen, fourteen years old.  Yeah, a little dude and I was about--hey, I had turned seventeen then though, yeah.  I was eighteen, I turned eighteen then.  I think that was around June or somewhere around in there, yeah.  So that's how, that's how that came about there.
Story_ID: 203506
Speaker 1: There's just sometimes something get over you, you know, and you just feel like the hell with it.  You know, I guess we all experience that as mens and especially as young mens too, you know.  You just get a daring feeling about yourself at certain times and then afterward, of course, I cursed myself out (laughter), I could have kicked myself too.  But, you know, and maybe, like I say you, you change all the way, you just--you become sort of a different person there.  And I guess you try to show, impress each other, you know.  And the other guys, hey, [HistoryMaker Curtis "Kojo"] Morrow, yeah, man, yeah, you got him, you know, and so.  You know, then when you settle down, you know, you start thinking, you start talking seriously, hey, man, that was--said, man, you were out of your mind, shit (laughter).  But--and they would have done the same thing, you know, 'cause it's, it is hard to say what you wouldn't do, you know, until you in a situation like that.  And you do 'cause I hear guys now, "Oh, man you were crazy, I wouldn't never been over there."  But, you know what, they would--if they had been there, they would have done the same thing, they would have fought the same way.  They would have fought like hell, and you can tell, like if a person sort of like in a leadership role, now, you can imagine they was in a leadership frame of mind then, it just hadn't developed, it hadn't developed, but they would have done the same thing.  So I don't think a person that haven't been into a situation like that should--they have nothing to apologize for, you know.  And we, one of our main things, most veterans, is to try to impress upon people, the younger generation--and this is across the color line, you know what I mean.  Man, that you don't wanna be in no war.  But it's just, it's--the propaganda is so much against, you know, that, you know, I mean by the television and so forth, 'cause all those seem like those Hollywood movies--
Story_ID: 203507
Speaker 1: Well I'll tell you something else, man, we came out--I think I was in the hospital then.  Anyway John Wayne came over there once and he had a mistake.   I think he had his two guns on and everything, and I didn't witness this but this is what the guys told me, you know.  And this is the way it happened, you know.  And most of the, the soldiers, the wounded veterans was in, they was in hospital wards.  You know, he was visiting, trying to cheer them up.  And they start throwing those little spittoons at him and the little piss buckets at him, the toilet thing at him, you know.  How dare you come in--and he had never spent a day in anybody's army.  I didn't know that.  I thought he was--I thought sure he had been in--most of us thought he had had [U.S.] military service before, but he hadn't.  And we used him as an example, I say most Americans did, you know.  And most of those Hollywood actors has never been in any combat situation except maybe Audie Murphy, you know.  And, well, I don't know what Sergeant York, yeah, well, Sergeant York, I don't think he played his part, you know.  But--
Speaker 2: Jimmy [James] Stewart was a pilot, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a pilot, yeah, um-hm.  And he made it there and back, you see, and, you know, most of the time, you know, we'd get shot up by our own planes, we get shot--I got friends right now that were shot up and he's a disabled veteran, he'll be a disabled vet for the rest of his life, in and out of hospitals.  And we standing up there waving at the plane, when he made that first dive too, you know, they make a circle first and then it goes up and make a barrel.  And we had just took this hill.  Then all of a sudden we hear 50 caliber machine gun fire, you know.  And I--the first thing I noticed was tree limbs and I remember seeing a rifle in the air too where somebody had got this rifle shot out of his hand.  And, and I hit the ground, you know, automatically, you know wherever, you hit the ground, see.  And come to find out this guy, I met him thirty-some years later.  His name is Nate Street, Nathaniel Street [ph.].  He's part of our 24th Infantry Regiment Association here [Chicago, Illinois] now.  And I remember them carrying him off the hill and he had been shot.  Some of the shrapnel from that shell had exploded and it's still--they couldn't get all of it out, you know.  So we lost a lot of mens like that.  Now, they don't show those films, I don't think they still--at least I was told that they never show those film to the pilot because that would just knock out their, their efficiency, you know, if you knowingly know that you had just killed some of your own people.  You know, them guys, they flying what, three, four hundred miles per hour, you know, everything look the same to them down there.  So you say the same thing happen with bombs too, you know, you dropping bombs.  So like an incident.  I remember a call during the Gulf War, the first Gulf War, you know, the pilots--we sitting up here watching television and the pilots is flying down shooting, retreating Iraqis and one of them said--made a remark, that it's like shooting ducks in a barrel.  Okay, then, you know, you with your comrades, you know, so that's just, you know, it don't, don't phase you, you know, you got the support of your unit.  But years later, you think about stuff like that.  So just think about things, you know, it don't--you forget a lot of stuff, but it's still--you get a little flashback and you remember faces.  Like you could be walking down the street and you see a Chinese American and they fav--and they probably look like someone that you seen before dead, you know, or a enemy soldier or prisoner or something, see.  And, you know, it just snap you like, see.  So you see a lot of guys go into ministry, they become a preacher or a deacon or something.
Story_ID: 203508
Speaker 1: I wanna change gears a minute and just talk about what happened after you got back [from the Korean War].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Let's get you back here, and 'cause we have a lot more ground to cover.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, well, once you got--what kind of work did you do when you got back?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got back here, first I exhausted all the little G.I. benefit I had, you know.  And then I--the post office, my first job, was post office.  And then--I didn't stay with them too long.  I had--I think I worked--went to the post office about two or three times.  The last time was three years.  I stayed with 'em for three years.  And then I was--a lot of little jobs in between.  I went to the American Academy of Art [Chicago, Illinois] and that kind of got me on the right track like because I had just about decided that I didn't want to be drunk all my life (laughter), you know, I didn't wanna be a drunkard.  Then I was meeting some good positive influence.  I met this one brother, artist, by the name of Gus Nall.  He's made his transition now.
Speaker 1: What's his name, Gus what?
Speaker 2: Gus Nall.
Speaker 1: Knall, K-N--.
Speaker 2: N-A-L-L, Nall, N-A-L-L-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, N-A-L-L, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nalls, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a painter, see, and I started going down to the, Washington Park Fieldhouse [Chicago, Illinois] there, that's where I met Gus at.  And, and he kind of helped me get off the wine bottles (laughter) and stuff, you know, well, Jack Daniels really, Old Crow, really, that's one of my favorite and the rum.  That was top one for me.  And so I decided, you know, I started getting involved in arts, drawing and painting.  And so I moved into another group of people, see.  And I just sort of, you know, stopped doing some of the things I was doing.  And then I-- was just harmful to myself, I wasn't harmful to no one else, and it was kind of hard for me to keep a relationship, you know, for a woman too because I was, I don't know, some--you know, I was just, I guess I was sort of a difficult person (laughter), you know, I just, you know, I just couldn't--I don't know I guess I was sort of still dealing with it, you know.  And I wasn't abusive or anything.  I just couldn't maintain a relationship, you know, see.  Then the arts really got me like on the right track and then there were some elders too that I listened to, some people, my uncles was one, especially my Uncle James [ph.], the minister one, you know, he was--I hurt him once, you know.  I got drunk and I went out and I wrecked the car on the [Chicago] Skyway at that time.  And he came and got me out of jail.  I don't know what made me call him, but I called him and he interrupted his service and came and got me out of jail, something he never done, you know.  And he never said a word, he just came and got me out of jail, and I went home, and I got to thinking, I said, "Shoot, I can't keep doing this, living this."  And then I met this girl too, you know, and I started listening, you know, I started cooling down a bit, see.  And so then I moved from 63rd Street--that's where I was living at that time, to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] there, and it seemed like I sort of changed.  And I got more involved in the art, went back to the P.O. [post office] and worked there and then I really got deeply involved in the art.  At that time, you know, the civil rights struggle was going on.
Speaker 1: About what year is this now?
Speaker 2: That was like in '59 [1959] up to '62 [1962], '62 [1962], yeah, up to '62 [1962], 'cause I left Chicago [Illinois] and went to New York [New York]--
Story_ID: 203509
Speaker 1: That was to really change it up, a turning point too in New York [New York].  In New York, then I became--I began listening to Elijah Muhammad and the Muslim brothers.  I couldn't join anything because I just didn't wanna be joining anything (laughter) after the [U.S.] Army, see.  And, but a lot of things that they say, most of the things that they were saying about living, taking care of yourself, stop eating certain meats, foods and so forth, alcohol and drugs.  And, I paid attention to that and I dropped those habits and I began to, you know, read more and, you know, look on the--I began to really get myself together tremendously.  Otherwise, I probably could never have went to Africa if I hadn't a done that.  And so I owe thanks to, to those brothers, you know, and sisters too, really.
Speaker 2: Now, this is New York?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in New York, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, were you, did you hear Malcolm X when you were in New York?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I met him.  I saw him several times, many times.  I used to see him out there on his soap box up there in Harlem [New York, New York], 125th [Street] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Out in front of the book store [African National Memorial Bookstore] there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And also at this restaurant on 116th [Street] and Lenox Avenue.  I met him and Cassius Clay--well, at that time, it was Cassius Clay, Muhammad Ali and, of course, he was always talking, you know.  You listen at this guy, damn, you know.  And, you know, he's saying something you know, me and another brother from Chicago [Illinois], I know we artist, we two bad artist there, you know, we doing our thing in the art world.  I'm working at the post office during the day, and Clay he was working at the, he was railroad inspector.  But he had a (unclear), he drew down his pension, both of us had drew down our pension, you know, our little retirement that we had up there, the little that we had.  No, that was before then I drew that, I did that after I left, when I left the state.  But, so we would paint and listen to Malcolm and quite often, and when the resurrection took place there in Harlem, you know, I was there.  We was out there, you know, throwing bricks and things, you know.  And I got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What do you mean the resurrection? Or what do--
Speaker 1: Well, they called it a race riot, the riot that was going on there, yeah, after--who died, [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]
Speaker 2: After Dr. King--in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: No, now, wait a minute.  King died when I was in Africa.  I don't know what it was about, but anyway, it was after--just check it out, but there was a race riot.  What year did King die, '50--'68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight, [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't King.  Was it Malcolm?  I was in New York when Malcolm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Malcolm died in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was there when he died.  In fact, I just got off from work.  I was planning on going to the--that theater, you know to catch this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Audubon [Theatre and Ballroom, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Audubon, yeah, right.  And I was trying to get home enough to get there 'cause I used to listen to him, you know, but I was late getting off and late getting home or something.  So I was at home. And I just turned on my television set, and but I heard it on the radio first so.  Well I'm like, I couldn't believe it, you know.  And, but, anyway, that's another story--
Story_ID: 203510
Speaker 1: Because at that time too, I'm living in a building, 706 Riverside Drive [New York, New York]--I don't know, you might have heard of it before, a lot of our peoples came out of there, you know, Tolita [ph.], went on to be (unclear).  I think Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture], he used to come around there, Carmichael, and at that time, that's what he was.  And, and Malcolm [X] used to come over too 'cause, you know, it was some of those, popular building like on 120--148th [Street] and, and then this brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One hundred and forty-eighth [148th Street] and what, what was it?
Speaker 1: Riverside Drive, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this brother by the name of Cal--Calvin X [ph.], that was like, sort of like a tutor to me, you know, this brother was like, he kind of took me under his wings, you know.  He said, look, man, man you gotta, you know, you gotta start cleaning up yourself, you know, you just working right into the man hand, you know.  You know, (unclear) words, we used to get out in the daytime.  We'd run around the block.  And that's when the split was coming up too, you know, the split between Elijah [Muhammad] and Malcolm.  This was right after Malcolm had came back from that first--from his trip to Ghana.
Speaker 2: Talking about like '63 [1963], '64 [1964], I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  And, you know, he had came back, he had changed, see.  And at that time too I was with some of the, you know, the Muslim brothers.  They was--everybody's deciding which camp they're gonna go into, whether it be Elijah or (unclear).  You know, so anyway, it was sort of like forecast, you know, that there was gonna--something was gonna happen, you know, taking the thing seriously.  Anyway, so when it happened, when he was killed there, in there, by his own peoples there, you know, it was sort of like a real big shock like, you know, to everybody.  And then some guy would say, oh, oh, man, I told you it would happen, you know.  So, you know, so that's the peoples that I was more or less moving around with, see.  And then--oh, I met this one brother who was living there, and we used to get together and put on, put together a pot, Brother Calvin [ph.], somebody bring some rice, somebody bring some beans, and so a lady cooked, you know, she could really burn, you know.  And we'd be sitting down reading books or whatever, talking about politics and political issues.  That's the first time I ever had any kind of enlightenment about politics, really.  And one evening we had this brother from Ghana--in fact he lived there.  His name was Francis Tagoe.  And I was talking about--
Speaker 2: Francis, what was his last name?
Speaker 1: Tagoe.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: I think that's T-A-G-O-E, it was a Ghanaian, G-U-E, either one, yeah, it was a Ghanaian name.  And I was talking about going to Africa.  And he says, look, if you gonna go to Africa, you should go to Ghana.  And he gave me a book, 'I Speak of Freedom' by Kwame Nkrumah, and that was when I decided that that's where I was gonna go, to Ghana.
Story_ID: 203511
Speaker 1: First thing, what we did, in meanwhile we organized the, what did they call it?  The 20th Century Art Creators.  We were like the first group of artists to put up, put up or put together a outdoor art exhibit on 116th Street--125th Street [New York, New York], the first outdoor show, you know, all black artists, artists and craftsmen, you know.  So we was having meetings, we got that organized, see.  And so a friend of mine--I'm, you know, I'm down with all the artists there then, see, a lot of guys, you probably know a lot of 'em, you know.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, who were some of 'em, just to--
Speaker 1: Artie Morrah [ph.] was one, but his name was Gaynard [ph.] then, and Gaynard changed his name too.  And it was Earl, Earl Sweeting, I know you heard of Earl Sweeting--
Speaker 2: Right.  Earl Sweeting, right.
Speaker 1: --Earl Sweeting, but he one of our senior advisors.  Matter of fact, I went to him.  He the one who gave me the name.  His wife gave me the name, Kojo.  And--
Speaker 2: What about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And Sneed [ph.].  And, oh, man, you know, I--
Speaker 2: Did you know Elton Fax?
Speaker 1: Hey, you know what, I met his--I met his-- was that his wife?  I think that was his wife, yeah, I met his wife, and I didn't know him personally, 'cause he was--I think he was doing that journey then, see, he was, you know, he traveled from North Africa all the way down to Nigeria drawing and sketching, you know, and he was, you know, he was a bad artist, man, you know.  And I don't think I met him, I don't think I met him.  He might have been part of that group, you know.  I don't know if he was there at that particular time, 'cause I understand that trip took him over a year, see or it could have been three, I don't know exactly.  But, but anyway most of the, the known artists now, they all around my age, now I guess or older.  And so we was--and that was when I decided I was gonna go to Ghana.  And, and that's, and I was directed to--first of all someone told me about Tom Feelings and gave me--they had Tom Feelings' address in Ghana.  So I started writing to Tom.  And then I met his wife-to-be at the time, Meryl [ph.].  And then, who was that, oh, Earl Sweeting (unclear) wanna do, you know when you start talking about you gonna do something, people start sending you to peoples who had already been there, because, you know, then it was like really in the pioneering stage like, see, wasn't too many of us there.  And [Kwame] Nkrumah was head of state there, and president then, you know, so it was a lot of freedom fighters there, you know, from different parts of Africa.  And that was my thing, I was gonna go there and become, you know, to get involved with those, with the freedom fighters.  I felt like--I was thirty-some years old, I think I was thirty-two years old then, 30, 31, 32.  And I left when I was thirty-two--
Story_ID: 203512
Speaker 1: I arrived in Ghana at the age of thirty-two.  So I figured I could go there and be cadre man, anyway, you know, to help train and to draw and paint too, you know, if, you know.  That was my fallback on things, see, and to just see how long I could survive there, you know.  Anyway, so people start sending me around to other peoples, so I was sent to Earl Sweeting and his wife and as we was--you know, they were telling me about their experience of living in Ghana and about his wall painting, you know.  I don't know if you're familiar with any of his paintings, you know, Earl.  And then as I was leaving there, his wife, asked, she says, "[HistoryMaker] Curtis ["Kojo" Morrow], what is your, what day were you born on?"  And I told her I was born on a Monday, 'cause I remember that, you know, my mother [Clere Smith] used to (laughter) remind me of it, you know, at times.  And I was born on a Monday morning at nine o'clock, mom.  And she said, okay, you should carry the name Kojo with you, 'cause Kojo is the day that you was born on.  Kojo means Monday for a male, you know.
Speaker 2: That's an Akan name or is it just Ashante, I mean is it specific Ashante?
Speaker 1: That's a Akan name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ashante use it, yeah.  And so I was, you know, I liked the sound of that name see, so I did it.  Anyway, then from there I met a woman--they directed me to a woman who had lived in Ghana three years.  And she lived--she met a friend, she, she met a Ghanaian, and living in New York that was here studying and they became close friends and so when the woman went back, she invited her over there.  And she was a market woman.  So she was explaining to me, telling me about the food, how they eat and, you know, some do's and don't do it, how to be, be a gentleman, that what the whole thing was to be a gentleman, you know, and--
Speaker 2: According to the African standards, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and according to our standards here, just be a gentleman, you know, and be respectful of peoples, you know.  That's the bottom line, you know, that will enable you to survive anywhere, especially in Africa, probably in Asia too, but I mean, you know, in Africa and Europe, you know, wherever.  But you know conduct yourself as a, as a gentleman, you know.  And, you know, you don't go into your brother's house trying to rearrange the house.  First thing you wanna do is learn the ways of the house, learn the customs and the language.  The custom is very important.  So, you know, that's the lil' information I was getting from them people, you know, and carry your paints, carry everything you're gonna need with you.  So anyway that's what (unclear)--and I met--I was communicating with Tom [Feelings] and so he asked me to bring some books with him, with me.  I guess he thought I was coming by ship.  So, because you know, people, you know, you could sell books there and peoples, Africans are really interested in books, you know, they have a keen interest in books.  And, you know, I was getting that advice from different people, that the few that I met before, you know, they was (unclear).  And actually me and a girl, my girlfriend, we supposed to go together.  And we had planned we were gonna go together.  And at the last moment she couldn't make it.  She just, you know, her boss lady had talked her out of it, you know, like my mother and my sister (laughter) tried to talk me out of it, you know, like, "Son"--I didn't come home.  I just called 'em up, told 'em I was going over there.  I had a three weeks' vacation coming from the post office.  So my plan was to, you know, go and stay three weeks, see if I liked it enough, if possible, to stay there, you know, for a year and paint, and accumulate paintings.  Of course, you know, that three years lasted until eleven years or ten years and ten months, you know.  So anyway, I got there, I was late getting to the airport.  They had a party for me the night before and everything.  The next morning it started raining and it rained and it rained.  I gave up my apartment to one of the fellow artist there, and I got out to the airport in time to see my plane taking off, you know.  So I figured, I was standing around there scratching my head, trying to figure out what to do and I'm talking to the clerk and she say, well, you can take on any other flight.  And you can go by way of Portugal and continue your flight from there.  So I did it and ended up in Portugal for five days and two days, and five days in Spain, two days in Los Palmas [Spain] before.  So it took me actually about twelve days to get to Ghana.
Story_ID: 203513
Speaker 1: Your experiences in Ghana, you intended to stay three weeks, you stayed ten years, what happened?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was after--now, I got to Ghana in October of '65 [1965], October--yeah, October of '65 [1965], see.  And, of course, that time [Kwame] Nkrumah was still president then, see.  And I started off painting, I met Tom [Feelings], I met the Afro American community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Tom Feelings, and--
Speaker 2: --Tom Feelings, yeah, Julian Mayfield, Ted Pontiflet and Jim Bassi [ph.] and, oh, boy, Rebecca Watts [ph.], Sylvia Boone--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sylvia Ardyn Boone, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Trent Robinson [ph.], you know what I mean, all (unclear).  I met all the community there, you know.  But it was the artist, John Reed [ph.], John Winston Reed, that was my main man, you know.
Speaker 1: Who's that?
Speaker 2: John Win--John Winston Reed, yeah, he was a sculpture and artist, you know.  And Ted was a, is a painter--artist, he taught art there.  And also another brother by the name of Daniels [ph.]--what's Daniels first name?  Daniel, he was a entrepreneur type, you know, like those guys was like, Jerry Harper, you know, all those guys, they was like freelance, they was--well, they was really businessmen, you know, it's people would like--they were the type of person, man, that you could put in the desert and give them a light bulb, and you come back two years later and you see a lighthouse out there (laughter), you know what I mean, or a restaurant, you know what I mean.  You know, they, they was the type of people that, you know, you can give a screw driver and the next thing you come back, you see a tool of die something, you know, they was people--they was--they were like inventors, you know what I mean, they was like business peoples that can take nothing and make something out of it, you know.  And so that's the kind of group--then other peoples I met there was like educators, Joe Suette [ph.] and all those guys, you know, and politicians there, like okay, Miss Shirley [Graham] Du Bois, you know, man, oh, she was like head of Ghana Broadcasting [Corporation] there.  And so I like in the midst of a lot of giants, man, you know, like some heavy people who had just became disillusioned with this situation here, and they just said, to hell with it, you know.  They gonna go there.
Speaker 1: Now, at that juncture I know Malcolm X had, had, you know, had visited Ghana in, in the, I guess in '64 [1964] or '65 [1965], I'm not sure if it was in the same year he died or not.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But he had--he was planning along with one of the Ghanaian, the Ghanaian ambassador to the UN [United Nations] to charge the United States with genocide in the United Nations with--
Speaker 2: Sakai Quai [sic.]?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Sakai Quai?
Speaker 1: Yeah, [Alex] Quaison-Sackey.
Speaker 2: Quaison-Sackey, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alex Quaison-Sackey, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, um-hum.  Yeah, I remember him.
Speaker 1: And they were planning to do that just before Malcolm X died and it's curious that most of the biographies of Malcolm X leave out his trip to Ghana and that, and that, his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they try to--
Speaker 1: --his relationship, yeah.
Speaker 2: They were trying--that's his picture there when he was over there.  That was at the airport, that picture there.  You can't hardly see it.  But he was--they tried to talk him into staying because, you know, peoples over there kind of figured that, what would happen, you know, something bad would happen to him, you know, if he returned here.  And, but he felt that this is where he had to come back, you know.
Story_ID: 203514
Speaker 1: So their thing to me was, damn, man, what can you do?  First thing they wanna know, what kind of education you have?  So man, I dropped out in the ninth grade, I'm a high school dropout, you know. They said, "Well, look, you can't teach, what can you do?"  And what was that I said, first thing I said was--oh, Tom [Feelings] asked me, Tom said, "Let me see some of your"--this was like the second day, right, you know, (laughter) what I mean.  I'm before all those big wheels like Julian Mayfield.  He was like our godfather over there.
Speaker 2: He's a writer and a producer and that, you know, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, writer, producer and all that, you know.  So I'm sitting there listening, you know, laying out my little, whatever I can do.  And Tom looked at my paintings, and he said--I took some paintings with me, some drawings with me.  And I took them off the stretcher, you know, and just fold 'em up, put in my--and Tom said, "Yeah, this dude can paint," you know.  So that's one thing in my favor, you know.  And I was a Korean War veteran, so I figured I can do something in that line.  But, you know, they were very suspicious of peoples too, all, everyone at that time.  There had already been some attempt on [Kwame] Nkrumah's life, et cetera.  So, but that wasn't something, you know, I was really wanting--my arts was what I really wanted to do.  But there was just other things too that I felt like I--anyway, so they just say, well, you know, there's nothing they could do for me.  I wasn't looking for them to do anything for me.  I had a few dollars left.  I had my return ticket and I had about--well, I had $85.00 when I got off the plane, 'cause I spent some money in Spain and Portugal.  And when I arrived in Ghana, I had $85.00, American dollars, travelers checks, whatever.  But I had some Ghanaian pounds too that I managed to get cashed in before they was taking pounds out of circulation.  So I guess what I had, probably came up to maybe close to about $150.
Speaker 2: So what did you do, what did you end up doing?
Speaker 1: Well, I stayed with Frank [ph.], not with Frank, with Tom, Tom Feelings, he stayed with me for a while, you know, because he was like on, living in a glass house at the time (laughter), you know.  And, you know, he was subject, have to move 'cause he was, you know, working for the government too and all that.  So that was just temporarily for him at that particular location.  They wouldn't approve of the fact of him bringing in another American, you know, that wasn't connected with their government or no government for that matter.  So, anyway I stayed there for a while.  But I got into the--I started meeting Ghanaians, see, there.  First thing, I met was, they introduced me to John Ray.  John Ray was already--he had his own pad set up, you know, had him a little apartment.  He had two bedrooms.  He said, "Yeah, man, I mean, you could share with me," you know, you just pay half the rent, okay.  Well, rent was like, I think he was paying something like $150, if you break it down to dollars, a year for the rent, you know.  So, you know, I can deal with that, see.  And for the food part, well, hey, I'm going native all the way first from jump street, see, 'cause I know that's what you have to do.  And, so then, you know, I began to just walk around, get--familiarize myself.  I start meeting musicians first, you know, 'cause the first night we went to a club there, and I met the musicians.  And we sort of cling to each other, got to know, start meeting the girls, you know, the girls.  And, and then I began to meet other artists, African artists, see, and craftsmens there, you know.  And they would say, "Oh, man, when you get broke, when you spend all your money, come on over and see us," (laughter) you know, you know.  And so that didn't take too long.  I spent that little money I had.  I think I last for about three months or something, close to it, including cashing in my return ticket too.  I cashed that in.  I figured like push come to shove, I could always go to the [U.S.] Embassy, you know, and get out, get--I know they gonna kick your butt around, you know, but yet and still they'll be forced, you know, let you, repatriate you and then you have to pay it back, I knew that.  I never came to that, I came close to it a couple of times and then that coup [d'etat] came and that just about turned everything upside down.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966]
Speaker 2: Six [1966], okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], yeah, in February, I think it was February.
Story_ID: 203515
Speaker 1: So I'd been there four months before the coup [d'etat].  I made a painting of [Kwame] Nkrumah too, man, I made this big full-length painting with him holding a book 'Neocolonialism [: The Last Stage of Imperialism,' Kwame Nkrumah], and I think he just brought that book out, they called it 'Neocolonialism' and, I don't know, but anyway he was holding a book, you know, I painted him with a book.  And, and it was gonna be presented to him too, one of the guys was gonna present it for him, so I thought I would get a position with the worker brigade, you know, and that's something I could have qualified for, you know.  And then at the same time, there was a call out for veterans, period, African veterans, you know, that--because at that time there was talk about liberating Zimbabwe, which was Rhodesia.  And so, you know, Nkrumah had camps up there, and I never got chance to see 'em, but anyway we had all signed up.  We was up there like at two o'clock in the morning, man, (laughter) up there for waiting for the, you know, for them to open up so we can go and sign up to go and help in that struggle there.  And so we did, we did, we signed up, everybody, mostly all the males there (unclear), most of the African veterans, you know, from the Second World War [World War II, WWII], some of them guys, you see 'em with their leggings on, things that they had salvaged from this, you know, when they served with the British.  I think some of them was in Burma and so forth, you know.  And two days after that or two days later their coup came on.
Speaker 2: Now Nkrumah was in China, I think, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was (unclear) Bayping [ph.], what do you call it, Peking [Beijing, China], wasn't it, Peking.
Speaker 2: Beijing, they call it now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Beijing, now, yeah, Peking then.  And on his way to Hanoi [Vietnam] and the coup happened.  That was really--that was one of the most tragic moments.  I had, you know, I didn't know what coup d'etat meant.  And that same day I had an appointment to go to meet a minister, a paramount minister, and the brother who was gonna take me to him had, you know, he came to meet me, you know, he came down there.  And I heard--I woke up and I heard all the commotion.  I was living on the second floor, I heard all the commotion and people was shouting and everything and it seemed so jubilant like, you know.  And then Abu [ph.] was down there, that was this brother's name, Abu, and he was--I'm hollering out the window, hey, what's happening.  He said, Hey, Curt--what did he call me?  "[HistoryMaker] Curtis ["Kojo" Morrow], Curtis, yeah, hey, there's been a coup, there's been a coup."  I said, "Man, what is a coup?"  You know.  I said, "Come on up," he came up there and he explained to me what a coup d'etat meant, and I was saddened, too.  But, you know, something too, though, I actually knew that that was happening, that it was gonna happen 'cause we was told.  I remember this girl I was with, everybody talks about Nkrumah at that time, you know, that's what, you know, it was always about Nkrumah, you know, about what he was doing and so forth.  And this young lady told me, she said, "You know what, you Afro American, you raving about Nkrumah, and we don't have milk," or something like that, you know, some statement.  And Abu also mentioned it too, he said something to the fact like, well, his bro--no, that was his brother told us that.  We went to--we met his brother and his brother was a member of Parliament [of Ghana].  His brother told us that Nkrumah was, already left the country and his brother was dropping hints that, you know, like Nkrumah days are finished, you know, and like Ghanaians, they only say something once, you know, especially on that level.  And, then sure enough the next day, you know, well, probably a couple of days after that, the incident--that a coup happened.  So anyway, that was, that caused a lot of plans to be changed, you know.  So people like Julian Mayfield and also Tom Feelings and a lot of the majority, those who was working with the government or for the government, you know, in whatever capacity, rather than to denounce Nkrumah ideology and so forth, they just left, you know.  But since I had never totally--that list was destroyed, I heard.  And then, you know, I just--some of us just decided to stay, especially the freelancer, you know, the entrepreneur type.  So we just stayed there, you know.  And I was one of the ones that chose to stay.  I figure I'd stay--stick around for, you know, until I had no other, no alternative but to leave.
Story_ID: 203516
Speaker 1: And so I stuck around [in Ghana] and got into--at first, I tried drawing and painting and then--I stopped by this brother's house one day.  He was a Togal [sic. Togolese], no, it's--he was from Dahomey, Benin now, and a musician.  And he was working with a cow horn, you know, 'cause he knew how to make lamps from cow horns.  And we sitting there talking and everything.  And he said, oh, man wait, and eat, and we ate, you know, and ate some fufu together, and as I was getting ready to leave, I said, you know, it maybe something else you could do with them   He said, "Yeah, look what I made for my old lady," and he ran in the back and came out  He had a pair of earrings, that, you know you cut the mouth off, trim it off and you got two hoops, earrings.  I say, "Damn, man, shit."  And so he gave me that.  I asked for a piece of that cow horn.  He gave me a piece of cow horn.  He gave me a cow horn and a saw blade, a hacksaw blade.  And I took that hacksaw blade and I took it to my, my little house (laughter) and I made a pair of earrings.  And then I made another pair of earrings.  And then my girl came by there and she had some earrings, you know, with just a wire hook, and I scissored a hole through it with a hot needle--I didn't have a drill, and put those ear wires on it so--and gave her--she had a pair of earrings.  So that's how it started, right.  Then I began making, someone--I stopped by another brother's house, to visit--every so often and we'd go around and visit other, each other, you know, home, some of your home boys, you know, just to talk about, you know, the [United] States [of America] and whatever.  This guy was teaching art, Leroy [E.] Mitchell [Jr.], I don't know if you ever heard of him, Leroy Mitchell.  But anyway, he was teaching art at Achimota [School, Achimota, Ghana] and also he taught up in UST [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana], at University of Science of Technology, up in Kumasi [Ghana].  And his wife bought, Dorothy [ph.]--she said, "[HistoryMaker] Curtis ["Kojo" Morrow], how much you want for this here?"  And I said, you know, I said, I said, "Wow," (laughter).  So she gave me a cedi--one cedi, fifty pesewas for a--fifty--I guess maybe forty-five cents or forty cents, something like that.  And so that was my first sale, and she say, "You know, you keep making these then you can make a living doing this."  And I went back and I start making earrings, and then I began to carve little outlines of Africa, you know, the map of Africa, and put the whole thing--I began making little things like (unclear), just sort of, you know, things of nature.  Then I began making a Adinkra symbols, all from cow horn and then I devised ways--the guys would come around, the cobblers would come around and they would give me hints on different ways of finishing it, you know.  And I discovered clear lacquer, lacquer, you know, you can dip it in and you get the original colors from the cow horn, beautiful pieces, you know.  And as fast I would learn something, then I got a couple of--I got one guy to work with me, Otu [ph.], and he was unemployed, you know, and so we worked.  It was me, him and Christine [ph.].  That was my girl.  We'd make jewelry there.  And I would teach--learn something, and I would pass it on to them, you know.  And so we had a little "earn while we learn shop" there and then we would make jewelry.  And then I began to carve faces, African maps, masks, you know, and then, you know, and I was selling them, and people were buying them, tourists would buy them--well, actually, before I was--and gift shops, the little boutique stores would buy them.  And then in evenings maybe me and Christine and Otu, we get out and we go around to the, to the, to the old beauty bungalows, you know, (laughter) the expatriates that was there, Americans, British and, you know, we sell our, we spread out blankets out and we'll sell jewelry, and they would buy it, you know, they would buy it.  Say, we do barter, barter--that's what we called it, barter, barter, you know, bargaining bit.  And so that went on for some years and but I was continuously developing to it, and there was always something else to come up in between, you know--
Story_ID: 203517
Speaker 1: We got involved in, with a family, who--Afro American family who came there with the intentions of being a maintenance man for [Kwame] Nkrumah but that, Nkrumah government came.  That upset that plan there, you know.  This guy was a painter from Evanston [Illinois], black dude, okay, him and his wife.  They had two childrens, one--oh, she had a, was pregnant and she had two daughters with her.  She had seven kids altogether.  One of her sons was there.  He left, he went to Ghana when he was seventeen years old, and he was working with the Ghana Broadcasting [Corporation] there.  The guy was just an adventurous type so he invited his mother to come over, you know, and her mother invited her boyfriend, that was who he was, her boyfriend at the time.  They all came over together, you know, sold everything they got here, packed up and went to Africa, went to Ghana, fell on hard times.  We all fall on, you know, you gotta go through that initiation bit, see, fall on hard times.  And, but Charlie [ph.] could cook, Charles Simpson [ph.], he made his transition, his wife could cook.  They could cook.  And so they decided to make donuts.  They started making donuts and then we start supplying--they start supplying donuts.  They got a contract with Kaiser Aluminum to supply them with box lunches, you know, so the workers would get a nutritious meal once a day.  So what we would do, we'd buy Spam or different, you know, things we could buy to make a box lamp lunch, a sandwich with lettuce and tomato, a piece of fruit and maybe a piece of candy or something.  Then we would carry it, I think about twenty-five, thirty miles or something to Akim Oda [Ghana] and delivered it.  We start off with eighteen boxes and they ended up with three hundred boxes a day.  And by that time we had an assembly line going, making money, money coming from everywhere now.  And so we fall out, you know, we had a whole lot of different problems going on, internal problems and all that.  And we had some big problems too, with trying to, you know, being respectful to other peoples, that's where the whole thing fell apart, because of that part, being not respectful and disregarding other people's customs, our people's customs there, you know.  So everybody, you know, they lost faith, they lost confidence in it, so they had to leave there.  Well, you see things coming so I jumped off of that ship and went on out and started getting deeply involved with my, with my thing, 'cause I knew--I didn't think they were gonna be there that much longer, not in that position.  And, you know, like the handwriting be on the wall, see.  And so, I just developed my arts and my craft.  Then I began to--well, I was there actually five years before I left Ghana, '65 [1965], yeah, till about '70 [1970] before I--first time I left Ghana to go to Togo, which is just the next country over, see--
Story_ID: 203518
Speaker 1: By that time Charles and Edie [ph.] had left Ghana and went over to Accra [Ghana], I mean, to Lome [Togo], where, (laughter) there they set up another fabulous hotel, motel inn, you know.  It's--we were in an environment where anything you can think of doing, you could do it.  The peoples was with you 100 percent, you know.  That's still, the same thing is still available now, you know.  If you're a floor sweeper here, you can go there and set up a cleaning services, you know, and train peoples how to clean, you know, or make your services and so forth.  If you're an artist, you know, anything that you're doing, if you're a writer or you could tutor, you know, so any skill that we have here, that someone is willing to pay you to do here, you could take that same skill to any third world country and teach it, you know, and, you know, and make a nice living, nice living.  Maybe it just be according to their standard of living, but that's okay, you know, like hell, I was paying $72 a year for rent there then, you know (laughter).  So you can imagine, although I was earning sixty-five cents a day, twenty-five cents, I couldn't eat twenty-five cents worth of food a day, I mean, I have to, I'd have to really pig out, man, you know, 'cause figure like you can get a nice breakfast for five cents that's breaking into our own money, you know.  And, so anyway that's--by that time I was wearing cloth, man, I had a pretty good command of the English--of the language.  You couldn't tell any difference, you couldn't tell me from an African there you know, then, but my mannerisms, start doing this (hand motions), you know, talking with my hands and stuff, my language, my English started, I started using Pidgin English, like African English, you know.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Can you give us an example?
Speaker 1: I did go come (laughter), mean I'm going but I'll be back, you know what I mean.  Make I go come small.  I'll be just a minute, I'll be back soon, you know.  A day like I no day, that mean I'm here like I'm not here, you know.  (Unclear) (Speaking African dialect).  You know, you can, then you can mix in language too and stuff, you know, in there, mix it in so people can understand you.  And, so I, I was down with it, man.  Sometimes it would just be--I was frightened myself, you know.  Like you be out in the middle of a forest somewhere with a bunch of African say, Ashantis 'cause that's--I was adopted by the Ashantis, you know, in 1967.  I think I was there about eighteen months before I was adopted.  We got in--we got, we, we embarked on a plan to bring food stock from the interior to the city and to sell in the markets in Accra [Ghana].  So that involved--we have to, somebody have to go there and construct or reconstruct or clear the feeder road which lead up to the main road, you in the deep forest.  We say forest (laughter), it's like jungle, you know, to the main village and then from the village, we get trucks up there and the trucks could transfer the food back to the city, see.  So that means we had made--we had made money with the catering service there, enough money to buy trucks and tractor.  So my job, me and a brother by the name was Joe, Joe DeCosta Louisa Ghanan [ph.].  That guy could speak about, we didn't know how many languages he could speak, man.  Some say fifteen, twenty languages, different, you know.  And so our job was to stay out there in the bush with the peoples there, the Ashantis--this was after I was adopted, and supervise the clearing of the roads so when Charles and John Ray get the equipment, then they would come back and, you know, the road would be clear and we could, food--and also our job was to locate the food stock, you know, from the farmers and the interior.  So that's what me and Joe was doing, up there for forty days.  That was a rough forty days.  And we got the road cleared too, you know, the road, there--well, you could call it a road.  It probably was about wide enough to get a, a minivan down, you know.  But everything grows there so the weeds would grow up, so you have to continuously clear it off.  And we gotta do all this between rain drops too, you know, because when it rains it just wash it out.  So anyway we done that, me and Joe got it cleaned (unclear), and it rained the day that they came up there to pick up our folks.  No, it start raining that night, or was it a day before.  Anyway, it just rained, rained, rained like it do.  And we standing up there watching the roads disappear. Man.  So, needless to say, that brought an end to that particular trip.  And, so a lot people were disappointed, especially, our--on our side, you know.
Story_ID: 203519
Speaker 1: But in the meanwhile I had got pretty well known with the peoples in the village, and I liked it up there, man.  I loved it, it was beautiful, man, just like walking into a picture postcard, you know.  And so I decided to hell with them, I just, I made me a home up there, you know, and I got a house, you know, and I stayed out with part of a family or part of a clan, the Agonafo [ph.].  And, see, that's his picture up there, you know, and--of my chief and the elders and so forth.  And then I'm still doing my jewelry thing too, now, right.  So, so anyway I went back to Accra [Ghana], and I saw that whole thing had fell apart.  The peoples had became disillusioned, you know it's a lot of stuff involved, right, but it's, it's--it concerning other people.  Anyway, so they left and they went to Togo.  So I decided, me, I stayed there.  And I was doing--by that time, I was doing my jewelry thing.  I would make jewelry there from cow horn and ivory, chips of ivory.  And then I would go over to, carry them over to Togo, I mean not Togo, to--well, my first trip was to Togo, yeah, my first trip was to Togo.  By that time Charles [ph.] and Edie [ph.], them people was just magic peoples, you know, as a team, they was magic people.  They had this hotel, motel going on where they were catering to Peace Corps and also travelers, they travel in and out of Africa.  And they said, "Oh, "Kojo"--[HistoryMaker] Curtis ["Kojo" Morrow]," they called me Curtis, "Curtis, set up your stuff here. You could sell everything you got here."  And sure enough the first night I sold everything I got there.  Then I'd pitched in and help them.  I would stay there for maybe about two or three weeks, sometimes a month.  Then I would go back to my village up in Agogo [Ghana], make more jewelry.  The second trip I decided to go to the Ivory Coast, Cote d'lvoire.  Now, that's going inland, you know, the old trading route, and I would go over to the Cote d'lvoire, sell my jewelry there to the Frenchmens, you know, and to the boutique stores, and then I would buy things in Ivory Coast that you couldn't purchase in Ghana, come back to Accra, sell them there and then go up to my village.  I got enough money to last me for six months or so. You know, I would just lay up and cool out and make jewelry, you know, and, you know, and just have fun, you know, whatever, you know, go out farming or hunting or out with the guys, you know, we just hang out, out there in the bush.  And, you know, I go with--you always go with someone until after three years or so.  Then, you know, you feel confidence enough to go roaming around yourself, you know, long as you don't want to venture too much off from the ridden path, you know.  And so that's what I would do.  Then my money started running low.  Then by that time I have accumulated quite a bit of work, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like you had it worked out pretty well?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had it worked out, man, 'cause, see, I was meeting guys, Africans, who had traveled all over the world and that's what they would do, Ghanaians, you know.  And they traveled all over Africa, I mean brothers from, that go to--Muslims that would go to Mecca [Saudi Arabia].  And they would--they'd take things there that they can trade and they would buy things there that they could sell, you know, and just buying and selling, and which is, you know, you can do that all--you can go all over to world doing that, even now.  In fact, as a craftsman, you only need your tools.  You can take your tools.  And all my tools would fit in that bag, you know, in a little bag, you know, for carving and so forth.  And you can go anyplace that they have trees (laughter) or cow horn and you can make money, you can make jewelry, um-hm.  The problem was, you know, in your production, you could never keep up your production, (laughter).
Story_ID: 203520
Speaker 1: You returned [to the United States of America] because of your mother [Clere Smith], right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my mother--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: --yeah, my mother made her transition, and I returned.  That's when I started working towards returning.  It took about--it took about nine months or so, you know, (laughter) to get it--get them scratches together and get a way back, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you think that you were gonna stay for good when you came back, or did you think you'd just come back for a while and then go back to Ghana or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought I was coming and gon' stay for a while, I mean you know, come back and go back.  That was my plan because, see, during that say after my fifth or sixth year, you know, that's what we would talk about like Africans and African Americans, we talking about coming back here furthering my education, my technical training, 'cause I knew what I wanted to do.  I wanted to stay in the art field and I also wanted to get into the casting bit too.  And, you know, the modern technology--modern techniques of manufacturing just so as I can make more than one, you know, start like a factory.  That was my plan.  And so I would discuss that with my Ghanaian brothers, you know, and sisters, you know, we'd talk about things.  That's the reason why they wanted to get here, was to come here so they can, you know, advance themselves so they'd be able to go back and utilize some of the, the raw materials that they have, rather than just selling it out here and buying it back from, you know, from other countries.  So that's the conversation that we always spoke of--discussed amongst us, you know.  But then, you know, how you put things off, see.  And there was always some excuse for not doing something, you know.  And so when she, when mother made her transition, well, that was it.  Then that was like, I say well, I gotta do it then, see.  And so that's what really prompted--
Story_ID: 203521
Speaker 1: During my stay there, you know, like during that period there was--I was like self-contained then, see.  I know that I realize, of course, this was told to me before I even--on my first or second day, but when I began meeting the other Afro Americans and British people too, Caucasians, you know.  There was a lot of peoples there, not a lot, you know, but most of the ones who survived is the entrepreneuring-type, white, black, red and yellow, right.  And, you know, that's what they was doing.  Them guys was like (laughter), you know, you got to take your hat off to 'em, you know.  Conditions is different, like sometime I have to travel two hundred miles to get some saw blades, you know, and we can just go down to the hardware store here and buy it for less than three dollars, you know.  And it could take like a week, you know, and you gotta go through a whole lot of changes, you know, you got a hardship, really, you know.  A lot of things we take for granted, you know, like here hot and running cold water, snakes, insects, malaria fever, sickness, food, you know, just--the food is plentiful, but in most cases you gotta devise ways of getting it too.  You gotta devise ways--you gotta set you up a household, you know, where you got somebody to cook for you, and you gotta supply them--and you also gotta be able to take care of the peoples who with you, you know, your crew (laughter), you know, where it could be three or four or a hundred, you know, you gotta provide for them, you know, make a way for them, you know, a livelihood, see.  So that everything is like a challenge to you, you know.  And that was like a beautiful time in my life there too, you know, you gotta be thinking all the time and, you know, you like--you're in charge, see, you got--you're responsible for other people, you know.  And so that was like I enjoyed that.  You know, although on my level, you know, whatever it was, you know.  And so anyway, I left and the peoples that I was with had associated with me like they, they are self-sufficient too now, you know, 'cause they have a craft, you know.  And even if it's just what we were doing, you know, the craft, but all--they probably have other crafts now, you know.  I know Gotereka [ph.] continued his schooling, and his education.  I think Christine [ph.]--that was my girl, you know she's married, and she probably a grandmother by now (laughter), you know.  And she always wanted a sewing machine, so she got her a sewing machine, so no telling what she--she probably own a factory, you know.  I mean, them peoples are very ambitious, you know.  And so, you know, we all benefitted from our stay together, you know there.  Otu [ph.], that's my clan leader there, he came to the [United] States [of America] and he was here--he's retiring now.  I think he's back in Ghana now.  He managed to get his family over here, and all of them got degrees.  So I'm continuously--we get in touch every now and then.   "Well, [HistoryMaker Curtis] Kojo [Morrow], why don't you come on back, man?  You don't have to stay here," you know.  Some guys I helped get out, you know, by telling--directing them, you know.  They were trying to get to the States, you know.  And we sat down and we plan our ways, you know, like well, "Okay, man, you can go down to Takoradi [Sekondi-Takoradi, Ghana] and jump and, and stow away on a ship," (laughter) you know.  And some of them dudes, they would do it, some of them, take 'em three years to do it--to get here, they got here.  They went to school, they took advantage of all the opportunities that we had laid the groundwork, you know, that we paved the way for and they got their degrees and so forth and they gone back to--by now they're like, many of them, some of them, the ones that I knew, in my, my little sphere, they, you know, they're retired now and they're back in Ghana, you know.  They probably in government or else in, you know, manufacturing (unclear) state and so forth.  But, so it kind of rubbed off on you, you know, you just feel like, man, I don't have anything against working, I think working is a beautiful thing, you know, we have to--everybody need that experience.  But you reach a stage where you feel like, you know, I like to be my own person, my own boss, and my own man--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I think that's a, that's pretty much a goal--that should be a goal of most people, I think, when they work--
Speaker 1: Definitely.
Speaker 2: --and to be in charge of something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm, yeah.  And for somebody to tell you something that you can't do, that really bugs me even now, you know, for someone would say that you can't do something or somebody got there foot on your neck.  I mean, gee whiz, give me a break.  I don't even--that's their problem, you know.  So, I don't--it just kind of, you know, it don't affect me now, you know, it probably don't affect us 'cause we all grown.  But for the younger generation coming up.  I guess that's why I started talking too you know (laughter), sort of relate my story.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And it might a had something to do with me not continuing my education too once I returned.  I was aware of the fact--
Speaker 2: Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --sure, I could've had a Ph.D. or doctorate [degree] or whatever now, you know.
Story_ID: 203522
Speaker 1: Didn't you study metallurgy though when you came back?  I mean, the metal--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I studied that downtown [Chicago, Illinois] there with the, with those guys down at the--with the craftsmen downtown, you know.  I learned from other craftsmen.
Speaker 1: Okay, but not formal education?
Speaker 2: No, un-uh, un-uh.  From the goldsmiths from downtown, the Jewish people and the Mexican Americans, Afro Americans, you know, so I just learned then from the books, the reading and so forth.  It's not really a difficult thing to (laughter)--you know, I could say that, I guess, but it's like, you know, once you get the funda- the difficult part is like making the models first, like your (unclear)--or like this, that's a time-consuming thing, you know.  It takes time to sit down and to carve this model out of a piece of wax and then the casting, well, that's already laid out and the metal, you know, you learn the, the properties of the metal, you know, the melting, the melting temperature, and, you know, so that's not a real difficult thing.  And the other thing is the craftsmanship, you know, it's carve and cutting and polishing and after a while, you get tired of sticking things in your hand, you know, and cutting yourself up, and you don't do it anymore, you know.  But here there's so many restrictions too, because, you know, you can't just teach someone.  You gotta have certain environment to teach someone, you gotta deal with insurance, you gotta deal with the bureaucracy bit, you know, the zoning and so forth.  So I feel bad about not being able to pass it on.  And most of us craftsmen feel the same way.
Story_ID: 203523
Speaker 1: But you did teach for a while, right?
Speaker 2: That's difficult.  That's one of the most difficult things.  I tried to teach members of my family.  They say, "Oh, uncle, that's too tedious," you know, when they're in school, they want some money, you know, or they'll hang out with me then.  But once they finish school, they want a job, they want a regular job that they know they can get paid for, paid, you know, for doing it.  But I have tutored peoples, you know, I have consulted peoples, you know, coming to me with--but they have the skill already.
Story_ID: 203524
Speaker 1: You asked me, "How did I feel when I came back here?"  Larry [Crowe], I'll tell you, man, your confidence is--your self-confidence is just in abundance, abounded.  You know you just--there's nothing to--you feel like a--excuse me for saying, you feel like a white guy in America that was born and raised here.  You feel like an African in Africa, you know, them guys walk with their heads--they feel confidence about themself.  They know who they are.  So that's the feeling that you have, even if you go over there and you stay three weeks, you come back, you know, you got a different outlook on life, you know.  But if you go and you stay a couple of years or three years, man, you know you--a lot of things that would hurt, that would offend you, it just wouldn't offend me, you know, because you know, like the Ashantis, you know, they teach you all their customs too--not all, you know, everything they can about their ancestors and how they fought, the most powerful armies (laughter) in the world.  They fought to a standstill.  They could never really be conquered, you know.  And they was talking about some of their strategy--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the British tried to beat 'em for eleven years, I think.  Well, they fought eleven wars from, yeah, the 19th century to 19--to the early part of the century.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.  And they would talk about things like that, you know, their ancestors, you know.  That's what--we'd be sitting around, people see guys sitting around under the baobab tree, the palm tree, drinking palm wine, well, that's what they're talking about, they're talking about customs, traditions, politics, you know, that's what--and the farm, yeah, they talking about the farm too and discussing ways of trying to, you know, improve themselves or how to get their childrens out.  One of the big problems and once you get 'em over here, and they get their training, they don't come back, you know, they bought off.  They getting this good salary, you know, they get, I mean, life is--
Story_ID: 203525
Speaker 1: A lot people don't agree with me, man, but this is the easiest place in the world, America.  A person can make it here, man.  It's like an artist, you sit down and you paint a painting, right, and you look at that painting, and you say damn, there's something wrong with this painting, right.  And you can't put your finger on it, but then when you step back and you look at it in mirror and you see things, oh, my god, you know.  And sometimes you walk away from it and you come back and you see, you can put your finger on it right away.  Well, that's what we have, a lot of our peoples have--at a disadvantage is, because they have never had the opportunity to walk away or to go away to someplace else for a while and come back and look, and you get a whole picture, a different view of it.  So that's the way that most brothers and sisters feel that go there and stay for a while and come back, you know.  And they form that link too, you know.  So that's my--no, I hadn't planned on staying here that long.  I planned on staying here for about two years, you know, and then go back.  But I kept getting into different stuff.  Someone suggested I write a book, although I had (laughter) promised my, myself years ago that after I traveled around the world, you know, and I've come back to America and marry and settle down and write books, you know, at the age of forty-five.  I put that (unclear) it was forty-five, forty-five, yeah, forty-five, I think it was forty-five, yeah, at the age of forty-five I was gonna come back to Chicago [Illinois] and get married and settle down and, you know, and write books and be like my grandfather [George Wash Morrow], tell stories and so forth, you know.  And so when I got back here, man, somebody mentioned that to me, so I started to write about my adventures, my experience of living in Africa.  But you run into different barriers too, you run into obstacles, you know, people say, it's not too many black people that wanna go to Africa.  And they don't even wanna hear about somebody else going there, a black person going to no Africa and staying there for a while, as a tourist, you know, because that's like a taboo land, you know what I mean.  It's not the place that--I recall too in New York [New York], I was talking to my co-worker there, just before I left.  I was working nights at the post office there, as the custodian labor then.  So, you know, we only worked three days, three hours or four hours and everything is finished so you go somewhere and hide, you know, just stay out of the way of the supervisor.  So me and this guy was up there and I'm talking about going to Africa, going to Africa.  And this guy said to me--I think he was a minister or deacon or something, he said, "Man, you know, I'm getting so sick and tired of you and that African shit.  I wish you would go there and stay."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, that, that hurt me, man.  How dare this guy tell me to go to Africa (laughter) and stay, you know, although I'd been talking about it, right?  And I remember when I was a kid and the subject come up about Africa and, you know, you see the pot and see the natives dancing around the pot and there's a white man in there and they cooking him, you know, that one, you know.  And so we was ashamed when people bring up the subject, the conversation or whatever about Africa, like my family members was when grandpa was talking to us about Africa.  They just didn't wanna--that was not the nice place, the main thing to talk about.  So we, you know, you--we had to deal with that, see.  So when I come up with that book, man, the 'Return of the African-American' [Curtis J. "Kojo" Morrow], a lot of the brothers, who we knew, and they wouldn't even look at that, you know, and they was--maybe they'd look at it themselves.  I don't think--they wouldn't give me no prop on that, you know.  So, (unclear) that's what you wanna--even my cousins, man, I remember one night, I sat up all night on the telephone talking to her trying to convince her that that is the land of our ancestors, and she was telling me that no, Mississippi and Tennessee and Louisiana, that was our roots.  And finally, now, you see her now, now she's Afro, all the way, she's (laughter) she got her--she made me a vest, man, a African vest.  You know, so I mean you could see those changes come in on her.  Like I remember I came back here and I brought that sharp--that chart with the Adinkra symbol.  That was the first one, and I'm making those Adinkra symbol earrings out of cow horn--I don't know if you remember that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you remember, yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 203526
Speaker 1: And I had peoples, educated people come up to me, "Man, you mean people buy that shit?"  I said, "Yes, people buy it, you know.  This is symbolic, man.  This is, this is--these symbols here, this is hieroglyphics here.  These symbols was like thousands of years"--we don't even know the beginning of these, some of these, like the gye nyame symbol.  Those signs were left on the earth to lead peoples to certain areas at a certain period of our--this cloth means something.  It's a story behind it, you know.  And, you know, so I would--you know, they would stand there and just scratch their heads.  But now, those same guys that, you know, they making a turn, they're going to Africa now, even if it's only to--that's good, we don't care if they go to Africa for two days, just go and see.  And you'll see your ancestors there.  You see people, you see--and it doesn't mean about, anything about your complexion.  That's, man, every person, every black person in this country here have characteristics about them, you can look at every (laughter)--you know, you go there and you stay for about two years and you start looking at peoples, you know, you say this guy look like he from the Hausa man here, and she looks like she's Guan or Fante, Efe, you know.  So you can just about, you can kind of--(unclear) 'cause that's what you do over there, you know, 'cause you see people and you try to identify what tribe they come from, see.  Okay, so, you know, you got--you have to deal with that, 'cause me and Tom Feelings, you know, we used to talk about that, and Ted Pontiflet and all the brothers and [HistoryMaker] Maya [Angelou] too.  And, you know, we'd just--we'd talk about those things, you know, how to, I guess Africanize our people because we been away so long from that particular, you know, environment there so it's like--it's like, hey--(laughter).
Speaker 2: It's funny now, it's not, it doesn't seem to be a black church where the minister is not wearing a Kente stole around his neck.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I remember that and also [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.] too.  I see that--I've been there several times, you know.
Speaker 2: The whole congregation is dressed in African attire.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That's good.  And the chief used to talk about that.  He used to tell me, you know, them guys, you--some things, oh, how did this guy know it, you know.  He never been out of Ghana before, you know.  And they would say things like, "We want you to go back and teach your peoples our cust--their customs."  You know, and that come from more than one different source there.  And that was what the elders and the Ghanaians, well, I'm just saying specifically the Ghanaians, but also the Togolese too, now, they would say that.  They would--'cause some of the Africans would come here, you know, and, man, they would change their name, rather because maybe their names could be too difficult to pronounce or some of them just don't wanna be identified as Africans, you know.  They want to be, you know, they wanna be--I can't say white, you know, but I mean they don't wanna--they sort of--because they know that the stigma that's attached to them, they try to deny their, you know, existence--
Story_ID: 203527
Speaker 1: There seems to be a lot--I just wanted to ask you this, there's a lot of dialogue about this now in the black community and, in fact, there's a big--after [HistoryMaker] Henry Louis ["Skip"] Gates [Jr.] went to Africa and made the special for public television where he kept harping on the issue of Africans selling African Americans into slavery as if we could be identified as such, you know, (laughter) on the continent.  But there's been a lot of discussion about that and argument back and forth and he was severely criticized for trying to push that point.  I mean what was the attitude that you, that you noticed on the continent about slavery and about us as a, as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we talked about that.  (Unclear) many--I mean a lot of elders, chiefs--now, I'm talking about elders now, I'm talking about chiefs, and sub-chiefs, the elders who was like in their seventies, eighties, yeah, was older then, probably, you know, it's kind of hard to tell them guys' age, you know.  And so they was back in those days.  They was back in like 1800, 1815, you know, around there, you know.  So they were--and they were telling me stories, they would say, like, okay, first of all, we can say, I'm just talking in a bit of parable here.  For instance, we see, there's old money and there's new money, right.  Now, the old money in this country here is like the Rockefellers or the Kennedys, you know.  They say old man [Joseph P.] Kennedy [Sr.], he was a gangster, right.  Okay, now the old money in Africa came from slavery, you know, that's--they just inherit it, it's passed on and on.  They didn't think nothing of that, man.  That was the way it was in their life.  That was life at those, at that particular time.  I mean, you wasn't nobody if you didn't have a servant, or a slave, you know.  I mean, that was just--I imagine the same thing here, you know, you couldn't be a rich person if didn't have servants, you know.  And so you pay your servants the least amount that you can.  That's why we see some of our peoples here, Caucasian and blacks, they'll go to places like Mexico or the Philippines to get maid, household, house servants.  And those peoples are in their houses, in their condominiums, wherever, you know, 24/7, right, you know.  They may get a day off or something like that a week.  And they wanna keep them at the minimum wage too, wage too.  The same thing back in those days, in ancient days in African days, you know.  Two tribes go to war, right.  One is victor over the other one.  So the other one becomes the victor, the losers becomes servants or sub-servants to the victors.  They becomes like their slaves.  But only they wasn't as harsh as the slaves was, as our ancestors was here.  So those guys, the peoples there in Africa had no idea of just what slavery was, how it was here in this hemisphere (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're saying they're two different things--
Story_ID: 203528
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think like, you know, once in Africa too, I think too, I remember one day I was walking through--I don't know where I was going, some place, you know, and I was looking down, (phone ringing) and this brother said--I heard somebody call, said, "Look up, look up," you know, "Walk tall," that's what he was saying.  "Walk tall, walk like you own this world."  And that was, Julian Mayfield told me the same thing, you know.  And then, I remember there was an article in the Daily Graphic about giants who returned, and they were talking about the American Negro or the African American, we are giants that returned.  I mean, we was here, we've been subjected to slavery and everything that they could throw at us off the whole books, right, yet we have multiplied too.  And right now, we got black people sitting up in the White House [Washington, D.C.], man, we got black mens and womens running for governor, governments, senators and so forth, like our ancestors couldn't even imagine something like what is happening today.  So I just said all that to say, man, I think we one of the baddest or the greatest races of peoples on this planet.  I don't think it, I know it.  Notice there's no other race in this world that can compare their history to our history and still be on top.  You know, I think we've been spread out, you know, we sort of, you know, a lot of us is in the state of denial more or less, but I think--I think very highly of us.  I'm very proud to be a black man.  I'm proud to see the way you and sister here, you know what I mean, I mean to see--I mean, a lot of people, our people, they may not be aware, they think they done it on their own.  But they didn't, you know.  I mean, and you can go back--we can go back right now, I'll say like, I don't know, I think it's about seven hours and forty-five minutes from New York to Africa, right.  So let's say about twelve hours from Chicago [Illinois] to the bush.  Just think in eighteen hours from this moment here, we could be right in the heart of Africa, we could be in a place where peoples never seen airplanes flying in the sky before, our ancestors.  And we could see peoples doing the same thing, drinking from the same rivers, telling the same stories, eating the same food, you know, the bush food, that our ancestors ate thousands of years ago, okay.  Then we can just take a train up, well, maybe not a train, you know what I mean or a car, (unclear) wagon and something and go about, maybe fifty miles and you'll be right in the heart say, Kamasa [ph.] and their skyscrapers there.  You can go to Abidjan [Cote d'Ivoire], you know, you see skyscrapers, you see skyways, by-ways, you know, and you see--all this here is black peoples, you know.  So we can see where we came from to where we are now, you know, where our living standards and states now, you know.  And so I think--I think, and I think, and the average black person or the minority person, I'm just saying black person now is, is really achieving.  We only hear about, I don't know, probably ain't no more than 2 percent.  People say, oh, all the black mens are in jail unless they're gay or something.  I don't believe that at all.  Okay, it was just--even their--they contradict themselves, right.  People say, okay, the total prison population is two million people.  We just give a rough rounded out figure, right, two million people.  That's in, out of three hundred, I think it's about three hundred million Americans here, say thirty-five million black peoples here.  So two million, just say that whole two million was all black peoples, so that's two million out of thirty million or forty, probably forty million.  So that means thirty-eight million of us is not in prison.  I don't know, they not in jail, they must be doing something out here, you know.  But we only hear about the negative side, that's my belief, right, because that sells news media there.  You not in prison, she's not in (unclear)--I'm not in jail, I mean hey, I'm not a dope addict, you not a dope addict.  I'm not a drinker, I'm not a wife beater, you not a wife beater, you know, I mean, so your childrens is going, they're going to--I mean you was single parent.  Your kids is in, finished, went to school, college, you know, so I mean--and hers (unclear), I imagine, you know.  So, so they talking about another person, you know, they talking about--and then another thing, too, a enemy is never going to give you your full strength like we hear about casualties in war, you don't tell your enemy how many of your peoples was killed in action and there're not--your enemy is not gonna tell you how many of their people were killed in action either, you know.  And in order for some peoples to keep above or to feel that they in a higher elevated position, they gotta be able to look down with somebody.  And we do the same thing now.  We're guilty--some of us are guilty of same thing, because people, you know, once they take something from somebody, they gotta have somebody that they can look down on.
Story_ID: 203529
Speaker 1: I seen that--we used to see it in Afro Americans coming to Africa, you know, they began to be white.  They really began to think that they--"Those peoples," they began to say, and I mean we fall victim of things that we've been indoctrinated--
Speaker 2: Is it because the experience either makes you more African or makes you more European, (laughter) depending--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --on you gotta engage it, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you gotta, you know, and you have to really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You can't be neutral about it, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you have to think about, you--I have to think about it myself, man.  I have to think sometimes, you know, some of my actions, you know.  You get on a bus--I'll give you an example, you get on a bus and one white person get on the bus and, then everybody, and he ask for directions, everybody on the bus trying to give him directions, you know.  They subject to get up and let him sit down.  Well, I don't know whether that's good or bad, but, you know, they wouldn't do it if a black person get on there maybe, or maybe they would, depend on the condition of the person too.
Story_ID: 203530
Speaker 1: You know, just to answer your question, I think, man, we've come a long way.  We got longer--we have further to go now.  All we want now, we just want a equal share.  And that's saying a lots too 'cause the brothers that, you know, in Ghana, you know, they have those political sessions.  I'll just give you a rundown, instance--for instance every morning when [Kwame] Nkrumah was in power, you know, every morning, it's usually about at daybreak, someone would, some of the guys would come around and they'll begin talking about--you don't know whether they testing us or not.  They wanna know your views on politics, your political views.  So we discuss Nkrumahism or Nkrumah ideology, you know, and we talk about a relationship between races, you know, relationship between America and Africa and what make us tick and what make them tick and why are they here, you know.  And it's mostly they're there to try to benefit themselves, everybody go someplace to get something, whether it could be materials, raw material in that case, you know.  So in order for them, they have to keep the other person--and I could give you another example too.  We have to--before we go to Africa, before anyone go to go to Africa, you go through this little indoctrination bit, you know.  The group leader would say, well, now, if someone said this will cost three dollars, you should barter him down or her down to two, at least one and a half, which mean that the person on the other end gonna have to reduce, I mean they gonna have to set--
Speaker 2: Or raise it.
Speaker 1: --that price up (laughter), you know, to get that three dollars.  We never think of doing that here.  And labor costs, it's the same thing.  It's like--it's, man, I mean that's what African politics--and they are very much aware of that too, you know.
Story_ID: 203531
Speaker 1: Now, at this stage what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy, break that down for me, legacy?
Speaker 1: Well, those works that you are leaving behind, those good works that you are leaving behind for other generations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, you know, I think about that, I just wanted to hear you say--but what I think, it's like, okay, since I'm, I'm--one thing I missed in my life really is being a father, raising a family, you know.  So now I look back, I say, oh, gosh, I wish I had, you know, that's something.  But you can't do everything, you know, and the Creator have different plans for you, you know.  So I never had that privilege to do that.  So I think about that, so I figure like okay now, I left, I leave--I'm leaving art behind me, jewelry.  I also think about, you know, going into a place or a bar or a lounge or a church somewhere and seeing someone wearing a pair of my earrings that I made fifteen years ago or twenty years ago.  And I get the satisfaction of knowing, damn, I made that, you know.  And so now that I've been, you know, privileged enough to put together, to write a book, so I left that behind too.
Speaker 1: Well, you've got--in fact you got two books.
Speaker 2: Two books, right.
Story_ID: 203532
Speaker 1: And that was one of the things that really guided me in my life too, 'cause the book that blew my mind, man, was 'Matthew Henson' [ph.]  Oh, gosh, here's a black man that did everything that he--come out of a what, just after slavery days, eleven years old, turned out, I mean his father [Lemuel Henson]--his family couldn't take care of him, said "Look, son, you gotta go take care of yourself," you know.  Finds a way to a restaurant, I mean a woman who's cooking meals, you know, in [Washington] D.C. area, I believe it was, worked with her for a couple of years.  Then met this sea captain who needed a cabin boy, sailed around the world--I think at that time it was taking something like three years, you know, to make a trip from New York to the China and back, you know.  And then going to the North Pole, hooking up with [Robert] Peary, going to the North Pole, learning a language, making a family there, going through all the different trials and errors that we have to go through, as, as he had to go to--as we have to go through as a black man; then coming back here, make--oh, touring the country as a Pullman porter, getting shot at down in the Mississippi, threatened to be lynched and all that, you know, surviving that, just because he wanted to see this country, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he picked an orange in Florida and almost got lynched for picking a orange off a tree, reaching out of the train and pulling an orange--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you--yeah--
Story_ID: 203533
Speaker 1: I figure like, okay, I can leave a book or something like that, man, it would inspire someone to the fact that this is not the only place in the world.  This, I mean, America, I've said this is a great place, you know, I mean it's a beautiful country, and the peoples--the majority of Americans is great peoples too, beautiful people, you know.  There's always some assholes, you know, wherever you go.  You find 'em in Africa (laughter), you know, everywhere.  But, you know, so I mean, that's what, that's part of my, my legacy there, and that's what I really want to do.  Now, you know, I'm getting into this photography bit, too.  But the books thing is really blowing my mind a bit, you know, imagine to be able to, you know as an artist, you set up and you can take a blank piece of paper and turn it into something that people would buy, you know, 'cause I see a lot of your work, you know, I mean book illustration and so forth.  And the same thing applies with words, how--now, this is completely new to me, man, this taking words and put 'em in a way that peoples can read them and enjoy them enough to purchase them, you know, and putting together a story.
Story_ID: 203534
Speaker 1: How did you come to write your two books?  Did you take advantage of any programs here in the city [Chicago, Illinois] for beginning authors or did you just do it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I didn't.  In fact, a friend of mines when I--well, first, how it first, the first book ['Return of the African-American,' Curtis J. "Kojo" Morrow] was, one of my nieces said, "Uncle Jimmy [HistoryMaker Curtis "Kojo" Morrow], you should write a book, you know.  You been all those places, and done all those things, you should write a book."  Okay, so that stuck.  And then I always wanted to do it--I kept putting it off, you know, that's how we do with a book, you put it off, you know.  And then from that point, I decided to--oh, I met this sister from Saint Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], and so we sort of hung together for a while.  You might have seen her, but then she went back to Saint Croix.  And she--that's when I was going around the Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois] over there on 75th Street, that's where I met her.  And so she was staying with me, we was staying right across the street over here on 39th--on 35th [Street] and [S Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive, Lake--Cottage [Grove Avenue].  And I was downtown, I had a little shop down there, you know, doing my jewelry thing.  And she read--I had some notes that I had been keeping.  A brother said, "Look, man, keep your mouth shut and make notes," you know, that was Ted [Pontiflet] told me that (laughter) in Africa there.  So I began taking note, see.  Okay, so she was going through looking.  She called me up around one o'clock or something.  She said, "Kojo, man, you gotta write a book, you gotta write a book," and she start telling me about--you know, 'cause I told her to read it, you know.  And she kept bugging me.  She kept--I mean she didn't bug me, you know what I mean, she kept encouraging me.  And so I decided, yeah, I can't--I shouldn't put this off.  And so I start writing it out in long hand and she--we bought a typewriter.  And that sister sat up there, and she was, and she typed it up for me.  And that's how I came to write that first book.  She went back to Saint Croix for the winter because she couldn't deal with this Chicago hawk, you know.  And but she typed up my first book for me and then I--I decided to--at least, that's where it started.  And then the second book ['What's a Commie Ever Done to Black People?: A Korean War Memoir of Fighting in the U.S. Army's Last All Negro Unit' Curtis J. "Kojo" Morrow] was about my Korean War.  That was more difficult because I didn't want to be doing all that.  So I had a nephew who joined the [U.S.] Army, and he was--he had just finished basic training.  He was being sent to Korea.  He was home on furlough, and he, you know, was telling us about he was going to Korea.  And one of his sisters says, "Well, you not gonna like Texas."  She, you know, she thought Texas--Korea was a city in Texas for some reason, you know.  And so, you know, how kids do, everybody started laughing, "Oh, Korea is a country."  I said, "Yeah, it's a country, you know," and she said, "I didn't know, they never said anything, I never--no one ever taught me anything about no Korea."  And she said, "Uncle, you've been there and you should--you never said anything about it."  And I come to think of it, I had never said anything to any of my children--or family, around my family about Korea, unless I just, you know, you just, what you gon' tell 'em?  And so I got to thinking about that and then I said, "Yeah, you know, we just gotta, I should do that."  And then, you know, one thing led to another, so I started to, you know, recall memories.  And then I bought a computer, Apple II-C, my little computer and so I had to learn, I had to learn how to type, you know, and I have to learn how to spell and how to put words together and everything.  So anyway, so I, that just--to me it's another art form, you know.  And so that was how that came about.  Then I realized that, hey, I could pay somebody to--what I was doing was trading, doing the bartering system, you know to--like I'd type up a few pages, I'd come to you, hey, man, (laughter) it's for me, you know, I was trapping peoples, you know, the editor, and then I'll make some jewelry for them.  So that's how I came about, I'll put it together.
Speaker 1: So you're saying, well, in terms of your legacy then, it's you're talking about the world being bigger than just the United States and also you're leaving your, the record of what you saw behind?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 203535
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently if you look back--when you look back on everything?
Speaker 2: I say now, I'll say it now, but, you know, like it probably would have changed things.  I probably would have taken the--I'm saying that I probably would have taken more, taken advantage of the education bit.  Then I would have been more able to interpret some of the things that I witnessed, but if I had that education, I wouldn't have done it. So it was like you know, caught up in a, so I don't, I can't think of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, many people say that, sometimes that take on a difficult enterprise or something that's daring, they always say if they had known better at the time, they probably wouldn't have done it.  And, you know, they would have been more cautious.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They would have proceeded with a certain amount of caution, that a certain amount of ignorance about something does not lend, you know, itself to, you know, you don't have the same kind of caution.
Speaker 2: Right.  I would have been more analytical.  I definitely would have been more analytical, you know.  I would have stopped to try to figure things out and, you know, and that would have taken time from that point and it also would have--it could have caused suspicions too, among the peoples there, you know.  And so I just--you know, so I can't think of--well, the Kor- the [Korean] War part was something that I wouldn't wanna do it again, definitely not, and I wouldn't wanna wish it on anyone else.  But other than that, I'm very pleased of my life, you know.  It's sort of lonely too because, you know, that being a writer and all that too is kind of--'cause it's something that you really got to be able to live with yourself yet.  And that could be--people say you're selfish, you know, 'cause I saw my girlfriend and say, "Well, hey, all you think about is yourself, you know," you--and that's true.  You know, like I'm thinking about doing something like I may be--I'm sitting up here thinking about how to figure out something with this computer here, you know, or I'm trying to figure out a story, or I'm trying to figure out how to make a piece of jewelry, you know.  And, and, you know, that's not her interests.  So then, you know, you got some--you got some conflict of interests there, you know.  "Hey, well, you care more about that than you are about, about me," and it's not like that, you know.  But yet, I couldn't blame them for, you know, for walking (laughter), you know what I mean, so that's one thing.
Story_ID: 203536
Speaker 1: How would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to, oh my work, you know, my works.  I imagine it would be around for--the books would probably be around for a long, longer time.  And I guess that's it really, yeah, that's it, um-hm, 'cause I mean I know can't save the world.  I'm not even gonna try, you know, you can't save everybody, and you cannot enlighten everybody.  But just a few, you know, if you can just touch two or three people's life, you know--and I know I've touched a lot of people's lives, you know, in my brief stay here on this earth, like peoples have touched my life, you know.  And, hey, that's all you can--that's all I can, can do.  So, I, actually I'm ready for--hey man, I, I've lived seventy beautiful years, except maybe one year and then that's, you know, so I have no gripes at all.  If I go to sleep tonight and don't wake up, no problem, you know what I mean, just do what you wish to do with this shell, bury it or burn it or whatever, I don't care, you know, 'cause my spirit, it's gone to wherever spirits go.  And, boom, that's it for him.
Story_ID: 203537
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture there, this picture, the fellow in the center there, is named Osofu.  Osofu is the master hunter.  He's the master hunter of all the Ashanti region [Ghana], especially in that area, you know, the Akim area, Ashanti.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: O-S-O-F-U, Osofu.
Speaker 2: Now who's in the photo, from left to right, and can you give us a date?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, that's me to, you know, to the left with the white fogu on, and that's Osofu in the, in the center and the brother on the end there, he's also a hunter and a farmer, they all farmers and his name--all I recall of him was Quaisey [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay, and about what year was this shot?
Speaker 1: That year is in six--wait a minute, '69 [1969], '70 [1970], that was around, that's about 1969, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's go to this one.
Speaker 1: That's me and the little girl there.  She was one of them little girls who lived in the compound, in the house.  I lived in a house of carvers, mostly the wood carvers, you know.  And, you know, they carved big maps, African maps with different species of wood that represent each state, or each country in Africa.  And, you know, a compound house just like a compound, you know, and you got--it's shape like a, like a 'u,' you know.
Speaker 2: What year was this shot?
Speaker 1: That was in '70 [1970]--that's when Reggie [ph.] came over there.  There was in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Description, who, who's in the photo, when and where it was taken.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That picture was taken during the Ashanti ohene's funeral.  It was in the Komatsu [ph.].  And those are called abafu [ph.], I believe it's abafu, asafo.  Those are warriors, and during the olden days, they would, you know, they would perform certain rituals, you know (laughter).  And during the--right after a king died, paramount chief, it could be a paramount chief or it could be a king.  Now this, in that particular case there, it was a paramount chief.  I mean that particular case was a, when the Ashanti ohene, the king of all the Ashantis, made his transition and that's part of this celebration.
Speaker 2: And what year is that?
Speaker 1: That was in '70 [1970]--it's either '70 [1970] or '72 [1972], I can, I can look it up, but I think it was either '70 [1970] or '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Unclear), please?
Speaker 1: Now, this picture was taken on the day that I was adopted in--officially adopted into the Ashanti tribe.  That was 1967, '67 [1967] or '68 [1968] and that's the paramount chief, Nanaquai Kuti [ph.] in the center there.  And to his right is (laughter) Charles Simpson [ph.] dressed as a Ashanti, yeah, um-hm.  And to the chief's left is John Ray, John Winston Ray, yeah.  He's Afro American too.  He's still living over there, and behind him is Abu [ph.], the one directly behind him, yeah, is Abu.  Abu is--he's from the North and next to him is Nanoting [ph.] and Ben Ku Hene [ph.], that's the next--that's the chief that stand--in order--
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: --will be, yeah, it's next to the king, or next to the paramount chief there.  And that's my clan leader there too.  He adopted me into--that's his brother, that's one of the chief's brother--nah, that's the chief's linguist there, that's the chief's linguist there.  And to his right or to his left is one of the chief's brothers there.
Speaker 2: And here?
Speaker 1: And that's me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that, next to me is Joe Voom, Joe DeCosta Voom [ph.].  He's Afanti, and we was involved in this co-op feeder, feeder room clearing and, you know, and all that good stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this was shot, what year is this?
Speaker 1: That was shot in, let me think, was it '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '67 [1967], that was '67 [1967], yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, this one.
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: You ready?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is, well, that picture, Reggie took that picture.  Reggie took that, Reggie Jackson took that picture in--that was his first trip there.  So that must have been '69 [1969] or '70 [1970] that he took that picture.  That's the house.  I lived in that house there for about five years.  That was my house.  And those trees, those vines you see there, those are beans.  They are beans.  What kind of beans?  I think red beans or whatever.  They just grow and grow and grow.  And I eventually, what I did was, I comment--I cemented, you know, that little patio out there.  So I had a veranda out there, and that was my home for about five years there.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about this?  Who is this?
Speaker 2: And that's Monica [ph.] there.  Monica is, she was like a real--she was a friend, a good friend of mines.  We have a long history together.  She was like a sister, really.  Whenever I make trips over to, make a trek to the agriculture, I would look up Monica, and probably spend the first night there with her until I can go out and sell a few pieces to get me a hotel, you know.  And Monica was a draftsman too.  She was a draftsman and she became, eventually, she became a manager of a club there.  And I understand she married a Frenchman and she went to France, France.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's go with this one.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: That's my little girl.  That's my little baby.  That's my little sweetie.  She was, she used to sell mongos--mangos.  And I saw her selling mangos one day, and I said, and I told her to come on in here with me.  And she said, "No, she gotta sell her mangos."  So I just bought all of 'em 'cause they didn't cost but about (laughter) fifteen cents or whatever.  So then we stayed together, and we became like common law.  And she--we, (unclear) her, we just made jewelry.  And that was my African wife, my Ghanaian wife, yeah, for over, I guess about five years or so.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that picture, that's me, age seventeen.  I had just, I had finished basic training and--no, you know what?  I had finished basic training and, in fact, I was on my way to Korea.  Right, that was during my--I was on furlough with my mother [Clere Smith], and we took pictures.  And that's the only picture I have left of me (phone ringing).  And we took--just click it twice, turn it off.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was taken in '73 [1973], '73 [1973], a couple of years before I returned.  And by then, I was a master craftsman.  See that piece.  That's my--in ivory, you can barely make it out.  There's a figure there that I carved from a piece of ivory, and behind it is where, that's--on the outside, that's where I, that's my quarters, my little workshop in there.
