Story_ID: 303727
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Prexy Nesbitt, P-R-E-X-Y, N-E-S-B-I-T-T.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: My real name is Rozell Williams Nesbitt, but Prexy is what the world knows me as really.
Speaker 1: Now, why Prexy?  Is it a nickname or is it a--
Speaker 2: It's a nickname.  It's in the dictionary.  I had nothing to do with being given it.  It was given to me by my parents' [Rozell Nesbitt and Sadie Crain Nesbitt] friends, who gave it to me when I was born--before I was born because they referred to how my mother was doing--about talking about how the little Prexy was coming along.  Prexy is a college term for president.  And I was one of the first born in that generation of people, so they--and it stuck, better than Rozell, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, because when you hear the name, people assume you're from the West Indies, probably, when they hear that.  It sounds like a West Indies name, Prexy.
Speaker 2: It sounds like something that is not from this country, that's for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in February 23, 1944, born in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At Cook--at the old Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a teacher--teacher and activist probably would be the closest, although activist is hardly anything that I can say is income generating, but teaching either on the high school or college level is what I've done most of my life.
Speaker 1: Would you call yourself an organizer?
Speaker 2: I could do that.  I've done a lot of organizing, both in labor and community organizing, but probably an activist scholar would be what I've been called and would be comfortable with.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 12, I think, 2004, 12th, yes [August 12, 2004].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 303728
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, that favorite food would probably be egg foo young.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) wouldn't have guessed it today.  But, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably the favorite time of the year would be spring I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The favorite expression that I probably would say would be in Portuguese, "A luta continua," which means, the struggle continues.
Story_ID: 303729
Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's [Rozell Nesbitt] side.  And we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sadie, S-A-D-I-E, Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Crain, C-R-A-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth, I can only give roughly.  It's March 9th--it would've have been March 9th, 19--wait a minute (mumbling), ninety-two, she would have been 19--let's see, 1910?  No 19--let's see if she'd be ninety-two today.  What would that be? 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen twelve [1912]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twelve [1912].
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Nineteen twelve [1912].  Okay, well, how much do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 1: I know quite a bit about her side of the family.  My mother was the youngest of seven children, born to Reverend William Crain who was a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister.  She was born in Mosley, Alabama [ph.].  Her mother's name--I didn't know her, but everyone referred to her as Mama Pet.  She was also from Alabama.  My mother was raised in Alabama, in Mississippi, in Michigan and in southern Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was a school teacher.  She was a very famous school teacher here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  She received the Dedicated--Kate Marymount Dedicated School Teacher of the Year Award [ph.] several times.  She was the founder of the teacher program at the Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois] and at the [Chicago] Institute for Psychoanalysis here in Chicago.  She was founder of something called the Original West Side Mothers Club [West Side Mothers Club].  My mother was a bit of an organizer.  She was very ensconced in the black professional community here of the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  She'd also been a dancer at one point in her life and thus was an artist, so we were very close to a lot of people, like, for example, the poet, Robert Hayden was a close family friend of ours.  There were a number of other musicians.  My mother danced with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and lived at one point at Katherine Dunham's building on the South Side of Chicago.  She was also very socially involved.  She ran the--what's the--on the South--on Halsted Street, the old, that was just torn down, just south of Roosevelt Road, you know what I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: You're talking about the market over there, the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the--
Speaker 2: The one that they call Maxwell Street Market (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Maxwell Street, my mother ran the Maxwell Street Y [Duncan Maxwell Branch, Chicago, Illinois], I think it was the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] or YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], out of which came out a lot of prominently involved women who were sort of the proteges of my mother.  One who comes to mind is one who founded the artist program that goes into schools.
Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about--Jessie Woods?
Speaker 1: Jessie Woods is exactly who I'm talking about.  Jessie was one of my mother's people she helped bring through.
Speaker 2: That's Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Urban Gateways, [HistoryMaker] Ronne Hartfield was another woman that my mother very, very much influenced.  She met my father down at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] in the [Great] Depression years.
Story_ID: 303730
Speaker 1: And my father, who was Rozell Rufus Nesbitt, R-O-Z-E-L-L, R-U-F-U-S, N-E-S-B-I-T-T, born February 13th, let me see he was thirty years older than me, so he would have been born in '14 [1914].  He was a school teacher as well.  He was the middle son of five brothers, all of whom became professionals, going through the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 2: So he was born where, now? I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  In Champaign-Urbana [Illinois].
Speaker 2: In Champaign, okay.
Speaker 1: And all five brothers went through undergraduate and professional schools, two became doctors, one became a lawyer, one became a physicist, and my father became an electrical engineer.  The day he graduated from the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, this head of the, the dean of the College of Engineering said, "I hope you never get to work as an engineer anywhere in this country," as he gave him his diploma.  My father then--
Speaker 2: So he didn't have it easy in school, you're saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't have it easy.
Story_ID: 303731
Speaker 1: My uncle, George [George B. Nesbitt], who is a Nesbitt, he's a very famous writer, did a lot of work on race relations for the public housing in the city--in the country, working under Robert Weaver [Robert C. Weaver], who became the first secretary of the--cabinet secretary, and my uncle did tons of writing about race relations.  He was a trained lawyer.  He was very active down in Champaign-Urbana [Illinois] as a lawyer.  And there is a story there that says that the sheriff of Champaign County [Illinois] pretty much told him that he had to get out of Champaign-Urbana or he was going to see to it that he bury him there.  When he went into the [U.S.] Army, he went in as a captain.  And he was in the Army just as they integrated the Army in the '40s [1940s], just as World War II [WWII] was beginning to wrap up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, in about 1948 or so.
Speaker 1: I think a little earlier than that, maybe '41 [1941], '42 [1942] even.  And my uncle recorded--I only learned this recently in a series of letters that he wrote to the Urban League and to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Most of them went to the NAACP, all the violence that went on in the Army between black and white troops as they integrated in different places.  He was stationed in various places.  Then was stationed in the Pacific for a while, and he fought segregation in the Army to such a degree that finally sent him into isolation.  And they sent him to a post in Australia by himself.  It was just horrible.  He paid a price for that for all of his life.  My father [Rozell Nesbitt] watched all this and refused to go into the Armed Services [U.S. Armed Forces] and instead did civilian service.  You could do civilian service and he worked as an engineer in the civilian wing of the Army, and I guess, at one point, they wanted him to work on radios for the planes and he took some tests and he scored very high on the test.  They brought him to Washington [D.C] and realized he was an African American and fired him right away.  He had the sense to contact, through one of my mother's [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] brothers in New York [New York], Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.].  And Adam Clayton Powell contacted Eleanor Roosevelt and between them all, became a big story.  "Army Hires and Fires Negro in One Hour," was one of the headlines in the paper and it became a big, big contest that didn't have a real ending to it, not a satisfactory ending.
Story_ID: 303732
Speaker 1: It was very much in the tradition of my father [Rozell Nesbitt] and his brother, George [George B. Nesbitt], and his other brothers to be fighters.  My father and George also were union organizers, and they helped to organize the Red Caps union here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  I was thinking about that as we drove by Grand Central Station [sic. Central Station] at Roosevelt [Road] and Michigan [Avenue] because that's where my father did a lot of organizing there.  In those years, the baggage porters unions were segregated.  That's very much part of the legacy that I had and then I think the other piece of this was my father's uncles were all Garveyites, or they at least subscribed to [Garvey Marcus Garvey] and to many of his ideas, and that had a great influence in my becoming then very involved Africa some years later, but they also were very--despite them all becoming professionals and marrying, and being very accomplished as professionals, they were also very community-minded and very cooperatively oriented with each other.  So, very--I guess by '46 [1946] or '47 [1947], they were all living together in different places.  We started out with the three or four brothers--three or four of the five brothers living in 2801 South Parkway [South Parkway Boulevard; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, Chicago, Illinois].  It was in South Parkway Boulevard.  Then they moved to 2752 West Warren [Avenue], over on the West Side and from there, they purchased, in 1948, in the Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois] community, a ten-flat apartment building, which was the building that I was--which I most really recognize as home.  And that building, they all five brothers and their families lived in, certainly for ten years, maybe a little longer than that until one of the brothers got called into the service during--just after the Korean War and then he moved to California.  He was the youngest brother of all, but, in general, that building, 1514 South Albany [Street] became a kind of a known entity on the West Side of Chicago.  It was a sort of seat of a lot of things happening out of Chicago.  I'm trying to think of the brother from--on the West Side who was involved in Harold Washington's various electoral campaigns.  His name will come to me.  He's an amazing man.  He was very much a part and influenced by the kind of politics that my father and his brothers represented, which was clearly progressive politics and it was a place where the Democratic--we were in the 24th Ward, but the Democratic machine didn't mess with our building.  We established our own identity.  It was not dependent upon Jake Arvey [Jacob Arvey] and the Democratic Party machine.
Story_ID: 303733
Speaker 1: I was raised very much to think about people like Ben Lewis [Benjamin F. Lewis], who was the independent alderman on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], who was found stuffed in the back of a car.
Speaker 2: I don't know that story, now.  Maybe we will pause here a second and talk about that story.
Speaker 1: That's an amazing story because Ben Lewis was one of the first non-machine aldermen elected in 24th Ward [Chicago, Illinois]. He didn't last long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Was he a black man?
Speaker 1: Black--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and was killed.  You don't hear many people--
Speaker 2: About what year is Ben Lewis?
Speaker 1: I was young, so it seems to me it must have been '57 [1957], '58 [sic. 1963].  It preceded Cardiss Collins' [HistoryMaker Cardiss Collins] husband.
Speaker 2: George Collins [George W. Collins].
Speaker 1: George Collins--it was before George Collins and I don't think he stayed in office for more than six months or a year, it seems to me.
Speaker 2: Because at one time, most of the black aldermen were Republicans that were in the [Chicago] City Council, there weren't that many but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  That's right.
Speaker 2: --but then when Dawson [William L. Dawson], you know--
Speaker 1: This is post Dawson.  It would have been just as Dawson was declining.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember--
Speaker 2: When Dawson came along they slowly took the Republicans out and replaced them with Democrats until--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So Ben Lewis was an Independent.
Speaker 1: Ben Lewis was an Independent and was definitely progressively oriented and anti-machine.
Speaker 2: Would mayor--would Richard Daley [Richard J. Daley] have been the mayor then?
Speaker 1: Daley, the father [of Richard M. Daley], was definitely the mayor then and precedes King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] organizing in Chicago [Illinois] in 1965 or 1966 that summer, so I think it must have been the early '60s [1960s], maybe '60 [1960], '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].  So it was an amazing moment but I'm simply telling that to say--in fact, here is the other period you could date it with.  It was along the same period as the protesting against the Willis Wagons, when the superintendent of the schools Ben Willis [Benjamin C. Willis] built those, brought in those trailers to keep schools segregated and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, to contain the black population.
Speaker 1: To contain the black population.  There was a woman who lived in our building, a wonderful woman from Vermont named Faith Rich [ph.], who she and--I can't remember this other man's name--they wrote the definitive stuff challenging the Willis Wagons and all the segregation going on in schools in the City of Chicago and that's why I'm saying that the 1514 South Albany [Street] building, which currently is owned by Michael Scott [ph.], actually has a history of its own.  It was a real site of a lot of people organizing, people pushing for progressive politics.  I'll tell you another person that lived in that building was a good friend of Studs Terkel, a Jewish woman, she had been a part of the Jewish community that lived in that neighborhood when we first moved there, a woman named, Tommy Danish [ph.].  She was working for the Public Housing Authority [Chicago Housing Authority] when Trumbull Park [Trumbull Park Homes Race Riots] took place.  That must have been '54 [1954], '53 [1953] or '54 [1954] when those riots took place against there being integrated public housing because I remember it was the first time that I ever saw a car get really damaged when they put that sugar in her tank.  She came home and they had, as part of them getting to her, they had put sugar in her gas tank.  So it was the first time I had learned about what you can do to somebody's car by sabotaging it that way.  And she was part of a whole history of progressive politics.  Studs Terkel would be somebody, Studs and Ida [Ida Terkel] were regular visitors to our household.  The building was a building of black people, Jewish people, Puerto Rican people, we had Azarya [ph.], Azarya refugee who lived there in the building.  That was an amazing mix there on the West Side as the West Side became all black and largely working class and then poor, pretty much the only white people to be found in that part of Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], at 1514 South Albany.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's quite a history.  Back to Ben Lewis, he was killed and found in a trunk of a car or something?
Speaker 1: That's my recollection--my recollection, but I'm sure there, the story is there to be told.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's interesting, interesting history.
Story_ID: 303734
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your family from history in the 19th century that goes back to slavery or Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: There would be no stories that go back to slavery except on my grandfather's side--well, there is some story that goes back, I should--on my father's [Rozell Nesbitt] side.  My name should not be Nesbitt.  The story in my family is that our name--we came a part of Tennessee--western Tennessee, not too far from southwest of Nashville [Tennessee], along the line of rail.  My grandfather, Lucious B. Nesbitt [ph.], this is on my father's side, when he was about seventeen, basically put the cow that he had and his few possessions on a freight car and took it up north and got off in Champaign-Urbana, Illinois and resettled there.  But, then he told the story, and I remember him telling it many times, that at the time of the Emancipation Proclamation and the subsequent acts of Reconstruction, his father left a plantation in a part of Tennessee that I can't remember, but we have pictures about this, where he took up the name of Nesbitt, which was the name of the plantation owner down the road.  I've always questioned this and my father and I, before he passed, talked about it a lot.  My father then went to this part of Tennessee, where there is a big funeral--cemetery that's divided, one part is black and the other part is white.  And at that cemetery is buried a governor of Tennessee whose name is Nesbitt.  We are also buried on the black part--some of my family's forbearers.  The story is they took the name Nesbitt because the slave holder down the road was nicer.  But I think that's just nonsense.  I think that the name Nesbitt was taken because of relationships that had gone on and had spawned some of this group of people called Nesbitts.  There were a number of brothers that my grandfather had who somehow or another ended up in various central Illinois towns, including Champaign-Urbana.  I have run into one line of Nesbitts from another brother--one of my grandfather's brothers.  That was a Bruce Nesbitt [Bruce D. Nesbitt] who ran black studies [Afro-American Cultural Program; Bruce D. Nesbitt African American Cultural Center] at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and Bruce and I until his death kept talking about the necessity of us trying to track this down, but we never really did.  So I think that's one story, is the origins of my name.  As part of that, my grandfather who was quite light-skinned and had very so-called European features used to always say that his forbearers had been an English judge, so I've never systematically looked into this.  But I think that all fits together in some kind of story other in that part of Tennessee.  Interestingly enough my uncle, George [George B. Nesbitt], who died did try to track this down through some of those services where you go back and I have to say to you that the white Nesbitts have been writing regularly to him for years and now to myself, as the oldest, trying to get us involved with their Nesbitt reunions that have been going on.  I haven't done it but I'm going to at some point.
Story_ID: 303735
Speaker 1: On my mother's [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] side, it's a murkier story though her father, my grandfather, Reverend William Crain, was a very, very famous C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] minister.
Speaker 2: He must have come up--well C.M.E. church started in Louisiana. I know that.  It was after the Civil War that it started.  My parents are from the C.M.E. church and I grew up in a C.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: In Dayton [Ohio], yeah.  But I don't know--they're not from Louisiana themselves but I know it started in Louisiana after the Civil War, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, it would be pretty easy to track him down because he was a very famous orator and he was called, the gun-toting preacher because he was given a lot of different types of churches. It's probably why my mother later would reject us being part of a black church because she, as a child, had been moved around so much, where these decisions would be arbitrarily made by the bishop to reassign his preacher.  So they once asked Reverend Crain, it's a very famous story, "Why do you carry this little .22?" he used to carry with him all the time, he worried about the people and he had a beautiful deep voice and he said, reared back and said, "It ain't the people.  It's the bishops I'm worried about."  (Laughter) So, he really had a great sense of humor that way.  It was a great story.  He was big man.  Apparently my own appearance is enough that my mother's older sisters would just start crying when they would watch me.  They didn't see me speak many times.  But when they did, my hands, my moves, all would just remind them of their father very much.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 303736
Speaker 1: Now, what about the Garveyites? Now, do you know much about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I don't know much about it except that part of my father's [Rozell Nesbitt] and his brothers' background came from his mother who was born a Barker [ph.].  She was a Barker.  The Barkers, which would have been my father's uncles were the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] influence, and they were several of them.  There was Willy [ph.]; there was Rufus [ph.] and there was another one--and they were big men.  Rufus worked for the Chicago Police Department [CPD] as a station engineer meaning that he was in charge of the boilers on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], not far from the area where today is celebrated sort of the black entrepreneurs that were around there, the hair brush people.  One of 'em is related--one of my other uncles married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Fuller [Samuel B. Fuller]? Fuller?
Speaker 2: Not Fuller, but--
Speaker 1: Fuller Products [Fuller Products Company, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: --but there was another man; there's a library named after him on State Street right now.  It'll come to me.
Speaker 1: So he was right here in what they would call, The Black Belt in those days?
Speaker 2: In that Black Belt era, around, in the '30s [1930s], on State Street, Wabash [Avenue] and he ran these boiler stations around there.  And then he also had--he raised blueberries.  He had a farm up in that part of Michigan that's all black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know what you're talking about, Cassopolis [Michigan] and Benton Harbor [Michigan] and all of that.
Speaker 2: Right around there, in that area.  There's another town (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Bridge Haven [ph.] and--
Speaker 2: No, it's another town.
Speaker 1: I meant it's a--what is it?
Speaker 2: It's in that very area.
Speaker 1: Where Ali [Muhammad Ali] had his training camp is up there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that piece of property stayed in our family, but it was those brothers, the Barkers, who were the real members of UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association].  And they were the ones who gave my father and his brothers a lot of African influence.
Story_ID: 303737
Speaker 1: Their farms were next--near each other there.  So when I went up there about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  We're talking about western Michigan--
Speaker 1: Western Michigan, southwest--
Speaker 2: --where the black farmers are, yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's southwest of Kalamazoo [Michigan], toward Chicago [Illinois]--toward the lake, rich farm land.  And in those areas, when I went up there, there was a German who remembered distinctly my father [Rozell Nesbitt] and his brothers coming there and one of the brothers is paralyzed but brilliant, and she, this German woman, who was in her eighties when I saw her, the minute I said Nesbitt, she said, "Are you Rozell's son?"  That's my uncle who is paralyzed because she played checkers and chess with him all the time and spoke a little German with him and I wish I could remember where this--if I see it, I know exactly.
Speaker 2: What's that college?  It was St. Andrew's College [sic. Andrews University, Berrien Springs, Michigan] up that way--where the Seventh-day Adventist college?
Speaker 1: There is a Seventh-day Adventist college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, they have a big Apple Valley market [sic. Apple Valley Natural Foods], international foods in it.
Speaker 1: It's the fruit area.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's really an interesting place.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I think that side of my family was very pivotal in influencing me with my interest in Africa and my very early involvement in Africa.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did any of them--well, you said you didn't know a lot about--details about their involvement in Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement, but it's just so rare that anybody mentions Garvey movement.  It was so widespread.  You would think that more people would talk about it, you know, but they really don't.
Story_ID: 303738
Speaker 1: Anything else about your mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] and father [Rozell Nesbitt] that you think?
Speaker 2: Nothing else that I can think of right away.  The discussion on my mother and father would bring up my sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] too, which--right away, I only had one sister.  She was two years younger than I was, and we--both my parents being teachers when my father came up to the local public school, which was the Pope Elementary School [Nathaniel Pope Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in 19th [Street] and Albany [Avenue], when I was in fifth grade, that would have been in 1954, my father came up to the school one day and found me sitting at the teacher's desk and asked me what I was doing there at the teacher's desk.  And I said to him, "Well, the teacher always has me teach the reading class and she goes to get some coffee."  And my father went right from that room right down to the principal's office, a woman named Puca, Blanche Puca [ph.], I remember her name.  And he stormed right in and confronted her right away with what this was all about his son was teaching when teachers are supposed to be teaching.  And he came home that night from his own teaching, and went to my mother and my mother had been talking us being taken out of that public school.  And they enrolled us in Francis Parker School [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois], up on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, Francis Parker, explain to--I guess, what was the significance of Francis Parker.
Speaker 2: The significance of Francis Parker is that it was in 1954, a public school that was--a private school that was pretty much elite, although it had a much more progressive political background than what say the Latin School [Latin School of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or the University of Chicago Laboratory School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] had.  At that time going to Parker were some interesting people, Allison Davis' [William Allison Davis] sons, Gordon [HistoryMaker Gordon J. Davis] and Allison Davis [Allison Davis, Jr.] were there and Jim Lowry [HistoryMaker James Lowry] was there, and Karen Gibson [ph.] was there, Jerry Morgan [ph.] was there, a number of professional black folks, not a lot, had their children at Parker.  We got a scholarship and we went there, and I started there in fifth grade.  My sister started there in third grade.  She was two years younger than me.  We went there for all of our--completing primary school and then going to high school there.
Story_ID: 303739
Speaker 1: My sister graduated [from Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] two years after I did and then went to Rockford College [Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  And as I want to just focus on my sister here.  She was, my sister was an amazing person and after Rockford College, she joined me in New York [New York], where I was in Columbia University [New York, New York] at graduate school.  And she came there and went with me to a dinner with a Jewish family that I'd known from Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio] and the woman took one look at my sister and said, "You should be modeling."  And she phoned Ford Modeling Agency [Ford Models, New York, New York], the number one modeling agency in the country and the next week, my sister starting modeling for Ford Modeling Agency.  She then later would bring in Naomi Sims and bring in this famous white woman, actress with the gap in her teeth, Lauren Hutton.  My sister broke in a lot of models and had a quite a repertoire as a model herself.  But one day she got very disgusted by the competition amongst models.  She had been in Paris [France] by then and left it, just arbitrary, just boom, and then went into early childhood education.  And I keep thinking about my sister in part because I see this Val Ward [HistoryMaker Val Gray Ward] poster there.  And my sister was very much involved in the community of people around, Ed Christmas [ph.] or Bob Christmas [ph.] here in Chicago [Illinois], Val Ward and Kuumba Players and Catherine Slade, a whole group, Bobby Sengstacke [HistoryMaker Robert Sengstacke], a whole group of people doing art and progressive stuff here in Chicago and that went until the--'73 [1973].  And in that period, she married a man who later killed her.  In what was one of the worst, most brutal murders here in the City of Chicago.
Speaker 2: What was your sister's name?
Speaker 1: RoAnne Nesbitt [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] and she married a man named Nobel Harris, brother from northern Illinois who was studying law.  I think he served all of three weeks in jail for killing her, driving her, killing her, putting her in the back of the car, and driving to a police station, walking in saying he killed her.
Speaker 2: What reason did he give for that?
Speaker 1: He gave no reason.  He later pleaded temporary insanity and walked away three weeks later--well, a little bit later, five weeks later walked out a free man.  It wouldn't happen today, but--
Speaker 2: No I would hope not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But that's the kind of thing that a black man would discuss in the barbershop that if you kill another black person that you could be out tomorrow, you know.  I mean they used to joke about that.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's exactly right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About how it didn't--black life didn't amount for much.
Speaker 1: It didn't mean a damn--it didn't mean anything.  So that was a devastating, devastating blow to our whole family.  The only thing that was salvation to some degree, my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] never had to live through that as she had passed away from cancer earlier, but my sister made quite a mark on early childhood education.  And the other dimension of my family, I think, is that there were somewhere, there were somewhere, I think, let me see--there were about ten Nesbitts who were teachers at one time or another in the public school system in the City of Chicago, including myself.  I was the one who had the shortest tenure.  Barbara Sizemore [HistoryMaker Barbara A. Sizemore] brought me in briefly but it would take someone like Barbara Sizemore to really summarize this contribution that had been made by my family through the years to teaching.  My sister made one too as a teacher of early childhood education and a graduate.  Finally, she graduated from Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right, Erikson Institute, we've interviewed [HistoryMaker] Barbara Bowman who's involved with that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Barbara Bowman is--views herself as one of my grandmothers in this, and was very much influenced by my mother who was on the board of Erikson and the ties and links there are very, very strong.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, that's good information about your sister, we--you know.  It's good to have it on record, you know--
Story_ID: 303740
Speaker 1: You don't have any other siblings?
Speaker 2: No other siblings, but I have then, instead, this whole galaxy of cousins, who are all my first cousins that are now spread out pretty much all over the country and I have one other cousin here, two cousins who are here, and there is a Julie Parsons Nesbitt [Julie Parson-Nesbitt] who is a cousin by marriage to one of my cousins, who is quite prominently known as being one of the top women poets here in Chicago [Illinois].  I think Gwendolyn Brooks identified her as one of the best promising women poets here in the City of Chicago.  Gwendolyn was a very close friend of my mother's [Sadie Crain Nesbitt].  I think I mentioned earlier my mother's relationship with Robert Hayden, I should have mentioned this--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --she had the same kind of close relationship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) right, the great, the late Robert Hayden, who was a great poet--
Speaker 2: --exactly with Gwendolyn Brooks and, Gwendolyn Brooks and my mother had a relationship with Mahalia Jackson that was very close, personal relationship.  My first exposure to Mahalia was going out there and bringing recipes and cakes to Mahalia that my mother and Mahalia used to exchange recipes and cakes all the time--
Story_ID: 303741
Speaker 1: Was your family very much involved in church?
Speaker 2: There was definite, there was a definite relationship to a church that was a very unique church in the City of Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] annuls and that was the Warren Avenue Congregational Church [Chicago, Illinois] on the corner of Warren [Avenue] and Kedzie [Avenue].  It was a church that has its own unique history here because it's out of that church that ultimately would come the West Side Christian Parish [Chicago, Illinois], would come the Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois], would come ultimately the monies for Jeremiah Wright's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr.] Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] because out of the Congregational church comes the United Church of Christ and that Warren Avenue Congregational Church was one of the first churches to be an inner-city church become integrated in the City of Chicago.  My father [Rozell Nesbitt] rolled me into the Sunday school in 1946 or '47 [1947] with a broken leg and our family then went on to integrate that church, which was then--to show you how long ago and how different it was--at the corner of Warren and Albany [Avenue], just east of Kedzie, was an all-white neighborhood, all-white who had gone through some other transitions.  It had become Puerto Rican for a while, but at that point, it was all working class white families.  In 1965 or '66 [1966], that church, as it was beginning to change and reflecting the changes in the neighborhood, became the headquarters for Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] West Side movement [Chicago Freedom Movement].  The Union to End Slums, his whole effort to integrate housing in Chicago--that whole summer of activity all was based out of the Warren Avenue Congregational Church and out of that church also came a lot of the work that would become the Community Renewal Society, which, you know, I can't remember the head of it right now.  His name will come to me but--
Speaker 1: Calvin Morris [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin Morris].
Speaker 2: Calvin Morris.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Calvin Morris.
Speaker 2: Right and earlier than that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yvonne Delk I think.
Speaker 2: Yvonne was the head and before that Don Benedict, and all those names come out of the Congregational church and my family deliberately chose, my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] particularly, the Congregational church because of its involvement with change and moving toward change issues.
Story_ID: 303742
Speaker 1: Well, that's something, really, I mean--the Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois] and its associate institutions, the Chicago Reporter and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Catalyst [Catalyst Chicago].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I've been a member of the board of the Chicago Reporter for several, four or five years.
Speaker 1: Well, those are two organs that expose racism in Chicago [Illinois] and its impact on the community, statistically and the stories about people.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that comes out of the tradition of a church [Warren Avenue Congregational Church, Chicago, Illinois] that in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] made a conscious decision to be part of social change.  Interestingly enough, for example, there was a family in that church called the Rubio [ph.] family and if the history of the city should be really probed, Rubio was a very close friend of the founder [sic.] of Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I can't remember his name.  He's since passed on but he was the first president of Columbia College.
Speaker 1: Not Fred Fine but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, he was a contemporary of Fred Fine, so--
Speaker 1: No, he was--I know who you are talking about.
Speaker 2: --you know who I'm talking about?
Speaker 1: I can't think of--yeah--
Speaker 2: His wife, Jane [Jane Legnard Alexandroff]--
Speaker 1: Alexandroff [Mirron "Mike" Alexandroff]--
Speaker 2: That's right, Alexandroff, and the Rubios were one in the same family almost.  And these were all people who were very close friends of my family and the Warren Avenue Church [Warren Avenue Congregational Church] was a pivotal institution for many things--the first bilingual services for the Puerto Rican community were done at the Warren Avenue Church, and several very prominent Puerto Rican ministers here in Chicago today all did their early internships and their associate, assistant ministry stuff at Warren Avenue, so it had its own personality and engagement, but it never survived King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being there.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: As the neighborhood began to change, there was also some very heavy FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] surveillance and visits that went on to families that were still members of the church, and that really was the straw that broke the camel's back.
Speaker 1: Now, those were the days of the Red Squad in Chicago too.
Speaker 2: Those were the Red Squad days and somebody really needs to pursue that someday.
Speaker 1: They tried to bring it back or have brought it back now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It would be an interesting set of files to get hold of because that whole set of people who ministered at the Warren Avenue Church were very involved in the social change efforts that went on around housing and all other, all issues in the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 303743
Speaker 1: And for me, the church [Warren Avenue Congregational Church, Chicago, Illinois] was also a kind of a bridge to Africa, because in 1965, I would take my year abroad from Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio] in Tanzania and what was just then become an independent country; and I decided to take a year and rather than go to Europe, I went as an overseas student for a year to the University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania].
Speaker 2: Now, that was achieved through the church, the contacts in the church?
Speaker 1: Well, the reason was mentioned church here is that the pastor at that church, a man named Edward Holey [ph.] left the church and went on to be the pastor for refugees for the Christian Council of Tanzania.  He did this through a national entity called the National Council of Churches and Church World Service that stationed him in Tanzania, and this is in a very pivotal moment in Africa's history because it's as all kinds of people fleeing political persecution and fleeing the colonial regimes of South Africa and Rhodesia [Zimbabwe], Mozambique are coming up north to Tanzania and are becoming refugees in Tanzania.  Well, with him moving there to Tanzania, my parents [Rozell Nesbitt and Sadie Crain Nesbitt], my mother, in particular, felt much more comfortable about me going to study for a year in east Africa in Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Tanzania was hot at that point, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very hot.
Speaker 2: --it had achieved independence in 1964, didn't they?
Speaker 1: That's right.  Tanzania in '65 [1965] was very hot.
Speaker 2: I think there was a lot of tension between the Muflans [ph.] and the others in Tanzania.
Speaker 1: And there was tension between Tanganyika [Tanzania] and Zanzibar.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where the real center was--
Speaker 2: --there was like a slaughter on the beach.  I remember seeing in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  I was the first foreign student to ever be there--certainly the first African American student at the university of Tanzania, and may have been the first at the whole University of East Africa because at that point the universities of Tanzania, of Kenya, and of Uganda were all combined in one university called the University of East Africa.  One of the historic notes that I would one day love to have explained to the world is that I coached the first basketball team for Tanzania from the University of Dar es Salaam.  We lost every game, but we had a great coach.
Story_ID: 303744
Speaker 1: We're going to catch up with all this, but I want to take you back to childhood.  We have a series of questions we always ask and I know that you're a political activist and you got a lot of detail to bring about a lot of stuff, but I would be remiss if I didn't ask you these other questions.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: They may seem lightweight and they are on some level, but they have some historical importance.  We always ask people to tell us what were the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, for me, the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, one of the smells of growing up would certainly be the kitchen of my Aunt Hattie [ph.], who was my mother's [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] sister in Detroit, Michigan.  She was a professional cateress and she was renown in the Detroit area for her work as a cateress and organizer of weddings.  She was part of the old Gotham Hotel [Hotel Gotham, Detroit, Michigan] staff of the famous black hotel in Detroit and rubbed shoulders and ran in the same social circles with a lot of the Detroit kind of black community of the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] but her kitchen and her cooking was just infamous whether it was traditional black food or whether it was other food.  My love of egg foo young, for example, came from a woman who worked for a while as a cook in a Chinese restaurant and learned to make egg foo young and to this day, I will eat as many as I possibly can because of that.  I think one of the sights I had growing up is a bit of an unusual sight.  It would be the sight of a Tennessee farm with ponies and a lot of children, and we used to spend part of our summers between Tennessee and Wisconsin, where in Wisconsin my family was part of a cooperative of families who, while living on the south side of these six black families, they also wanted their children to have a rural exposure, so they bought property in place called Fox Lake, Wisconsin, a German diary community and we used to go up there.  And I worked farms up there, helping to farm and do dairy cattle stuff with hosting dairy cows.  The rest of our summers would be spent in Nashville, Tennessee and spent in one of those of families who became one of our extended families.  They're called the Brunson [ph.] family and is in turn related to Walker [ph.] family, a very big family in Nashville, Tennessee, a very famous family because the Walker sisters married a man named Ted Acklin.  They're renowned around Tennessee A&I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and also around the baseball world, Junior Gilliam [Jim Gilliam] and Joe Morgan and a host of other black ballplayers all came up around this Ted Acklin, who was an uncle in that family--
Story_ID: 303745
Speaker 1: Now, this baseball connection is an important one for me because I neglected to say that one of my mother's [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] brothers was also a black baseball league [Negro League] player, played in Cuba, played in Canada, played a lot with Roy Campanella and played with Jackie Robinson.  One of the pictures that's one of my favorite pictures is a picture of my uncles on my mother's side standing behind Roy Campanella in Ebbets Field [Brooklyn, New York].  This same uncle would later run Roy Campanella's liquor store [Roy Campanella Choice Wines and Liquors] in Harlem [New York, New York], so there is a bit of diversion, but this baseball connection and the black culture around black baseball was an important component of our life in Tennessee, our summers in Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Were all these people coached by Ted Acklin?
Speaker 1: All those baseball players that I knew either played with him or knew him.  They all knew each other very, very well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The thing about this that intrigued me is that the players you named are real smart ball players, Roy Campanella was a catcher that handed all of these pitchers, he ran that team when he was a catcher.  Basically, Junior Gilliam [Jim Gilliam], a smart ballplayer.  He could do whatever it took to win a game for the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers].  Joe Morgan is a dean among ballplayers--I mean a great second baseman, hit home runs.  He had a lot of heart and knows the game, he's an analyst on television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  If you were to go to any of them now and say to them, "Do you know the name Ted Acklin from, Nashville, Tennessee," they'd all say, "Yes."  If you said, "Jim Zapp," Zapp [James Zapp] was a center fielder in the black baseball leagues and he--my uncle Ted Acklin died and he married my aunt, Era [ph.], who had been married to Ted Acklin.  She's one of these Walker [ph.] sisters.  And the Walker family--my godmother is one of them, Bernice Brunson [ph.] and our two families were one--not only did we have the co-op in Fox Lake, Wisconsin, but we also did everything together.  There was no separating these two families, so that this sense of family, a very extended family was very, very--we grew knowing what a yard cousin was, but we didn't make any differentiation.  It was just all one solid community that you called family.
Speaker 2: Is James Brunson [ph.] related to this group of Brunsons?  He is an artist.
Speaker 1: No, B-R-U-N-S-O-N?
Speaker 2: Brunson, he's an artist and he travels a lot to Asia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  No, not to my knowledge.
Speaker 2: --one of his projects is trying to make the connection between the Africans and Asians in ancient history and medieval history.
Speaker 1: No, no not to my knowledge.
Story_ID: 303746
Speaker 1: But they were also--had this other interesting link because a number of them also worked the road--worked the railroad.  So this is that generation of black people who built housing out in the South Side in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] and in Avondale [Chicago, Illinois] in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s]--in the '40s [1940s], right after World War II [WWII].  And lots of them were sleeping car porters or cooks on the railroads.  So Robert Brunson [ph.] worked as a cook on the Milwaukee Road [Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad] for fifty years before he finally retired.  So that was world that I also got another glimpse of through the fact that my father [Rozell Nesbitt] and uncle [George B. Nesbitt] had been organizers of railroad porters. So my first year in Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio], just before I entered Antioch, my summer job was working as a Red Cap at the old Dearborn Street Station [Dearborn Station, Chicago, Illinois].  I tell this to students today.  They don't even realize--very few people in Chicago [Illinois] realize that trains were such a huge thing here in the City of Chicago.  And so if you worked in that industry, that was an industry that made money and lots of that housing was built up by the railroads.  And I really got to experience that firsthand.  I remember working there at Dearborn Street Station one time, you know, I was a young college boy, had been raised very liberally and this Polish guy who was the station master; and he got angry at the fact that myself and another young brother, named Billy Adams [ph.], he was a part of a group of, part of a group of, a South Side social groups, called the Saints.  Billy Adams and I both worked there and we were talking to all the girls.  This Polish guy got furious at us for talking to the white girls.  He just wanted us to talk to black girls.  Well, so Billy and I decided we were going to ignore this, which we did.  So this guy came just rabidly angry one day, this short, stocky, came out running out, confronted me in front of this Dearborn Station--I will never forget this--really angry, yelling at me and screaming, it looked like he was going to take a swing at me.  Well, I decided that I could square off with him but before anything could happen, there was an older Red Cap.  His name was Red.  I don't know what they called him Red, he was white as the driven snow.  In fact, most people wouldn't even know he was an African American.  Red came over and stood over him with his hand in his pocket and he said--whatever that station master's name was--"You can say whatever you want to him, but don't put your hands on him. I know that boy and I know his uncles and his father.  Don't put your hands on him." (Laughter) I said, "Wow."
Story_ID: 303747
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're talking about this, the redcap named Red interceding--
Speaker 2: Interceding and really just--he, he made it clear.  He helped me several times.  I remember another time, here I'm a rookie, yeah, I'm seventeen years old, I don't know.  I'm big, but that's about it.  And I remember another time, I was unloading a train on the platform and the Dearborn Street Station [Dearborn Station, Chicago, Illinois] had a lot of trains coming in and out of there.  There was the Wabash [Wabash Railroad], the Canadian train [Grand Trunk Western Railroad], the Chicago and Eastern Illinois [Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad] train that went down to Mississippi, and then the Santa Fes [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway].  So they were busy, those platforms, and I remember busily unloading this one train, and apparently, literally, my butt was sticking out over the track and this Red stopped me.  He saved me 'cause this train was coming in, and I was totally unconscious.  And he pulled me away from this train coming in.  So I think that that was one of the things that really also had a great influence on me, was to have this--part of my family's insistence with all of us was that we never broke our roots to just the people, the folk.  And I think that that was also part of why we stayed in the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] for years and years and years until the point when most of the buildings around 1514 [South Albany Street, Chicago, Illinois] were gone, we continued, my father [Rozell Nesbitt], certainly, continued there until the very, very bitter end.  And many people in the black middle class really couldn't understand that about the Nesbitts.
Story_ID: 303748
Speaker 1: Just to anybody who's watching this, can you explain the difference between the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and the West Side to people?
Speaker 2: Well, the difference that I would make would be the standard difference between the Ivy Leaguers and the Gousters, and if you were on the West Side, you were a Gouster, and that meant you wore pleated pants and might have had suspenders, and you didn't have button-down shirts, you had big ol' collars, and you had a big ol' hat.  And then the South Side, you were an Ivy Leaguer.  You had the, and it's a class difference.  And what basically we're seeing is that the entry point--the port of entry really was the West Side and people worked, were working class and worked long enough, and you then you bought a house.   You rented on the West Side and you bought a house on the South Side.   And there--I think though there's a change in some of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some of it is mixed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of it was mixed, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, kind of a mixed thing, but the port of entry, I guess for a lot of people from Mississippi was the West Side immediately.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it might be another--tell me if you agree with this.  It seemed like the headquarters for most of the black institutions like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], regardless, the black institutions were on the South Side.
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: And they--that's where you had like a organized black community pretty much--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there's no question about it--
Speaker 1: --that kind of, yeah.
Speaker 2: Which was part of why when my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] helped to form the West Side Regional Mothers Club [West Side Mothers Club], it was a very important institution to create on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  But my mother had had earlier roots on the West Side of Chicago in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] because her father [Reverend William Crain] served a church that's still standing near Lake [Street] and Damen [Avenue], a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church there on the West Side at a point that that the part of the West Side was black and Italian and Irish Catholic.  That's how old and long ago we're talking about.  But this is around the Lake and Damen area, and I think arguably one can say that that area may have preceded the South Side as a center of black community.  It certainly got roots as early.  It was around World War I [WWI] that you had the beginnings of the South Side as an organized black community, the Black Belt and, and all that area.  But even earlier, during--before World War I, you had around Lake Street and Damen the nucleus of a little black community around there then.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  I think I've heard--I had a friend of mine was organizing some people over at Union Park [Chicago, Illinois] once.  And I'd never been to Union Park.  I went over there and discovered--I asked her when I went over there, "Why is it called Union Park?  She said, "Because, I don't know really."  And so we looked at the history of the park.  It's named for the Union Army, you know, the Union, the Union, and Mary Todd Lincoln lived across the street from it at one time.  There's a little part of it dedicated to Abraham Lincoln and all that part.  I mean so, that might be--
Speaker 2: I don't think that's accidental.
Speaker 1: --a basis for a black community growing up around that area, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's real--it's near United Center [Chicago, Illinois] right over in an area, you know, which is close to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the old, you know, the old Chicago Stadium [Chicago, Illinois], when we lived at 2752 West Warren [Boulevard], which would have been 1946, '47 [1947], a woman who used to help take care of us as little children, her husband was the man in charge of the stadium.  He was the maintenance man, Mr. Davis [ph.], 'cause we used to get--he'd give us tickets to go see the circus.  And Mr. Davis was in charge of the old Chicago Stadium.  I don't think any of my cousins would even remember that to this day.  But it was, I think this sense of history--I was talking with Tim Black [HistoryMaker Timuel Black] about this, who was a contemporary of my parents and knew them quite well--is being lost today, it's very, very important.
Story_ID: 303749
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about yourself when you were growing up.  What kind of a kid were you?  What did you really like to do?  You told about, you told us about some of the things you actually did, but what did you like to do and what were you looking forward to doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of more of the sights and smells.  As a kid growing up, I was athletic.  I played a lot of ball.  I read a lot.  My parents [Rozell Nesbitt and Sadie Crain Nesbitt] encouraged that with my sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] and I, but I, particularly.  I was the oldest.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of material would you read?
Speaker 2: I read a lot of black stories, stories about black folk, but I read a lot of sports stories too.  I read all of the dog stories, for example, the Lassie series ['Lassie Come-Home,' Eric Knight], that whole series that people don't even know.  I read all the Zane Grey series.  The Nesbitt brothers were famous for swapping these cheap dime--they were then a dime--dime Westerns.  They kept them in the bathrooms.  And it was a men thing, reading these dime westerns.  Well, of course, as the oldest on the way to manhood, I started reading that crap too.  So I read so many Westerns.  I should, I could write a western without blinking an eye.  And I think that going to Francis Parker School [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] was traumatic in many ways.  It was difficult, and it was balanced out by the fact of Hull House [Chicago, Illinois], and my involvement--I didn't mention that my mother was also a social worker at Hull House after she worked for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] of--I don't know.  Why am I forgetting the name of that area?
Speaker 1: Maxwell Street.
Speaker 2: Maxwell Street, because they've torn it down.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's like a port of entry for--
Speaker 2: That was a port of entry.
Speaker 1: --historical port of entry for the, I know the Jews and also for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mexicans, Italians, Greeks--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and black folks too came in through there, but--
Speaker 2: And black folk--
Speaker 1: Yeah, some Polish people, yeah, the Thalia Hall [Chicago, Illinois] over there and like Pilsen [Chicago, Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and for the Italians too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and then the Greeks because right there you had--
Speaker 1: That's right.  Little Italy [Chicago, Illinois] is close to there and--
Speaker 2: That's right.  When my mother--
Speaker 1: --Greektown [Chicago, Illinois] is over there.
Speaker 2: My mother taught school for a while at the Dante Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], which was on Desplaines [Street], near Taylor [Street].  It's torn down, but one of her students, one of the children in her class was a Mandakas family who, he ran a jewelry store over on Halsted [Street], right just south of Jackson [Boulevard].  And I think that whole experience of Hull House was very important as a rooting thing for us.  And then we had all these other things in our community, the West--the Fox Lake [Wisconsin] house, the experiences in Wisconsin, going to Tennessee, but that balanced off Francis Parker, which was troubling, because in 1954 when we started going to Parker, the way we used to get there was, itself, a challenge.  You would, we would--we lived on the west side at Albany [Street], near Albany and Roosevelt [Road] and we would go downtown and take the Clark Street streetcar.  I'd tell my friends at Parker, students just, they'd look at me in just shock.  What is a streetcar?  And there was a man, for instance, on the street car named Chicken Charlie [Casey Jones].  I don't know if you've ever heard anybody talk about this.  This was an Afro-American man who used to ride around on the streetcars with this chicken perched on the--a live chicken, on top of his head.
Speaker 1: I've seen a picture of him, and I've heard stories of him, but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We used to see this guy all the time on the bloody streetcar, going north, at that point, there were not many black people unless you were a domestic servant.  So to see this group of sometimes five or six African Americans, young, we had got adopted by folks who were regular, so much so that if my sister was sick or something, the people you'd regularly run into, they'd ask where--and I think there was a certain pride about us too going up there to Francis Parker.
Story_ID: 303750
Speaker 1: On the down side though, there was a man by the name of Larry Kirshbaum, who today is one of the big executives at Warner, Warner--not Stewart-Warner, that old factory, but the Warner Communications [sic. Time Warner Book Group].
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's one of the big vice presidents, graduated in my class at Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] and that's the Pritzker family too, with one of the Pritzkers were also in my--two years behind me and this guy, Larry Kirshbaum had a baseball party in 1956, it would have been, at the corner of Fullerton [Avenue] and Lakeview [Avenue].  He lived in a big building there.  And when I came in the building, the doorman wouldn't let me in.  He said, "You have to go around to the back if you're coming to visit your mother.  Is she here?"  Well, my father [Rozell Nesbitt] taught me I don't go to back doors.  So I refused to do it.  I probably started crying.  I don't know, but at any rate, he ended up ringing the people upstairs and she came down and escorted me in.  Well, I must have been so traumatized that my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt]--she had to call my mother and it became a huge incident.  But that, I just tell that story to say how rigid segregation stuff was up there at that point.  I have a friend who is Jewish--Parker was predominately Jewish.  She was in my class and we wrote a book report about 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] when it had just come out, and we went to see it.  And this must have been '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: This is the movie version with--
Speaker 1: The play.
Speaker 2: Oh, the play.
Speaker 1: This is the play version.  Lorraine Hansberry was still alive.  We went to see it here--I don't remember the theater, in '60 [1960].  But whenever it was, it was enough still risque that both our parents sat upstairs watching over us as myself and this young Jewish girl--we would've been both sophomores in high school, went to look at the play.  You know, I often think about that when you look at couples moving around today.  But you'll remember that when I started Francis Parker, there was a--what do you call these--I think it was a hammer slaying of a young black boy at the corner of 55th [Street] and Kedzie [Avenue], that was hammered to death by a group of white boys.  This was not--I'm not talking about Emmett Till.  Emmett Till had taken place or took place shortly thereafter--
Speaker 2: This is something in Chicago [Illinois] that--
Speaker 1: This was in Chicago--
Speaker 2: In Chicago, and probably out in the open.
Speaker 1: On the corner of 55th and Kedzie and, you know, this--that incident--because that was a very tense area then, you know, which would later become the Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois] incident, so '65 [1965], '66 [1966], but I'm talking, I know this was in the '50s [1950s].  And I've talked about this and mentioned it to several people, but nobody seems to ever know about it.
Speaker 2: And that's the area--is that the area they call New City [Chicago, Illinois] or something or--
Speaker 1: I think they call it that now, but it's on the way to Midway Airport [Chicago Midway International Airport, Chicago, Illinois].  It's just, you know, what is it?  Sixteen blocks east of Midway?  And commuting across the city was not generally done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you make, you raise an interesting point because Chicago, from what others have told us, was divided by--there were barriers.  You couldn't cross certain streets--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --certain viaducts, if you went onto there, you were in trouble.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Not just five years ago, we had a young man named Lenard Clark beaten with a baseball bat--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --for going into Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] by himself.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: So, it's still some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some remnants of that--
Speaker 2: --trepidation around going into, a black person going into a white neighborhood who doesn't live there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], it was just pronounced.
Story_ID: 303751
Speaker 1: I mean, for example, where I grew up on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], when the Latino community first began to move over there--the Mexican community, Cermak Road was the division line and the Douglas Park [Chicago, Illinois] train.  Black people didn't go south of that.  Mexicans didn't go north of it.  That's changed to a very large extent now, but at that point, in the, what, early '60s [1960s] throughout the '60s [1960s], never done, never done.  When I worked for Harold Washington, I remember being assigned one day to help work with police in stamping out the tension 'cause some Mexican families had gone north of Ogden Avenue to go to a playground and had been--one of the girls had been raped by somebody from the Vice Lords [Conservative Vice Lords] and the Latin Council--Latin Kings, at the time, got in their cars--fifty, sixty cars with shot guns, had cruised 16th Street.  And in return the Vice Lord, had put fifty, sixty men, and gone into the 21st Street, Little Village [Chicago, Illinois] area.  It was about to go up.  That's how I first got to know people like [HistoryMaker] Howard Saffold and others because that was--we really was on the cusp of a major riot.  But I think the antecedents of all those kind of tensions rests in the earlier period in this rigid apartheid-like character to the city.
Speaker 2: Do you have any sense of why Chicago [Illinois] is like that?  I mean of--
Speaker 1: Well, I think partly it's the industrial system that brought people here in groups.  I mean the steel industry was really crucial, and it brought groupings of people here as groups, specifically, often to set them off against earlier groupings who had unionized.
Speaker 2: So that explains like say in South Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], you have like the Irish and you--then they bring in all the Croatians and Eastern Europeans, then the Mexicans, you know, I guess.  So--
Speaker 1: Honkies, you know--my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] was the first person to tell me what a honky was.  And people today, the honkies were some white group, no, honkies came from Hungarians and they got that term out of the steel mill situation, the mills and the plants, where that was a term used when large groups of Hungarians were brought in, en masse, often to displace or replace workers that had been organized.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--so to go to one part of the city to the next--now, you were going to the north, from the West Side to the North Side?
Speaker 1: We were going to the north, from the West Side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The North Side has been, you know, has been more, traditionally, more cosmopolitan than other parts of town.
Speaker 1: It wasn't then though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], it was not that cosmopolitan.  That was an all-white, working class area.   Clark Street from Diversey [Parkway] south all the way to the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] was all-white, working class.
Speaker 2: So you needed some allies on the streetcar.
Speaker 1: We had to have allies on the streetcars (laughter) going--I remember very much an Armenian guy that I went to Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] with.  He and I used to get tired of Parker and we'd go over to Waller High School [Robert A. Waller High School], which today is called Lincoln Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] and we'd eat ten-cent hot dogs with greasy French fries and play basketball 'cause you could find a few Puerto Rican and black guys, a few, at Waller High School.  Waller was known to be a bit different kind of little place, but those other schools up there, Senn [Nicholas Senn High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Lake View [Lake View High School, Chicago, Illinois]--it was a race riot when you played them.
Story_ID: 303752
Speaker 1: You were talking about high school [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois], going to--
Speaker 2: Going up north and visiting up, going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the neighborhoods, the stratification of neighborhoods and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I think that that's--that part of that exposure for me made it much more easy to appreciate and understand the apartheid issue in South Africa when I then would go to Tanzania and get that exposure to people coming from South Africa and Rhodesia [Zimbabwe], southwest Africa, these other colonized countries.  Because I think Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] racial stratification is so, so developed that it really does parallel the kind of apartheid character in colonized Africa.
Speaker 1: It's kind of amazing today, that we can look at Chicago in those days and see the parallels with South Africa, because I think in those days--correct me if you think I'm wrong--but I think that we tended to think of the United States as being different from South Africa even though we knew we had apartheid in the United States.  We just didn't call it apartheid (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But for some reason in the people's, in the mind of the public and in the news media, South Africa was the one with apartheid, or Mississippi was the one that killed young black men, instead of Chicago or Dayton [Ohio] or some other place, you know.
Speaker 2: No, it was definitely part of the policymakers' program too, to set off the United States as being very different.  Now, in some ways in scale is so much more pronounced in the, as I would learn later with new, repeated trips and involvement in Africa, but I think that had certain things been permitted to go on unchallenged, scale, in some ways the scale isn't that different.
Speaker 1: Right, without a challenge, it would have been much the same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's just that, the, I guess the--and in terms of struggle against those odds against them, they were maybe behind us maybe a few years or something, but they started later too, so.
Speaker 2: Well, it's something that I think people have--the analytical part of me makes me think it's people really need to do much more work with.  I did a little film with a guy named Marian Marzynski called 'Skin Deep' for WGBH [WGBH-TV] Boston [Massachusetts], and in that film, we try to compare the Civil Rights Movement and the anti-apartheid struggle.  It's only thirty-five, forty minutes long, but it's an effort to cinematically look at those two histories and see where are the points of convergence and where are the points of--there are really very different histories.  It's a fascinating area.
Story_ID: 303753
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, now, you're going to Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois].  And what was the school like, I mean in terms of--do you remember any teachers vividly that really helped you or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  Well, there were, there were some--it was a school that was not very diverse.  There was I think, to the best of my recollection, a black woman who was a social work- psychologist, the school psychologist, and then there was maybe one black language teacher, but that was the entire faculty of being, of color in the school.  But there were some amazing teachers in the school, in particular, a man who would ultimately become the principal at the school for a period of time, Jack Ellison, was a Canadian man.  He's now in his--I think he's about ninety-five or ninety-six now, still alive and he was a progressive--he was very much a Wallace [Henry A. Wallace] supporter.  There were a number of people at Parker School, and I think that's part of what differentiated Parker from Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] and University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in terms of early on bringing in African Americans into the school, in North Shore Country Day [North Shore Country Day School, Winnetka, Illinois], some of these other private schools, and part of that came out of the fact that there were open socialists there at Parker.  There were people who had fled persecution in the '50s [1950s] at, under the McCarthy committee [House Un-American Activities Committee] and the Smith Act [Alien Registration Act of 1940] and all of that stuff.  Jack Ellison was a Canadian and ipso facto he had a kind of broader view and a more critical view of America.  Parker was also a place that was a kind of center of unionizing of other teachers throughout the whole area and a very progressive curriculum, very much based around Dewey [John Dewey] and Francis Parker and all these notions that you learn by doing, you--school should be a complete community and service was--we very early were exposed to service and being involved in school and city issues.  So it was a natural flow for me to go from Francis Parker to Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] in many, many ways, continued the same kind of tradition.  But I'd say to you that Jack Ellison had a particular impact on me.  When--the night I graduated from twelfth grade from, as a senior in high school, he said, "Come see me next week.  I wanna give you some things."  And I went to his house and he put together of box of, Monthly Review magazine and a lot of articles by Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] and a lot of stuff from Paul Robeson and he said, "Prexy [HistoryMaker Prexy Nesbitt], someday, you'll go to Africa, I know, and I want you to have these materials, and the stipulation is that when you go to Africa, I want to take me with you."  Why, I never did fulfill my part of the deal.  I went many times.  I spoke many times and he came to hear me speak, but I never did fulfill it, but he taught--he taught anthropology at the school besides being the great head, when I was a senior and then becoming the principal.  He was just an excellent teacher.  And he and a woman named Sarah Greenbaum, who was the eighth grade teacher, were two teachers that had tremendous influence on me.  I think one other, a woman named Marshall [ph.].  She taught seventh grade.  And in seventh grade, you had to speech class.  And so my class jokes to this day--all of us that went to Parker, about Ms. Marshall and her speech classes, but she was a great teacher, 'cause from her, you really learned the importance of public speaking and of oratory.  She was a tough task master, but I think that was part of the value of a Francis Parker education in those years.  You learned to read.  You learned to write.  You developed.  You learned to think.  Those were things that were much valued.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, Francis Parker, was he the--he was--was he a disciple of John Dewey?  I know there is an association (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was an associate and a disciple.  Francis Parker not only founded the Francis Parker School here, he went on and helped found the Lab School.  So much of the thinking of Lab School and of Francis Parker, come from the same source.  And it's all about experiential education and community education, and an expansive curriculum, and hands-on learning and service.  It's very much about the school being a part of change.
Story_ID: 303754
Speaker 1: Did you do some of the regular high school stuff in high school [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] like play basketball or go to proms, or all that kind of stuff (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did all of that.  We had this regular stuff.  Parker--because it was situated in the class groupings that it was in, had access to interesting sectors of America--Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] society.  So there was an institution called the eighth grade senior picnic, for example.  And in that institution, eighth grade girls asked senior boys to a picnic and the senior girls asked the eighth grade boys, you know, challenging gender roles.  Well, my date, the woman who asked me, as a eighth grade boy, interestingly enough was Irv Kupcinet's daughter, Cookie Kupcinet [Karyn Kupcinet], who later would be killed in Los Angeles [California] in that very, one of those first very bizarre Manson-like--I don't think Manson [Charles Manson], I don't think it was Manson, himself, but her death was one of those first early mysterious deaths in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  But she asked me to the eighth grade senior picnic.  And I played football.  We had football and the Bears [Chicago Bears] used to come--I remember Willie Galimore coming the year that I got my first letter.
Speaker 1: Famous little Willie Galimore (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Little Willie, was right there--
Speaker 1: The elusive Willie Galimore.
Speaker 2: The elusive Willie, and it was all because how Parker's, Parker parents links to the Bears.  I remember--I'm very proud of the fact that I made the All-Chicago Tribune [Chicago Tribune] team with Dick Butkus, although I wouldn't, certainly not wanna be identified with the coach [Mike Ditka] (laughter) and his run for the [U.S.] Senate.  But there I was in the Tribune right there with Dick Butkus.  But Parker's team was pathetic.  I mean we lost all the time, but there's a certain--you know, you picked up all of the things you're supposed to get out of competitive sport.
Speaker 1: All these intellectual schools lose (laughter).
Speaker 2: All lose like crazy, you know.  It was just a joke.  I remember going to one game where we played--
Story_ID: 303755
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Prexy Nesbitt, P-R-E-X-Y, N-E-S-B-I-T-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date and--
Speaker 2: Today is November 9th--it's Tuesday, November 9, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we today?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago [Illinois], 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: And just confirm that this is a continuation of an interview we started back in August [August 12. 2004], I think.
Speaker 2: This is part two of an interview we started back in August.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 303756
Speaker 1: Where we left off, we had you on the verge of graduating high school, from Francis Parker High School [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois].  And what were your thoughts, what did you see yourself career-wise on the verge of graduating from high school?
Speaker 2: Being very honest, Larry [Larry Crowe], I would have to say that my aspirations at that time were probably to be either a lawyer or a doctor, and largely that was because we had, I had an uncle that was a lawyer and I had an uncle that was a doctor, and I admired both of them.  I know I didn't wanna be an engineer, which is what my father [Rozell Nesbitt] was.  I also probably had thought a bit briefly, but it would've been very briefly, about a career in sports, because I'd been fairly successful in playing football and was a bit elated to make the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] all-star team from little ol' Francis Parker with Dick Butkus.  So I'm sure that went to my head for a brief moment, but certainly, by the time I graduated and had decided what college--and I had decided by the time I graduated in June.  I had abandoned any thoughts of a career in sports.
Speaker 1: Was it because--I mean why, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, largely because the college I had chosen, and I think, if I recall correctly, I had been accepted to three different--or four different schools.  I was at, at accepted at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], but chose Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio].  And Antioch in the 1960s, the only professional sport it had was folk dancing, which took place every Friday night on what was called, Red Square.  And that was the sole limit.  Although I must say that years later during the height of civil rights activity, the surrounding town hated Antioch.  The surrounding towns hated Antioch passionately, and we were once, they were signifying about the school and the student body.  And they once said that Antioch College could never field a football team.  And we put together a bunch of guys who had played football, and rented some uniforms, and, and drove vans with our uniforms to the Xenia Daily Gazette and challenged them to a football game on the spot.  So that was about the sole--although I did play a little pick up professional team stuff in Dayton [Ohio] for a little while, but it wasn't very substantive, only a couple of games.
Speaker 1: Was that the Dayton Triangles?
Speaker 2: Something like that.  It was something, the Dayton Brewers or Triangles, some team that really didn't mean much of anything except there was a little change, and it was a chance to do a macho thing.
Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played both on the line as an end and I had played in the backfield too for Francis Parker--the Francis Parker thirteen, 'cause I don't think we had more than thirteen players.  We got beat all the time, but we--it was a very good bonding experience with a group of guys that I have stayed in touch with all these years from Parker.  And I think it was important for the values, short of the wartime value.  I mean what is football, but a sort of facsimile of war.  But I think, on the other hand, that there is some real teamwork value that you get out of it, and certainly the relationships established have lasted all this time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I kind of think that youth in that age group need an outlet, something too, you know, in some ways.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and I think I--today I see that with my own ten-year-old and nine-year-old sons [Samora Nesbitt and Jele Magdalina] that they, soccer plays that role for them, although I must say that I'm happy that they do soccer instead of football.
Story_ID: 303757
Speaker 1: But I think the real moment for me at Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] that had, really shaped much of my subsequent decisions about my work and interests was when the then twelfth grade anthropology teacher, Jack Ellison, who subsequently would become principal of Francis Parker for a number of years, invited me to come by he and his family's house after graduation sometime and pick up a gift that he had for me.  And what he had was a number of books, some of which were by Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], one was by Padmore [George Padmore], another book was one that was done by Alphaeus Hinton and they were--in addition to that, Monthly Review magazines that went back all the way to 1948 and lots of the focus of these magazines were around Africa.  And it turned out that Jack Ellison, who was actually born originally in Canada but had been a Parker school teacher since the '40s [1940s], had a big interest in Africa.  And his giving me those books and saying to me, as he gave them to me, "Someday, Prexy [HistoryMaker Prexy Nesbitt], I hope you will go to Africa, and if you do, I want very much want to go with you."  I think Jack Ellison is today ninety-two or ninety-three years of age.  He's still alive.  I have never followed, fulfilled my part of that bond, which was to take him to Africa.  But I think it was very important clinching of a drift toward Africa that had been initiated by my family and by people I heard speak, and that my family spoke about.  And then to have a man that I very much respected in my own high school further ignite this interest in Africa was very, very important for me subsequently.
Speaker 2: Now, had you to this time had much contact with continental Africans?
Speaker 1: I would say it was very limited.  It was certainly a limited contact.  It wasn't extensive.  There were--I had met continental Africans--I have to take that back, actually, 'cause my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] and father [Rozell Nesbitt] actually did a lot of hosting of continental Africans who came into the house very often.  Then there were programs--I remember going to programs, for instance, that Sid Williams [Sidney R. Williams] organized--Sid Williams, that some people would know, who used to work for the Urban League here in Chicago [Illinois], a very famous figure.  And then there was [HistoryMaker] Etta Moten Barnett, who was a very close friend of my mother's.  So I think it's not correct for me to have said that I didn't have that much contact.  In fact, my mother and father hosted Africans through--who were there in United States on hospitality and guest visits through probably--and some of them were state department [U.S. Department of State] tours.  I remember my father taking me to, I think, a reception for Kwame Nkrumah when he came to Chicago in 1957.
Speaker 2: Now that's exceptional.  I mean that's really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is exceptional.
Speaker 2: That's exceptional exposure to Africa for those days.
Speaker 1: I think, yeah, I think it's not fair for me to say that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for those days especially--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, nowadays, you'd have an easier time anyway.
Speaker 1: That's right, but they clearly went out of their way to give us some exposure.  And I must have had further exposure because I remember recently coming across a paper I wrote in sixth grade, reviewing Alan Paton's 'Cry, the Beloved Country.'  And it was only I think two or three years after the book first appeared, and that must have come as a result of my parents.  I'm sure that, for example, my parents' relationships--my mother danced with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, for example, and I'm sure that she must have known Pearl Primus and people like that, who were all in the vanguard really of relationships, and then my uncle, George [George B. Nesbitt], who was very close to St. Clair Drake.  So I think that I had a lot of exposures, certainly much more than the average person would have had.
Speaker 2: Right.  So you wouldn't had the stereotypical views of Africa--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --or a lot--they wouldn't predominate your--
Speaker 1: They definitely did not dominate in my household.  So there was a view of Africa of stateliness and of grandeur.  And we read poetry regularly in my household, and a frequent guest to our house was Robert Hayden, the great poet.  I think I mentioned that earlier.  And those poets and the cultural people that my parents were close to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Hayden's, Hayden's poem 'The Middle Passages' [sic. 'Middle Passage'] really has a profound--
Speaker 1: It's rich with imagery--
Speaker 2: --impact on people.
Speaker 1: Profound, and he and the people he knew and the discussions that took place all would have had, meant that, no, I did not have the average exposure to Africa.
Story_ID: 303758
Speaker 1: But why Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio]?  Now, Antioch is, you know, it's sort of obscure in the United States even though those that know about it (laughter), they really know about it, I mean but it doesn't get a lot--since it doesn't have any sports teams or, you know, it doesn't seem to--you don't hear a lot about Antioch in the media.  You don't see it in the paper, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's an interesting story, Larry [Larry Crowe], because my father [Rozell Nesbitt], at the point that I was born in 1944 during the war [World War II, WWII], my father was for a brief period of time assigned to Wright Field [Wilbur Wright Field; Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio], which was down near Yellow Springs, Ohio.  And he met and got to know a lot of people from the Dayton [Ohio] area and people from Yellow Springs, and for African Americans in that southwest corner of Ohio in the 1940s and early '50s [1950s], Yellow Springs was called the oasis in the desert, and it was the place that was open for African Americans to come to.  It was an open town, and so my father, when I applied to Antioch, he--I think he always very much quietly, as parents do, but firmly probably, was pushing Antioch.  It had a very progressive political prospective, woven into its pedagogy.  It had the work study program that was famous, and I have to say I've never regretted it, and have to be very grateful to it because it was out of the experience of going to Antioch that I then made the first trip to Africa.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--did you have a chance to visit Antioch before you chose it?
Speaker 2: I did.  I made a trip in which my father and I went and visited Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], and visited Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and visited Antioch.  We didn't go to Connecticut to see Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], but I think they were pushing me towards--the choice was mine, but I think they were definitely, as I said, had some ideas of their own.  I don't think my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] was as enthusiastic about Antioch as my father was.  But when I--we made the trip, the last place that we went was Antioch.  And, and I have to say I think that folk dancing really caught in my imagination (laughter).  I have never, I'd never seen anything like it.  And very few people would know that I did a lot of Greek and Balkan and even Israeli.  I don't know if my Palestinian friends would accept that today, but I did a lot of Israeli folk dancing too because that was what was done at Antioch on weekends.
Speaker 1: This is--you know, I'm from Dayton, you know, and I'm--we used to go to Antioch just to watch this sometimes because it was so bizarre to us, you know, from--I mean it was, to us, at that time, it was actually bizarre so we'd go there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was bizarre.
Speaker 1: --and check it out and people would, circles of people dancing around, and it was really something.
Speaker 2: It was foreign.
Speaker 1: And it was a wide open place with very liberal--
Speaker 2: It was a very wide open place--
Speaker 1: --and very open, a lot of--
Speaker 2: Very, and the--
Speaker 1: --intellectual activity going on.
Speaker 2: And a lot of intellectual activity, a lot of political activity.  Antioch sent more people to work in Mississippi summer, probably than any other college, certainly any college its size.  It was a lot of give and take with Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  A lot of professors at Central State lived there in the town of Yellow Springs.  And from the first day that I was there 'til the day I left, I formed very close relationships with the black people living in the town of Yellow Springs.  I ran a little teaching baseball camp.  I helped drive young people to schools.  All of this was kind of part-time.  I worked with a brother to a woman named Virginia Hamilton, the great writer of children's stories, her brother, Billy Hamilton, Buster Hamilton.  All--I worked with both of them.  So that one of the riches of this little town of Yellow Springs, was the people who lived there.  And I was very involved in the big civil rights issue there, which was a certain barber shop, called Gegner's [Gegner's Barbershop], which would not cut black hair and in--I think it was in '64 [1964], the summer of '64 [1964], I was a person that appeared later, I think in Life magazine or something--I sat in Gegner's Barbershop, the first black person he'd ever had, and we did this in a nonviolent sit-in.  He took his barber's cloth or the apron and draped it over my head, instead of tying it over me to prevent me--his statement on what he planned to do, closed the shop.  It led to a massive confrontation with state highway mobilized.  It was a big, big issue.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Yellow Springs, in Yellow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in Yellow Springs, so this was, this institution of racism right there.  So it became the target for the next couple of years.  And then--
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  That's something I almost forgot from the news from those days--
Story_ID: 303759
Speaker 1: And then at the same time, Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] was sending all of these students to work in Mississippi.  My parents [Sadie Crain Nesbitt and Rozell Nesbitt] wouldn't let me go.  My mother had basically said that if I went to Mississippi, and went, I shouldn't even bother coming back home.  I think she was just fearful more than anything else.
Speaker 2: Now, this was in '64 [1964].  Now, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: --you started in '62 [1962], right?
Speaker 1: I started in '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], I mean, actually the staging ground for the--
Speaker 1: Was in Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yeah, was at Miami University [Oxford, Ohio], right.
Speaker 1: Was at Miami, exactly--
Speaker 2: --right around the corner at Oxford, not too far--
Speaker 1: Exactly, absolutely--
Speaker 2: --maybe forty minutes away.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and so that there were--that's, partly accounts for the large, large number of people who went into Mississippi, and who went through this Mississippi Freedom Summer.  And--
Speaker 2: So [HistoryMaker] James Forman and Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], all that group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All of those people--
Speaker 2: --they were there at Miami--
Speaker 1: --routinely came through.
Speaker 2: Western College [Western College for Women, Oxford, Ohio], which is actually right across the highway from Miami University, right, and--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --at Oxford.
Speaker 1: But Antioch would have been the school in the region that politically hosted all of those people and certainly the staff and faculty, the same kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the people, the Antioch students that went, that--
Speaker 1: Dick Heitler [Richard Heitler], Tamara Heitler, Jeff Jones, Joni Rabinowitz, Larry Deutsch.  There was a Michael Deutsch.  There was Louise Raiavich [ph.].  There were people who went on, not only into SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] but there were people who worked with the Deacons for Defense and Justice, for example.  And see, the advantage was that many Antioch people could go and do it as a work study project.  They got full credit because to graduate from Antioch, you had to have work, or what we called, co-op hours, because there was only two schools like that in the whole nation, at that point.  Antioch was one of them.  Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] was another one that had this kind of work and study setup.
Speaker 2: Northeastern in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: In Boston, Northeastern in Boston.  And I think that that was one of the things that helped to facilitate the numbers of people that Antioch sent to work in the summer of '64 [1964], but then that continued, and I think that that was a very consistent part of Antioch, was just social activism was completely a routine part of one's education.  It was not an aberrant thing.  It was not something that you had to fight the whole institution to get to be accepted.  Social activism was assumed.  In fact, it fit very much with Horace Mann's philosophy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who's the founder, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who was one of the founders, you know, always think about some great contribution you make to humankind, and I was greatly honored when years later, Antioch would give me one of the Horace Mann awards, and then there were others.  There were--Antioch had its contradictions too.  There were not a lot of black students despite all that I've said.  I think in my class of '67 [1967], there were seven of us out of probably 160 or 180.
Story_ID: 303760
Speaker 1: Towards the end of my senior year, my fifth year--it was a five-year program, Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] embarked upon what was called, the Rockefeller Program for Integrated Education [sic.  Antioch Program for Interracial Education].  And there was some real issues that emerged and surfaced in the campus.  Antioch was clearly not used to having large numbers of working-class, poor inner-city youth come in numbers.
Speaker 2: Now, I know something about, I heard something about this, you tell if it's--my, what I heard about it was that someone came up with the idea that inner-city gang leaders were, the leadership, you know future leadership of the inner-cities, you know.  So why not identify them and bring them to Antioch and, you know, train them, and give 'em a good liberal education and political education.  And then they'd go back and be able to really lead and organize in their communities, is that the--
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and I was on the committee that helped to draft this plan and got the grant from the Rockefeller Foundation [New York, New York].  And I worked very closely with the then dean of students, J.D. Dawson, on this.  What I thought we--I think what we didn't foresee was how ill-prepared Antioch was for the students who would come, how really not ready they were.  Antioch's faculty was more accustomed to dealing with Coretta Scott King, who was also a graduate of Antioch, and Paul Grahams, and Prexy Nesbitts, middle-class black families' offspring, not kids that had been thrown out of the public school system.  And ironically enough, the two that had the most, biggest incidents in this program were two working-class white kids from the southwest side of Chicago [Illinois] who had a gun fight in the cafe, what was called the Inn Cafe, that many--very famous, all through the region (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Antioch Inn, right?
Speaker 1: Antioch Inn, and they--these, I wasn't there when it happened, but it happened, and it was--
Speaker 2: So these two white kids have a gun fight?
Speaker 1: These were two working-class white kids, two brothers, who had literally a gun fight in the inn, and it kind of broke the bubble and made the faculty and the administration take a hard look at what it was doing.  And then things got more stabilized under the leadership of a wonderful woman by the name of Jewel Graham [Jewel Freeman Graham] who would later become one of the international vice presidents of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], an African American social worker, living in Yellow Springs [Ohio] who took, really took the whole program by its horn and provided more of the supportive mechanisms that this group of students needed, more tutoring, more transition kind of, orientation, that--it was crucial for the program to survive.  Now, under that program, a large number, impressive number of students went through by the end and they have gone on to do extraordinary things.
Speaker 2: Right, they were just--I met some of them in the late '60s [1960s] you know, when I was in college in Ohio, and Billy Broward [ph.] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Billy Broward was one of them.
Speaker 2: [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: LaDoris Hazzard [LaDoris Hazzard Cordell] who's a federal judge out in California.
Speaker 1: Harriet Parker, right here in Chicago, a very prominent attorney, right here.  These were all people who kind of viewed me as the big brother, and I was projected for them as the kind of big mentor, and they're wonderful.  It--when I came back from being in Tanzania--I came back for my last year at Africa--at Antioch, and here was this new campus with all these young brothers and sisters, who were--if I can put it proverbially, (laughter) raising hell.  And it was a wonderful thing to come back to.
Speaker 2: Now, Antioch was the first college--now, this is after you left, but I think it was the first--I believe it was after you left, it was the first school around there anyway, too, where the black students took over a building (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had their own dormitory, absolutely--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they called it the Umoja House.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Now, was that influenced by you (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't influenced by me so much 'cause it really took place after I left, but they started then looking around for people to do some of the training and teaching and they brought me down four or five times to speak about what I had done in Tanzania by that time.  And, but one of the people who was a teacher there was a man named [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers, who would go on to become a professor here in Chicago.  And I think he's the head of the international affairs of the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists and also Bob Rhodes [Robert N. Rhodes], who is a very famous teacher who taught--the two of them both taught at Antioch and also at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio, which embarked upon a similar, kind of experimental type of curriculum that would bring in substantive attention to black concerns and black issues, and a service orientation.  So it was really groundbreaking, and Antioch, as it has been in so many things, was one of the first places to cut its eye teeth on this new approach.
Story_ID: 303761
Speaker 1: But, for me, it was all very consistent with what I had been doing already by that time, which was, when I left Antioch [Antioch College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] in '65 [1965], and went to study in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania--well, the start of it was that I wasn't going to Dar es Salaam.  The real beginning was that I was gonna go to the University College of Rhodesia [University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland; University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe], what would later become Zimbabwe.  And I wanted to go there because I had heard they were involved in something like a civil rights struggle, which was a mistaken impression.  They were--it was much more advanced already.  But, for me, it was a continuation of what had been interesting to me in terms of what had been happening in the U.S. in '64 [1964].  So I was all ready to go there through Antioch's education abroad.  And about a month before I was to leave, no leave, more--less than that, two weeks before I was to leave, the Rhodesian government sent a message to Antioch refusing me a visa, returning their, changing their position, and therefore, wouldn't--denied me entry into the country to go to the University College of Rhodesia.  So at the last minute, a wonderful woman who ran the Antioch education abroad program found the University College of Dar es Salaam [University of Dar es Salaam, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania], Tanzania, which at that point was only two years old.  It was in its second year, and I switched gear and went to then to go to the University College of Dar es Salaam Tanzania in 1965 for the academic year '65 [1965] to '66 [1966].  And I had--the experience altered my entire life entirely.
Speaker 2: Now, to set the stage for this, Tanzania was recently, just recently independent.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], Tanzania was independent.  Here I come in July of '65 [1965] and--
Speaker 2: And had a lot of, there's a lot of violence in Tanzania--or at least--I think on the, right on the coast of Tanzania, with the, between the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Zanzibaris.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Zanzibaris, right.
Speaker 1: Between the Zanzibaris.  There's still tension between the Zanzibaris--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], there was huge--
Speaker 1: There was an up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) uprising.
Speaker 1: There was a mutiny.  There was a, what was called the Colito Barracks mutiny.  And I arrived literally within months after that had been a bit settled.  At the same time in the fall of '65 [1965], three months after I'd been on the campus, the Rhodesian government declared UDI [Unilateral Declaration of Independence] and the white Smith [Ian Smith] government broke off from Britain, and so the university students at university of Tanzania protested, and it was one of the most strident demonstrations I'd ever been part of.  We burned the British high commissioner's Land Rover and Rolls-Royce and burned the British Union Jack, and marched and seized the British High Commission building and we were all arrested.  My mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] (laughter) who had worried about whether I'd get arrested in Mississippi, gets this telegram that I had been arrested in Tanzania.  We were held only for two days, all of the students.  There's a hundred of us or so.  And we were then we were trucked back up to the University College campus, which was outside of the town of Dar es Salaam [Tanzania].  And then we were told we were gonna be addressed by Mwalimu Julius Nyerere.  We were gonna be--he was gonna discipline us.  So he came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, here's, yeah, here's one of the great presidents of independent Africa--
Speaker 1: One of the great, great presidents of Africa.  He came to the campus and he spoke to us with absolute furor in his voice.  And he talked about all we represented and what we had done, and what a disgrace all it was, all that we had done to the British flag and the Rolls-Royce and then as he went out the door, he turned and he winked at all of us (laughter).  I knew in that minute that this had all been done for public consumption, for the world's consumption.  But what he was really saying in that wink was that he was really right with us in our protest against the universal declaration of independence by the white supremacist or Ian Smith government.
Story_ID: 303762
Speaker 1: The meeting with Nyerere [Julius Nyerere] was just the first of several that I would have in the period of time that I was in and out of Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] but it was--it was one of the things that was formative for me, was to get to know Julius Nyerere somewhat and to be at the White House [Ikulu, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania], at his presidential residence, I think a couple times in '65 [1965], '66 [1966] and later in the period of '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].  I was in Dar es Salaam at one of the most exciting periods to be there.  I went there as a student '65 [1965], '66 [1966].  I would later come back to work for the Mozambique Liberation Front [FRELIMO] in '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].  But in that, those two periods of time, incredible stuff was happening.  Dar es Salaam was the center of the liberation struggles in Africa by that point.  I remember going to a seminar, for example, held at a place called Patrice Lumumba Institute, in Dar es Salaam and the person speaking at the seminar was Che Guevara.  It was unannounced.  My professor was teaching adult studies at the Lumumba Institute and also taught me political science, a woman named Irene Brown, a wonderful socialist from Britain.  She told me that, to come by and lo and behold I get there and who's doing the seminar but Che Guevara--the Che Guevara, and that's not unusual in the Dar es Salaam, in that atmosphere of this extraordinary sea town with all the liberation movements having offices there.  And so for me, it was an awakening of a whole new world that I had really not had that kind of exposure to.  I--when I got off the plane in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, the first thing that happened was a group of refugees, students from South Africa, who were students with me at the university, three of four of them, one of them whom would become my roommate, wonderful man named Leffert Singye  [ph.].  They took me immediately to go and listen to a man speak, a record that they had, a 78, to tell you how long ago.  We cranked it to play it.  And it was Nelson Mandela's speech, "Why I'm prepared to die," [I Am Prepared to Die] which, that he gave at the Rivonia Trial, which was in '63 [1963] [sic. 1964].  So it's, you know, this is only '65 [1965], so it was sort of living current history and that kind of thing happened all the time, the, all the liberation movements had offices there.  I spent a lot of time at another place that was called, the Kurasini School for Refugees [Kurasini Special Training Center, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania], which was run by the African American Institute [Africa-America Institute, New York, New York], which later I would learn much about it that was questionable, but at that time, it was an important school for South African, and Namibian, and Zimbabwean and Malawian refugees, all of whom had fled their countries, and had come to be based at Dar es Salaam.  At the same time, during the period that I was there, especially the second trip, Nyerere opened up Tanzania to African Americans, coming as a haven for African Americans to come.  And he urged them to come and bring their skills and resources.  And I have to say that (laughter) it was a kind of mixed bag of folks that came and some of them were quite dubious.  I remember the classic case of a dentist from here in Chicago [Illinois], who had killed his wife.  I can't remember his name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there is a, that's a famous story and--
Speaker 1: That's a famous case.
Speaker 2: --I know he's related to [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right--
Speaker 2: --and there--it's never been really proven that he killed his wife, but they--
Speaker 1: His wife was, his wife was related to Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, right, but--
Speaker 1: But my family is related to Oscar Brown, Jr.  My--one of my aunt's twin sister was Dorothy Brown, who was married to William Brown [William H. Brown], who was Oscar Brown, Sr.'s--the older one, and they had a law practice [Brown, Brown, Green and McLaughlin, Chicago, Illinois] together right there on 47th, in the old professional building at 47th Street and, then it was South Parkway Boulevard [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, Chicago, Illinois].  So we heard a lot about this from the family's point of view.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a celebrated case.  It's been covered on one of the--even the, television magazine shows did a piece on it once.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The family I don't think had any ambiguity about this, and I think he was, it was only more recently that finally he was extradited back to Cook County [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, because I think he stayed in Uganda with Idi Amin for a while.
Speaker 1: I think he stayed in a number of places in Africa.
Story_ID: 303763
Speaker 1: But what I'm illustrating therefore is to say that they weren't just clear-cut political activists who came to Tanzania.  There was a wonderful man named Monroe Sharp, who had been part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] here in Chicago [Illinois] even.  And Monroe ultimately died in Tanzania.  But for a period of time, Monroe was put in jail and it was, it was strange stuff that he had been doing.  And we never quite knew.  And then finally all this would come to a real messy situation when in 1974, just before the Sixth Pan-African Congress [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania], African Americans were detained throughout the country because of a rumor that was going around that they were gonna be involved in a coup attempt against Julius Nyerere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it wasn't, it wasn't clear at a certain point, 'cause I know, what, Congress of Afrikan People had an enclave over there.  I think Center for Black Education [Washington, D.C.] and Queen Mother Moore had a group.  There's a group out of the University of Kansas at Lawrence [Kansas] that was there, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't know all those groups because in '68 [1968], '69 [1969] those groups had started coming through already.  But I was working with FRELIMO, the Mozambique Liberation Front, and the Mozambique Liberation Front had a very clear position on this.  It was that I was to have no contact with any of them whatsoever, because nobody knew who all was in those groups.
Speaker 2: That raises an issue too.  You said that when you arrived, you were basically embraced by people and they tried to get you right into the political flow of what was going on, but isn't there some distrust in terms of--I mean you're speaking to it now in terms of the African Americans being over there, because I mean the United States government has a long arm, and, you know, who knows what a person, even a black person in Africa, may represent ultimately to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was definite distrust, Larry [Larry Crowe].  And there was--and I think that part of what, for example, made my entree with the FRELIMO, with the Mozambique Liberation Front was the fact that the president of FRELIMO, Eduardo Mondlane, had known my family here in Chicago [Illinois].  He went to do his Ph--he did his Ph.D. at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  And while he was doing that, he worshipped and had a social life at our family's church on the West Side of Chicago, Warren Avenue Congregational Church [Chicago, Illinois], which would later become famous--I think I mentioned this earlier--for being the site of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] organizing drives in '66 [1966] when he had the open housing drive [Chicago Freedom Movement] and the Union to End Slums and all these activities.  And Warren Avenue Church was the base for that.  Well, earlier the pastor of that church, Edward Hawley had, had been with Eduardo Mondlane at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio].  So it was--Eduardo then let Edward Hawley marry he and his white American wife, who was from one of the western suburbs, Janet [Janet Rae Johnson Mondlane], and my family was one of the families that received both of them, so that they knew my family.  And so when I came to work and work with FRELIMO in the school programs that FRELIMO was running, I came with already a certain imprimatur from Eduardo.  And I also came with having been there in '65 [1965], '66 [1966] and having met a lot of liberation movement leaders and activists and participants then.  But in--there were certainly moments that there were great suspicions of African Americans.  You remember that at that time, for example, Peace Corps was very active, and Peace Corps was clearly was one of the views.  I remember a Peace Corps woman who had various relations with some of the liberation movement, young people, members of the liberation armies and she was finally thrown out of the Tanzania.  So it was not, it was--you paid the price, and you had to pay a price to create legitimacy.  I think another big problem was that many of the African Americans that came stayed to themselves.  They created new enclaves.  They didn't get enough immersed with the Tanzanian population or with the refugee populations.  And that was I think a source of undoing in the end.  But, for me, it was the very beginning of what would be a long, long relationship to Africa, was those early years.  And I still have friends from that period, it was the first time that I was there in '65 [1965], '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 303764
Speaker 1: By the end of '66 [1966], now, you finished, you completed a course of study at the University College at Dar es Salaam [University of Dar es Salaam, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I finished a course at the University College Dar es Salaam.  It was an amazing year to be there because it's really just as African studies begins to come out on its own and I learned more in that one year of study--the first Congress of African History was organized by a man named Tamu [Arnold Tamu] and Terence Ranger and John Lonsdale, all these kind of progressive British guys basically and, and some others.  Walter Rodney would join that department towards the end of my time being there.  A man--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Walter Rodney is, it's worth it to pause a minute and tell us who Walter Rodney is.
Speaker 2: Walter Rodney, of course, was this great Guyanese historian and revolutionary who became a figure for all of Africa.  His book, 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa' [Walter Rodney] is probably one of the most foremost single pieces about African history and about colonialism.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he seems to be a real link to activists here.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: The former SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] activist [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding] who got involved at the Center for the Black World [sic. Institute of the Black World] in Atlanta, Georgia seemed to really, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think he and the brother who ran the Center for the Black World, [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson and then also John [ph.], the brother that Bob--what is his name, he's a West Indian brother also, a Jamaican?  Walter was very involved in the formation of the Center for the Black World and later when I would work for the World Council of Churches program to combat racism in 1980, we would have a world conference on racism, largely for churches, but it was a worldwide--and we chose as our keynote speaker, Walter Rodney.  But we chose just too late.  We asked him in May and he was assassinated just a couple weeks thereafter.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--just to go back again a little bit.  You mentioned Malcolm X, Bill Sutherland being host to Malcolm X when he was there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Malcolm X, I think, to many black folks who had never been to the continent, or never thought much about international affairs or saw themselves in it, in his speeches, put us in the international world.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And it made it more real to us.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and did a tremendous job of bringing together the struggle in Africa and the struggle in the United States on both sides of the country and that was what led to the decisive break he would later have with the Nation [Nation of Islam] was how much international standing, he, himself, had assumed.  And part of what--most people, a lot of people talk about the impact of the trip to the Mecca [Saudi Arabia] that he made, but I think also his period in Dar es Salaam [Tanzania]--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --and meeting the African Liberation Committee leadership--
Speaker 1: It's strange in the movie, Spike Lee's movie ['Malcolm X'] and this may be Spike Lee's youth that he's really telling here, but he doesn't really talk about Malcolm's Africa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He misses that whole--
Speaker 1: --visit to Ghana--
Speaker 2: --he misses that whole chapter.
Speaker 1: The 'We Charge Genocide' piece at the UN [United Nations] with Alex Kwesane Sasaki [ph.] of Ghana--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  He misses that whole chapter.  And then also the people that Malcolm also interacted with.  Bill Sutherland is great on this because he really helped to arrange many of the people that Malcolm met when he was in Dar es Salaam.  I know that he, for instance, met people from the Congolese struggle at that point, and he met people who would have been--I think one of the people he met was a man named Ben Turok, who was a Jewish white, ANC [African National Congress], South African Communist party revolutionary who was very, very--who was banned from South Africa, had spent time in jail, was in Robben Island [South Africa] with Mandela [Nelson Mandela].  Meeting that kind of person was very instrumental in shaping the new worldview that Malcolm would come back with after he had made the trips to Africa, and then forming the Organization of Afro-American Unity, or whatever that political formation was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --and that, of course, was why, I think, in some respects some people would argue that this is part of what led then, of course, to the need to get rid of Malcolm, was how powerfully connected he had become out of the Dar es Salaam experience.  But I think that was something that came with being in Dar es Salaam.  The same thing was true for Walter Rodney.  I think about that early period that I was there in '65 [1965], '66 [1966] and just the array of people that you met.  I got to hear, to meet and to socialize with people like Agostinho Neto, who was the leader of the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola] of Angola.  When Eduardo Mondlane was assassinated, Amilcar Cabral came from Guinea-Bissau for the state funeral that was held for Eduardo Mondlane.  Then Samora Machel surfaces as being the new leader of FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front], and people like Marcelino dos Santos--
Story_ID: 303765
Speaker 1: I think that this is part of then what decisively shapes me, is being around these people as one's mentors and teachers about Africa.  It was an extraordinary period in which to be in Tanzania.  I often tell people that in 1965, '66 [1966], Nyerere [Julius Nyerere] led an Ujamaa event where the whole town of Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] marched and laid money in the streets of Dar es Salaam.  We laid the money out on the tarmac, on the streets, and it stayed out on the streets until the next morning when the street sweepers would pick it all up.  This was a fundraiser for the whole nation.  And I think, how impossible today that you'd have that kind of an event take place, but this was the spirit of building and of coming together, Ujamaa, uhuru na kazi, freedom and work, that was Socialist in its content but African its character.   That was just an amazing influence for all of us.
Speaker 2: Now, we--every Kwanzaa, you know, every fourth day of Kwanzaa is celeb--that Ujamaa is focused on, a lot of people still call it U-jama (laughter), and I don't know if they really know, you know, understand, but Ujamaa has an economic and social (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, and it's work too--
Speaker 2: --the signature, I guess, the thing that really characterizes the presidency of Nyerere--
Speaker 1: Julius Nyerere and his political philosophy and in some respects the difference between he and Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], you know, because he inherits the mantel of the leadership of the Pan Africanist movement which, you know, it's not then accidental that the Sixth Pan-Africanist Congress [Sixth Pan-African Congress] takes place in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania in 1974, subsequently.
Speaker 2: Now, you're ahead of the curve on this in some ways by sort of default.  You're not allowed to go or you're discouraged from going to Mississippi in '64 [1964], but immediately after '64 [1964], most of those who survived that ordeal in Mississippi go to Africa.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.  And I'm there by that time, already there and really have a base at that point.
Speaker 2: There's a tour and then subsequently Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and some others actually live in Tanzania (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right--
Speaker 2: --moved to Tanzania.
Speaker 1: --that's right, and then I come back because in '68 [1968], protesting against the Vietnam War--
Story_ID: 303766
Speaker 1: I finished Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio] in '67 [1967].  I do children's theatre for about a year and a half all over the East Coast, wonderful children's theatre.
Speaker 2: Children's theatre, really?
Speaker 1: Children's--African folktales for children, performed here in Chicago [Illinois] through the artist program that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Urban Gateways [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Urban Gateways, which my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] had been very close to the wonderful woman who founded it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jessie Woods.
Speaker 1: Jessie Woods.  Jessie and my mother--Jessie was a student of my mother's at the Y, the Duncan YWCA [Duncan Maxwell Branch, Chicago, Illinois], which was in Maxwell Street, the Maxwell Street YWCA [sic. Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].  That's where Jessie met my mother.  So she--and a lot of this is gonna come out in Ronne Hartfield's [HistoryMaker Ronne Hartfield] new book--if it's not out, it's gonna come there, but that's--doing that children's theatre, I come back and did it at a bunch of schools here through Urban Gateways.  I did it in Boston [Massachusetts].  I did it in Baltimore [Maryland], but after doing that, I go and start school at Columbia University [New York, New York] in '67 [1967].  In the spring of '68 [1968], there is a massive protest at Columbia University, one of the first big university protests against the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  I was one of three graduate students that got busted.  I was with the black students when they took over Hamilton Hall, disagreed with most of my colleagues because I thought our protest was also a protest against the war in Vietnam, and lost my fellowship after we were released from jail, after we were busted.  And then immediately thereafter, I was drafted and had to leave the country, and left the country to go to Tanzania.  I spent a period of time in England, a very important period as it would turn out later, because at that point, there was a internal struggle inside of the Mozambique Liberation Front [FRELIMO] that wouldn't let me--it was a very intense struggle that would culminate the assassination of Eduardo Mondlane, but because of that, the Tanzanian authorities wouldn't let me come right away to Tanzania.  So I spent about three months in London [England] and another couple of months doing famine relief work for the Christian Council of Kenya [National Council of Churches of Kenya] because it was the World Council of Churches and the Church World Service that financed me going to work for FRELIMO, to kind of pay me a stipend that paid my fair.  Eduardo Mondlane organized all of that, but it was a reentry then to work for the Mozambique Liberation Front in '68 [1968] and '69 [1969], and at that point, shortly before then, Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] had been in Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] for a while and had had big disputes with the liberation movement leadership that was--all of which was based by '68 [1968], '69 [1969] very firmly in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.  I was there when Eduardo was assassinated and then had the great pleasure to work very closely with one of FRELIMO's greatest leaders, still is one of Mozambique's most revered, political figures, Jorge Rebelo, who was a very well-known poet also throughout Africa and worked in the propaganda and information ministry for FRELIMO.  Until finally then in '69 [1969] as my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] was dying, I came back to this country, and for whatever reason, I've never understand, I never had any further trouble from the draft.  Friends have told me that that was a period when I came back, that they had already had a whole lot of trouble with very political people putting them in jail and didn't want anymore experience.  Although later, this definitely did come back to affect me when I tried to get a job at one point working for the United Nations [UN], and in fact, have tried even recently and clearly have something that's in my history that won't--they won't let me work for the United Nations.  The U.S. government has a lot to say about who gets jobs with the UN, even consultancies, which I have tried to get and have never been able to get.
Speaker 2: And I can imagine under this administration, you'd have a lot of trouble, but would it be--do you think that would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was the case even with the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.
Speaker 2: Oh, was it?
Speaker 1: It definitely was.  And--
Speaker 2: That's kind of, well, sort of surprising in a way.  But I guess, maybe not.
Speaker 1: Lots of people who have had political profiling,  people who were with ALSC, African Liberation Support Committee, for example, who shouldn't have been given positions to work on Africa because they just, they knew so much about Africa, and even the Clinton administration, never, never even considered because of the screening that goes on, political screening of people.
Story_ID: 303767
Speaker 1: In '69 [1969], '70 [1970], I came back.  In '70 [1970], I started working for the American Committee on Africa as an organizer.  And that was pretty early on to have somebody trying to do full-time organizing around Africa and bringing the issues, struggles in southern Africa to African American communities.  I worked here in the Midwest, worked all over the Midwest, hosted every major ANC [African National Congress] representative, helped--we, I was very involved in helping with the film 'A Luta Continua' that Bob Van Lierop [Robert Van Lierop] did, and we used that film very widely to use it as a way of raising consciousness of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you were a student as I was in those days, going to a conference, more than likely you'd see the movie.
Speaker 1: 'A Luta Continua.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, you'd see 'The Battle of Algiers,' 'A Luta Continua' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'A Luta Continua,' and Bob did a subsequent one called 'O Povo Organizado.'  It was supposed to be a trilogy of films.  He never got to the third one, but he did do the second one on the Mozambique struggle because Mozambique was very much a kind of, a model struggle at one point in the '70s [1970s] and throughout the '80s [1980s].  Then I also worked quite closely with the Polaroid Revolutionary Workers Movement.  And that was a group of black workers at the Polaroid Company [Polaroid Corporation] in Boston [Massachusetts], in Cambridge [Massachusetts] actually, who objected to Polaroid being used as part of the mechanisms used to issue the passbooks to people.
Speaker 2: So they would shoot the photos with the Polaroid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they used the Polaroid equipment--
Speaker 2: --Land cameras and then--
Speaker 1: That's right, and I recall distinctly--this is a very interesting inside note for your HistoryMaker series, going with some people from the organization we had here called, the African--The Agenda [ph.], The Agenda newspaper.  [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers was in on this and myself, and we picketed.  We did a flyer at the first Black Expo [Black Business Exposition] that Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ever organized here and Jesse and his colleagues had us thrown out for distributing this flyer against Polaroid at this Black Expo.  But we did the flyer to bring to people's attention that here they had this Polaroid equipment, Polaroid recruiting and Polaroid's role with regard to enforcement of the apartheid system in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute, Jesse Jackson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir--
Speaker 2: --the founder of Operation Breadbasket--
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: --and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: He actually--his organization or he pers- did he personally take part in this?
Speaker 1: I'm sure he had a part directly in this--in the decision--
Speaker 2: --in having you all kicked out of there--
Speaker 1: -out of the International Amphitheatre [Chicago, Illinois].  That's where it took place--
Speaker 2: For?
Speaker 1: For handing out these flyers against the Polaroid Camera Company.
Speaker 2: And, of course, they--he must have come back later to apologize after he found out what it was about?  Did he--
Speaker 1: I have yet to hear (laughter) that apology.  I don't need it, but at the time, it was really very funny.  I'm not sure how well Harold would have remembered all this, but it was one of the early activities that we would do here in the city as part of doing work around the South Africa issue.  At the same time in '70 [1970], '71 [1971], on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], there was a group formed called the--that I was very involved in called, the Chicago Committee for the Liberation of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea.  And at the same time we were involved with Bob Van Lierop's effort to fund an organization in New York called the Africa Information Service, which published a little book ['Return to the Source: Selected Speeches of Amilcar Cabral'] that was--Bob and I hosted Amilcar Cabral coming to the United States, and this book was a collection of his speeches, including in that book, the wonderful speech, Cabral's informal talk with African Americans.  It's one of the finest pieces of political literature that's ever come out of that period of time, and it took place in the basement of the Black Economic Research Center that Bob Browne [Robert S. Browne], who recently died, had founded and that's where we had the African Information Service.
Story_ID: 303768
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me ask you this, when I was in college, I was the most African-oriented student on my campus at Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio], which is, you know, it wasn't, didn't have that many black students, but I was serious, so I was called to a meeting with, where they were showing a film to students they thought would be interested in going to Angola to help Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola], which is headed by Jonas Savimbi, and--Dr. Jonas Savimbi and they showed us a stirring movie of his struggle against the forces of evil over there and Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash] from The Washington Post was featured in this as someone who is urging us, who they used, the people showing the movie, you know, to say that, "Look, black Americans who know something really understand what's going on, you know, like Leon Dash, and if you go over there, you can be of some service to Unita's struggle in Angola," which left me kind of confused, but I decided not to go 'cause I was confused about it.  But they would have paid my way and perhaps paid the way of others to go.
Speaker 2: This was part of a very big offensive.  I can't think of any other word to call it, that was conducted by the South African, by the Unita organization probably with the assistance of the South African apartheid government, and definitely with the assistance of the Central Intelligence Agency [CIA] and it's a couple of key operatives in it.  One was Roy Innis, who was with Brooklyn [New York] CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] at that point and was literally trying to recruit black American mercenaries to serve with Unita, literally, straight up.  John Stockwell, who was at that time running the CIA station, or who had just stopped running it, and has written this book, 'In Search of Enemies[: A CIA Story]'--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --has talked about, but never with enough detail, the money that the U.S. government sunk into trying to get support for Unita flowing out of the black American community.  It was a very important initiative that took place in '75 [1975], '76 [1976], at a point when, for the United States government, strategically, as part of their Cold War thrust, it was very important for them to support Unita, even if it meant being openly seen as being siding with the apartheid government because by that point, '75, [1975], '76 [1976], Unita has a working arrangement, not only with the apartheid government of South African, Vorster [Balthazar Johannes Vorster], but also with the Portuguese to basically attack their main target of their--of Unita's fighting was not the Portuguese, but was the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola] of Angola.  And as you probably will recall by '75 [1975], November, and certainly by December, the Cuban troops have come in to--at the request of the MPLA of Angola to offset the South Africans and a group called, the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola] that also had received CIA money.  And they were trying to do a pincer movement on the MPLA right after independence to eliminate it once and for all.  The U.S. interest was to keep this group, the MPLA, from being successful because they just viewed them totally in Cold War terms.  African nations did not, and the Organization of African Unity, the Liberation Committee of Africa, all of them came out in support of Agostinho Neto and his organization, the MPLA, all of the--many other countries throughout the world, the Scandinavian countries all came in support of MPLA, but one of the groups that they most wanted to have, confused, at least confused, if not openly siding with Unita, was the African American community, and there were a couple, three key names I think should be associated with this.  One was, of course, Leon Dash and the series he did.  Leon is, of course, now down at Champaign-Urbana, Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], where he heads the African studies program [sic. Center for Advanced Study] or something down there.
Story_ID: 303769
Speaker 1: Another was Richard Gibson.  And Richard Gibson was an African American journalist who had written a book by then called, 'African Liberation Movements[: Contemporary Struggles Against White Minority Rule,' Richard Gibson] where he attacks all of the Soviet-backed liberation movements, which at that point included the ANC [African National Congress], FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front], MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola], PAIGC [African Party of Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde], all of those that were doing anything, Gibson attacks all of them.  Gibson would also later be exposed to be one of the operatives on the European continent who would convince African American draft deserters to go up to Scandinavia.  He'd get 'em up in Scandinavia, and then turn 'em over to the U.S. military and U.S. police authorities.  So Gibson was a third--the second and then the third was a woman named Florence Tate.  And I think you may recall Florence Tate from Dayton [Ohio].  She and her husband, Charles Tate, were quite well-known activists.  Florence would ultimately become a publicist, paid by the Savimbi [Jonas Savimbi] government to do public relations work for Savimbi and for Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola].  It's an interesting situation.  It's a story in itself because finally when they would move to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania], her daughter would become married to an MPLA Angola activist.  So you have a family that's divided.  You have Florence doing the publicist work and you have her daughter married to the MPLA, the effective organization that ultimately would become the government.  Now, of course, there is a sad, final story of the MPLA today, but that's another whole major thing to embark upon.  But it was a horrendous and it needs to be really written about in depth because it was, it led to tremendous confusion in the black American community, but one that you mentioned before, the role of Walter Rodney.  And Walter Rodney did an absolutely brilliant analysis that has never seen the light of day.  It should be published as a major book--his analysis of Angola.  And I remember him--I heard him present it at Howard [Howard University] in Washington [D.C.].  He also presented much of it here in a meeting at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  I remember, at least, I know a number of key leaders in Chicago [Illinois], black community heard Walter do that important analysis that he led, that he put forward as to the role of sowing all this confusion in the black American community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is, this stuff is deep.  There's a--to tell the truth, I mean we've interviewed quite a few people involved in foreign affairs and some involved in some things that have since, they've hit the light of day, are odious things and they always say, "Well, I really didn't know," or "I really didn't know what my role was at that time."  And do you have a sense of what people really know about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I think some--
Speaker 2: --I mean I'm speaking generally, but, you know,--
Speaker 1: Well, I think some of these people knew and knew very clearly and know very clearly.  I just recently confronted Alan Keyes, for example, on his role with regard to his work for Jeane Kirkpatrick when he was working for her and helped to lobby against the passage of sanctions against the apartheid government of South Africa.  And he came up with just the most ridiculous, contrived argument, trying to justify his role at that point.  But it becomes a very clear pattern when you then take what he then did for Savimbi, just before he was killed, when he works for Black, Manafort, Stone and Kelly [Washington, D.C.] public relations firm.  I mean some of these people got immense amounts of money for the work that they did and that then becomes what was the motivation that they had for what they did.  It wasn't that they were so confused.  They knew about the money that was involved--
Story_ID: 303770
Speaker 1: I know I've talked to several people that were involved in the junkets to Nigeria during the time period that Ken Saro-Wiwa was in prison and subsequently killed, and they were feted by the Abacha [Sani Abacha] government and came back and everyone from Episcopal priests, to black journalists here in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: To [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun.
Speaker 1: To Carol Moseley Braun herself, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and--
Speaker 1: And they, and I ask them now, what did they think they were doing, and they, "Well, at the time, I thought I was doing the right--," you know, they--some of them still think that they were doing the right thing, and so, very confused.  You know, it's just in- I mean the amount of confusion around, or at least, is professed, is incredible, I mean.  I mean it's hard for me to believe that anybody wouldn't know or wouldn't have any idea.  But then again, the level of knowledge about Africa and African politics is so small, you know--
Speaker 2: It's clearly a problem, but on the other hand, some of the people that we talk about and some of the people involved in these kinds of decisions are people who would take very painstaking initiatives to check carefully about things that would come before them, having to do with things they might be doing in their home base, whatever that might be.  Lots of information is available about some of these kinds of junkets and what's, who's organizing them and who pays for them.  And people are also very sophisticated about what's entailed in them.  I had a recent discussion with people in Washington D.C. who were concerned about the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] not long ago, feting Sun Myung Moon of the Unification church.  And it's very sad to me that some leading members of the Black Caucus didn't do the homework to let them know who Sun Moon is and the role of the Unification church, particularly, in regards to African affairs and affairs involving international questions.  And there's certainly some excuse that could be put forward that often our people don't know, but in this age, there can be no excuse because there's just too much available, that all it does is take hitting a computer button to have flash before you all the background of the people.  And you can check it and counter check it.  And there's now whole chapters that are available to tell what a person may be getting into.  I remember, for example, when we was doing anti-apartheid work here in Chicago [Illinois] at a point when Gatsha Buthelezi [Mangosuthu Buthelezi] of the black, of the Inkatha [Inkatha Freedom Party] organization was reaching out to black professionals all over the United States to try to get their support for his agenda, and as we would later find out--as everybody knew, his agenda was the same as the apartheid government at one point.  It was the sowing of immense violence against the newly installed ANC [African National Congress] government of Nelson Mandela and Buthelezi's armed men killed a lot of people in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Buthelezi, just for the record, he's the leader of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the KwaZulu Nation--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the KwaZulu Nation was in the movie, 'Zulu,' way back when--
Speaker 2: That's right, he played a role in it--
Speaker 1: --was actually in the movie, and it represents an ethnic group in Africa--
Speaker 2: Of the Zulus, yes--
Speaker 1: --that most African Americans are familiar with in some way or another because of the movie if nothing else.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: And they see them as warriors and exciting and so forth.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Men, I think it was a group of black men brought him to Chicago and put him on display, you know, feted him at the Chicago Hilton [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --who, that who saw him as this heroic Zulu--
Speaker 2: That's correct--
Speaker 1: --not thinking about what--
Speaker 2: Of what the implications were of what they were doing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what they did in that act was to go hand-in-hand, right into the trap that had been carefully laid by the apartheid government and its architects because all those initiatives were initiatives that were bolstering the apartheid system and the very people who were opposed to Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress, the very people who were looking for ways to continue apartheid and the separation and the domination in new ways.
Story_ID: 303771
Speaker 1: And I remember intense discussion about this very issue at PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] because in that period of time they wanted to appear at PUSH, and I'm happy to say that PUSH turned them down for Buthelezi [Mangosuthu Buthelezi] to come and to speak there.  Now, some other organizations didn't see this or else made some conscious decisions to identify with what Buthelezi was all about.  One of those was the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations [AFL-CIO] which gave to Buthelezi the George Meany Freedom Award.  And those were the kinds of very conscious decisions that were made that end up with, why Americans are looked upon so disgustedly by people all over the world.  But I think Africa is an arena in which it is really important for African Americans to assume our historic responsibilities and to substantively learn about Africa.  It's not enough to just take the trappings.  It is crucial that we really know the real history and know the players.  I'm thinking of this in terms of history because I've been doing a lot of work recently on the '40s [1940s] and on the work that Paul Robeson and Alphaeus Hunton [sic. William Alphaeus Hunton, Jr.] and W.E.B. Du Bois and the Council on African Affairs that ultimately gets red baited out of existence.  But they did amazing things, like in 1948 at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], they had a rally in support of the African mineworker's strike of that year in South Africa.  They had seventeen thousand people come to Madison Square Garden in solidarity with these African mineworkers that were striking, not only about their wages but about the conditions of work that they had to live, to work under.  And those kinds of actions taken by those of us in the diaspora in that period need to be duplicated now.  And it's really important, but it's not happening.  And I think part of it is our failure to assume the historical responsibility of learning and teaching others about what is really happening in Africa.
Speaker 2: I had a--let's see--well, let's catch up with the chronology, maybe we should just go on and catch up with the chronology--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But do you think it's getting--well, do you think it's getting better?  Do you think our knowledge of Africa is getting a little better (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, I think we're--but it's not substantive enough yet.  Now, part of it is because this is a country where there's no substance.  You can't really learn about Africa in a country, where, for instance, the leading--I remember listening to Katie Couric as George Bush [President George Walker Bush] made that quick public relations blitz trip to Africa that he made and Katie Couric kept saying that morning on 'The Today Show,' ['Today'] "Yes, well, here we are with George Bush broadcasting from the country of Africa."  You know, so we have this sort of country of Africa mentality that we have to go beyond in this country.  So it makes it a bit more challenging, but one of the things that I think that we have always been involved in our Africa solidarity work which--going back to the chronology, if we go back to the period of '75 [1975], '76 [1976] and the crisis around Angola, a lot of that work was predicated upon a heavy emphasis of teaching people about Africa, teaching them about the realities, teaching them about the history of the involvement that we have had with Africa.  I remember talking about this at great length with Belafonte [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte], for example, when we formed an organization in 1975 to support the newly-formed People's Republic of Angola led by the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola].  And The Black Scholar, the American Friends Service Committee, the American Committee on Africa, the United Methodist church, a number of us came together and formed a coalition to support and held right here in Chicago [Illinois], an Angola support conference.  That was a very important event, and we invited here I think probably the first representatives of Angola, the newly founded republic, the United States government--Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] and Kissinger [Henry Kissinger] were even willing to entertain the possibility of U.S. troops to go with the South Africans to defeat Angola because of the backing they were getting from Cuba at that time.  In all that kind of work, we tried to stress education and educating Americans about Africa.
Story_ID: 303772
Speaker 1: In the mid-'70s [1970s], if you came to Chicago [Illinois] and you went to a black function, you know, you would hear people say "A luta continua," you know, "pamoja tutashinda" and "bila shaka," they--I mean, you know, Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright], the psychologist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, Bobby Wright.
Speaker 1: Psychologist on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], you know--
Speaker 2: On the West Side.
Speaker 1: --put this above his mental health center, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And he used to say that we, you know, he--in response to that old saw that, you know, "I ain't left nothing in Africa," "I ain't lost nothing in Africa," he would say, "You lost your mind in Africa, Malcolm [Malcolm X] said, you know, you need to go find," that's the kind of, well, that--
Speaker 2: But I think was really amongst the, certain elite of us.  It wasn't--I mean and really, it didn't go beyond a kind of one tenth of our population.  It didn't permeate enough into a real broad-based mass consciousness about Africa, and that was one of the things that later, that would happen more with the anti-apartheid movement, at least for brief moments with much more media attention and much more media coverage, and there would be a broader awareness, certainly by the time Mandela [Nelson Mandela] gets to be president, everybody in the world knows Nelson Mandela.  But in that earlier period, very few people knew the name of, let's say, Josiah Tongogara of ZANLA [Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army] or the name Joshua Nkomo or even the name of Robert Mugabe in that period.  People didn't know those names.  They had slogans, yes, and we had the slogans but beyond that one tenth who had the slogans, we didn't have people who really understood enough how involved we were with the issues of Africa even at that point.  That was one of the things then by '77 [1977], I began again to feel very strongly that it was crucial and in the interim of roughly '73 [1973] to '77 [1977], I both went back to graduate school, got thrown out of Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for too much political activity, and ended my second--third quest 'cause I tried the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] briefly to try to finish a Ph.D., but I--American approaches to Ph.Ds always were too, too dry and academic with no real application for me.  And I wanted to see--and I had through come through educations that said, "You apply what you learn, you make things happen to change things."  So I came back into the organizing area, and in 1977 moved to New York to work for the American Committee on Africa, and started the Committee to Oppose Bank Loans to South Africa, which was about--this had actually come up many years later in the late '60s [1960s] with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people and SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] people, raising that.  But we then began a campaign to really withdraw money from banks that were involved in making loans to South Africa, so we went after Citicorp [Citigroup, Inc.] in New York [New York], we went after the Bank of America.  It was a very, very big effort, which between '77 [1977] and, and the passage of the anti-apartheid comprehensive sanctions bill [Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act] in '86 [1986] really made a substantive dent.  It went hand-in-hand with all the divestment activities that were done, and, for me, I got very involved then working all over the nation on the issue of apartheid, on working to build the divestment movement, to build the bank loan campaign.
Story_ID: 303773
Speaker 1: And in '79 [1979], I worked also with the Institute for Policy Studies [Washington, D.C.], which, by that point, you may have heard of Leon Sullivan certainly.  Sullivan had released his fav--famous principles, that if corporations abided by his principles, they then would--should be allowed to stay in South Africa.  And we always saw a real contradiction around that and we put out at the Institute for Policy Studies a very famous little booklet called, 'Decoding Corporate Camouflage[: U.S. Business Support for Apartheid,' Elizabeth Schmidt] on the Sullivan principles, which exposed what they were really about.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's your assessment on Leon Sullivan's activities in Africa, I mean--
Speaker 1: I think it's always been about the promotion of corporate capital.  It's been also, always about the promotion of Leon Sullivan.  Yeah, the ledger I think--I've actually talked with leading southern African presidents about this.  When they've asked me the question, "What do we do about this?" because he, he had several major conferences--what did he call them, fairs, big events in West Africa that major leaders of African countries would come to, but the question is, what came out of those things?  They--how much did they lead to real augmenting of American investment in the countries, or did they lead to a large numbers of African Americans starting businesses or joint ventures with African--I think the record's pretty bleak as to what came out of those massive things.  There were great parties for people.  The food was great.  The music was great.  African presidents used to enjoy going to them, but it was very minimal in terms of the actual returns that came out of those events.  They did represent an African American man who clearly cared very deeply about Africa and African issues even though I totally disagree with many of his approaches.  I think I'd have to concede that he, all of his life, cared about Africa.  That would be my overall assessment of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, so at least--
Speaker 1: But certainly in the corporate thing with South Africa, I completely disagree with him.  And I heard recently on 'The Tavis Smiley Show,' a lumping of him together with Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu], and others as a champion of the anti-apartheid movement and I think this was such a distortion of history.  It was just sad that people had had so little knowledge of his role in terms of helping provide new ways for U.S. corporate machinery to enforce, to re-enforce the apartheid government, to oil the wheels of apartheid as Bishop Tutu used to say.
Speaker 2: It seems like he was just sort of a unwitting tool--
Speaker 1: I think he was unwitting, but sometimes it goes back to what you also said was, at times, he was, these were witting tools.  I mean the man clearly wittingly, willingly stayed on the board of General Motors [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] and bought his new Cadillac every year.  I mean he knew what he was doing about that.  So.
Speaker 2: He knew what color he wanted and everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he knew what color he wanted, he knew the size that he wanted, so that there is a certain amount of very conscious decision.  In '79 [1979], after being at the Institute for Policy Studies for a year, largely encouraged by Eqbal Ahmad, the great Pakistani scholar.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that name?
Speaker 1: Eqbal Ahmad--A-H-M-A-D.  He was a contemporary of Edward Said's and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Said--S-A-I-D.
Speaker 1: S-A-I-D.  And he was also one of the people who would have gotten the mantel from Rodney [Walter Rodney] and also Archie Singham [Archibald Singham], great West Indian.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that one?
Speaker 1: It's S-I-N-G-H-A-M.  These were some extraordinary third world thinkers.  Eqbal was with the Algerians.  He was with Fanon [Frantz Fanon] in the Algeria struggle and was here in Chicago [Illinois].  He was one of the people accused of the plot, put Kissinger's [Henry Kissinger] head in the toilet or--do you remember that whole period?  And Eqbal was at the Adlai Stevenson Institute [Adlai Stevenson Institute for International Affairs; University of Chicago Center for International Studies, Chicago, Illinois], and that whole group who had put blood on the, on the files of the Selective Service System.  He was a close friend of that group of nuns and priests, but he was a brilliant thinker, Pakistani.  They're coming out with his book that Noam Chomsky and Isra- unfortunately, Said died before he could write it.  He was writing a preface too, but Iqbal's contribution as a Pakistani activist and scholar, his contribution to Africa's struggles was just, just profound and just wonderful.  He encouraged me to come to the Institute for Policy Studies.  And he then encouraged me to take a job when I was offered at the World Council of Churches Programme to Combat Racism, which I did in '79 [1979] and moved to Geneva [Switzerland] and then started working full time as a major liaison person from the World Council of Churches Programme to Combat Racism with all struggles against racism all over the world, whether they were in England or Australia, and Latin America, Mexico or southern Africa, or the United States.  And I served as the program secretary for this program that was despised by the South African government, absolutely.  They list the World Council of Churches as their number two major enemy, but also despised by certain key forces in this country.
Story_ID: 303774
Speaker 1: Around 1980, you were working for SEIU [Service Employees International Union]?
Speaker 2: In 1980, I'm still at the World Council of Churches in Geneva [Switzerland] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and working for the Programme to Combat Racism and I stayed there until 1983, but it was a great time to be at the World Council of Churches and work with the Programme to Combat Racism because it afforded me the possibility to make relationships with progressive anti-apartheid groups, anti-racism groups all over the world.  And much of the work of the World Council of Churches was really financed by the Scandinavian churches and the Scandinavian government, particularly Sweden, little of the work was financed, little, little, little by the United States churches, despite the fact that the United States churches made the largest hoopla against everything we did.  For example, the World Council got very involved in Angela Davis' [HistoryMaker Angela Davis] case at one time and were very supportive of her when she was on the run.  And in turn, the Presbyterian church gave some help to her struggle, her defense.
Speaker 1: The U.S. Presbyterian church?
Speaker 2: The U.S. Presbyterian church, the same one that just now has done this divestment from Israel.  Did you hear about that, based on the kind of thing, the divestments that went around in South Africa?  At the time, the World Council of Churches got tremendous flak because--and as did the Presbyterian church for being involved in Angela's struggle, in her case.  So that the overall, one of the major jobs that I also had was interpreting World Council of Churches' decisions and programs, but the biggest thing that I did in the time I was there was the withdrawal of the World Council of Churches' bank accounts from all of the banks involved in South Africa.  And this took place in Switzerland, which after chocolate, banks are sacrosanct in Switzerland.  You don't ever do anything against banks.  And I will never forget walking into the World Council and we had the press conference announcing our withdrawing of our monies.  There must have been five hundred journalists in this sanctuary, crowded, just packed with journalists to cover this decision.  And the South African government just went nuts over that.  It was a tremendous blow to their image of being displaced that--by that point, they were attempting reform and trying to do some, put some frosting on the cake, maintain the cake of apartheid intact, but some kind of black chocolate frosting on it here and there to make it look a little better.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the--those were the days I think when they started talking about establishing homelands and that sort of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Establishing homelands.  They started talking about--
Speaker 1: --for the black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the reform vote, letting coloreds vote, letting the colored vote, letting there be an Asian and then ultimately, there would be phased in an African voters' role, but all would vote for separate entities.  And that was all decisively rejected.  And then from '76 [1976] onwards, had come the swelling of the ranks of the armed struggle inside the country, so that by '84 [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], young people are really making South Africa ungovernable as the ANC [African National Congress] call went out.
Story_ID: 303775
Speaker 1: And in '83 [1983], I had the privilege of going illegally in--after I stopped working for the World Council of Churches, I was smuggled into South Africa illegally [by the Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference].
Speaker 2: Now, how did that happen?
Speaker 1: It was an amazing trip.  We utilized a contradiction of having, getting a new U.S. passport, using my real name [Rozell Williams Nesbitt] since most of the people in the world only knew me as Prexy [HistoryMaker Prexy Nesbitt], and going to the Transkei, which was a regular point of entry because by that point the Bantustans that you were mentioning liked to project themselves as being separate nations, so they had a separate passport authority, so we came in that way.  I didn't leave that way, but I flew in from, what was it, virtually another Bantustan, though it was supposedly an independent country, Lesotho--I flew in from Lesotho into Transkei, then went in through the airport at Transkei, using this new passport, which showed no, none of the travel I'd been in, and then met for ten days at a little mission church way out in rural South Africa.  And people came from all over the country.  To give you some idea of the sophistication of this group, the first thing, the first day I was there, these cars were pouring into this little mission and the first thing they do is all go and park the cars around a great, big chapel that was there--a bunch of separate buildings--they park all their cars in almost like a semi-circle around this huge chapel.  And they turn the organ up and nuns never stopped playing the organ for the next ten days, especially when we were meeting.  The reason, all these cars coming from all over South Africa had, all had to go through roadblocks and notorious activity at those roadblocks was that the police would plant listening devices on all the cars.  So to neutralize the car as a listening device, they put 'em up against these organs and they played the organ throughout the whole conference.  That was the level and the sophistication.  We had an infiltrator.  We had one person we knew to be an infiltrator and they decided on a specific strategy on how to handle him and isolate him, and to keep--it was extraordinary sophistication that struck me throughout that whole time.  And finally, I had to flee early in the morning dressed as a nun because the Transkei police had been tipped off that there were people there, and included people who'd had long associations with liberation movements in countries to the north.  So they decided it would be wise to get me out.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you would have fooled me if I was looking (laughter) as a nun.  I mean I don't know.  But I--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No beard.  I had hair in those days, but they put the whole thing around me, the little, the face thing and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seemed to be a rather large nun for the most--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, there's some big sisters there in South Africa (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, so you--that's something, that's incredible.
Speaker 1: And I went out the same way.  There's actually a very famous film about a certain bridge you cross over from South Africa and then you're in Lesotho--
Speaker 2: Which is nominally free, but has--
Speaker 1: Nominally.
Speaker 2: --has--
Speaker 1: But very nominally.
Speaker 2: It's used as a playground by South Africa, right, for only so much--
Speaker 1: Well, it--more importantly it was a place that the South African Special Branch went in and out of regularly, and wonderful people were attacked and killed in Lesotho as they were in Swaziland and in Botswana 'cause, you know, at some point the South African government basically decided it could go anywhere.  And they ultimately would kill people like Dulcie September in Paris, France when she became the new representative of the ANC [African National Congress] to France and Switzerland.  And she had just been with us at the World Council of Churches.  In fact, I still have a suitcase that belonged to Dulcie.  She'd just been appointed.  She had lived for a long time in London [England], and then they shot her in the back of her head.
Speaker 2: That's the kind of stuff you see in James Bond movies, and so forth, except it's too real and too--
Speaker 1: It's so very real and so much ongoing history.   I think most Americans don't have any idea that--and maybe this is--part of this interview is going backward and forward, but right now in the Iraq situation, there's large numbers of those private contractors that the United States is employing in the Iraq War are South African military and police people who have come to see this war as a major place.  Some have just been coming straight out of the South African army, leaving it, just leaving their post, leaving their positions and going for the money.  I think they can get eight, up to eight thousand dollars a month, and so there have been a hundred or so killed.  And then, of course, there was consultation made with this guy, Basson [Wouter Basson], who was a specialist for torture and chemical warfare for the South African government.
Story_ID: 303776
Speaker 1: Were you basically teaching organizing when you were there or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was what we were doing--
Speaker 1: What you were doing, yeah.
Speaker 2: We were teaching political-social change analysis and teaching organizing.  And then the special thing that I was bringing was a lot of information about the other liberation movement struggles 'cause understand, by this point in South Africa, it is completely, anything is banned.  You cannot possess a t-shirt that says ANC [African National Congress] on it.  You can't have a piece of literature that talks about the liberation movement, so though there are underground channels, this was a great opportunity for them to get first-hand information from people who had direct relationships with the liberation movements that only a few of them would have had some contact with.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a time period when the students--
Speaker 2: Absolutely at their zenith--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --absolutely at their zenith, impressive, impressive organizational stuff.  It's the first time that I ever learned about the toyi-toyi and that wonderful militant dance, and movement and songs are beginning to be sung at that point.  It was a great opportunity for me.  It was a great moment of exchange that I have to write much more about at some point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's gotta really be--being a part of this great liberation struggle, I mean it's just got to--yeah, how do you feel now, I mean after that.  I mean there's still a lot more to be done, I know, but having been a part of that and been there, when these things are going on, you know, I mean how did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's one of the greatest feelings that I can possibly have and it's been reinforced for me by the way in which many of my friends have embraced my own children, my son, whose name is Samora [Samora Nesbitt], my other son, who's named is Jele [Jele Magdalina], named after Josiah Jele who was ANC's first representative to the United Nations [UN].  These--embracing of the, of my sons has come out of years of relationship.  Now, some parts are not as happy.  It's very disappointing to me to see, for example, Sam Nujoma today and some of the positions he's taken around questions like homosexuality, and some of the corruption issues that have emerged in some of these countries.  It's been very disappointing.  But on the other hand, there are young people coming along in those struggles who are also bringing up new ways and new points of continuing the tradition of the liberation movements.
Story_ID: 303777
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an analysis?  I have heard that--I mean different people said, some people say it was the economic sanctions that did it.  Some people say it was the union organizing that did it.  I mean they were really adamant about it.
Speaker 2: About the freeing of South Africa.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think it was all of it.  I think sanctions played a role.  The unions were key, but so too was the armed struggle, was the fact of being able to strike, to infiltrate, all of that played a role, so too, were the churches.  All of these sectors of struggle being engaged played a role.  South Africans themselves, put great stress on the international, but they also would point to the community organizations, the United Democratic Front, the UDF, that was formed that at one point had some 1,200 different individual organizations and joined the United Democratic Front.  There was a great deal of careful thinking and analysis that went in.  The people feel there's a tremendous contribution from the frontline states when Angola and the Cubans defeated the South African army at Cuito Cuanavale in the late '80s [1980s].  That was a very important military victory because militarily defeating the Afrikaners.  It was very important.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember there were--there was a lot of--in reading African reports and those kind of publications in those days, there was a lot of discussion about it and what the South Africans said they gonna do to the Cubans and so forth, I mean the upshot of it all is that the Cubans are formidable in the--
Speaker 2: More than formidable.  I think they have almost a mythic status, you know.  And it wasn't just accidental that within months of his release, Mandela [Nelson Mandela] made a trip to Havana [Cuba] and he made a trip also to Algeria, and he went to the places where they felt very grateful for the solidarity that had been expressed.  And then later despite the pressure on him, he would say, "I will not renounce these friends."
Speaker 1: That's right, he said on television, on national television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, very clear.  I think that was one of the things he said very clearly on the 'Nightline' show--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in that town debate thing.  And it is not unrelated to the stance that they have today, you know, and their willingness to take a position supportive of Cuba despite all the pressure by current U.S. administration.
Story_ID: 303778
Speaker 1: Now, was there a moment--I mean was there a incident or a time period that you felt that--I'm sure you all, you believed in the struggle, but was there a place where you think you were over the hill in terms of the release of Mandela [Nelson Mandela] and capitulation of that South African, white South African government?
Speaker 2: I think it was a very difficult moment.  All along, I think I was lucky because I was able to get a kind of southern African prospective because I had so much involvement with all these struggles.  There was a coup effort against Angola, called the Nito Alves coup attempt.  It took place in I think 1976, '77 [1977], '77 [1977], I think.  That was a very difficult moment.  It was a very difficult moment for me when Samora [Samora Machel] was killed, which was in '87 [1987] or '86 [1986], '86 [1986].  Those were difficult moments.  It was very difficult when Samora was killed.  But on--I think coming up against that, you would see people who recovered.  For me, these were very personal recoveries because, for me, personally when Eduardo Mondlane was killed, my mother [Sadie Crain Nesbitt] died within months.  When Amilcar Cabral was assassinated in '73 [1973], my sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] phoned me and within four months, my sister was killed by her husband [Nobel Harris].  So that these deaths for me have a personal family connection, and recovering from these tragedies is, you nev- you really never make it in some ways.  Some part of you is always damaged, I think.  But the--it has also been--these, the Africans that I have known, the southern Africans I have taught me a whole lot and shared with me and my family, 'cause I had the great pleasure of taking my father [Rozell Nesbitt], for example, to southern Africa in 1981 or 1982.  They have always embraced us and I have never felt rejected.  I read much about African Americans who go to Africa and feel rejected and rebuffed and dah, dah, dah.  I've never experienced that.  But now I think, on the other hand, I have always tried to also know the struggles and have been engaged in the struggles, and tried to bring Africans that come here to our struggles here also.  I did a lot of work when I was a trade unionist working with bringing trade unionists in this country to understand better the struggles in South Africa and vice versa and vice versa.
Story_ID: 303779
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  We are following up in an interview that, I mean the last session was held, last session was held November the 9th, 2004.  So we're following up today.  Could you please state your name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Prexy Nesbitt.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today, I think, is the 10th of December of 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], the office of The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 303780
Speaker 1: Guess we can just pick up in the mid-'70s [mid-1970s], say '70 [1970].  Did you--I don't think we talked about the Pan-African Congress [Sixth Pan-African Congress] in Dar es Salaam [Tanzania].  We need to talk about that probably.
Speaker 2: Well, the Pan-African in Dar es Salaam took place in about 1974.  I think it took place in about April.  It had been organize--it had been organized largely by Dr. Sylvia Hill, who was I think the real head of the secretariat here in this country.  I was not invited to it.  I've had a discussion subsequently with her about that with her.  Myself and a fellow named Bob Van Lierop [Robert Van Lierop] were very actively involved in supporting FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] and PAIGC [African Party of Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde] and MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola], and I think that people of a certain ideological orientation were the people that were invited generally.  And Bob Van Lierop and I were viewed as more coming from a more Marxist, more left orientation, not nationalistic enough.  Sylvia has subsequently said that that wasn't true, but I certainly remember with great detail being not invited to attend that.  From all indications that I've gotten from FRELIMO and the MPLA people I know and PAIGC people.  The conference took place in Dar es Salaam.  It was a very important conference, although there were key people that didn't participate like C.L.R. James, for some reasons that he articulated very widely at the time.  There was a really interesting interaction between the African American delegation, and at least in part a group from the liberation movements of the FRELIMO and MPLA.  And I think that it--at the university, separate from the conference, Agostinho Neto gave a very, very important discussion paper to members of the conference and others called 'Who is the Enemy?'  'Quem e o Inimigo?' It's, I happened to know it because it was part of the documents that were later published by Aquino de Braganza, one of Mozambique's leading political figures and an advisor to Samora Machel who was killed in the plane crash that killed Samora Machel.  And in that address by Agostinho Neto, he basically summarized lots of differences and perspectives between the nationalist groupings and the sort of more internationalists--I think it's an incorrect categorization to call them and us Marxist, but it would be certainly the more internationalist oriented who saw the enemy not in color terms as much as in class and in forces that go beyond just color questions.  It was a very important exchange.  It's a discussion that continues to this day obviously.  And it was, it--I think it was part of a very exciting intellectual political period at that point.  And that then would take us right into the period of '75 [1975], '76 [1976] when you have this intense discussion around the nature of struggle, what's the orientation of the fights--who is the enemy, what is the vision for the future, who are your allies, who is your enemy?
Story_ID: 303781
Speaker 1: Do you remember the African Liberation Day in 1974 in Washington, D.C.?  I don't know if you were in the country.
Speaker 2: I wasn't in the country--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I don't think at that time, but I certainly remember it.
Speaker 1: It was a huge turnout of people.
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the biggest, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: There was a debate at Cramton Auditorium at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], where Stokely Carmichael, Kwame Ture--I don't know if he had changed his name by then, debated--what did he debate?  Gosh, I can't think.  But it was a debate over, you know, whether--
Speaker 2: It wasn't Gerald McWhorter or--
Speaker 1: Gerald, yeah, he was there, yeah, he--that was him, yeah, Abdul Alkalimat.
Speaker 2: Abdul was one of the people he was debating with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  That was the, yeah, that was one of the key person--I think that was the key person he was debating over, you know, which way, what political way we ought to go.  And it was, I mean it was a very heated and very, but I can't help, you couldn't help but think that when you were listening to this that it's something that we should be able to overcome (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I think this is true but I think, on the other hand, there were also other things that were really central questions that were involved by that time within the ALSC [African Liberation Support Committee].  There were different tendencies that had developed within the ALSC and where people stood on Angola was one of the differentiating points around--and particularly around the question of support or nonsupport for Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola].  But that was a very nuanced question 'cause some people that were for Unita were for Unita not because of Savimbi's [Jonas Savimbi] black chauvinism kind of approach but because of his alleged Maoist connections, which, in fact, turned out not to be consistently part of Savimbi because by, throughout his life, he would just use whatever came along, and the most consistent paymaster for him was the South African apartheid government and the Portuguese colonial government.  Bob Van Lierop [Robert Van Lierop] and I had learned a lot about Savimbi at the Arnoldshain conference in West Germany that was convened by the World Council of Churches Programme to Combat Racism.  It was held in 1972, I believe and it was a Cunene Dam conference.  It was mobilized to try to stop the Cahora Bassa [Cahora Bassa Dam] project that the Portuguese colonial government was doing and also the Cunene Dam project taking place on the border between Angola and Namibia.  And Bob and I, I think, were the only African Americans who were there.   The American Committee on Africa was there.  We were there as part of Africa Information Service, and at that conference, there was a tremendous amount of information that the Swedish solidarity groups brought forward about Savimbi in their effort to try to stop the World Council of Churches from funding both the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola], the FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola] and Unita, which was headed by Savimbi.  In the view of the Swedish groups--and I think they proved to be very correct, it was only MPLA that was the real genuine liberation movement.  They pointed out these papers and documents that FNLA was getting all this CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] money that Unita was getting, even then Portuguese and apartheid government money.  So that was stuff that we had heard.  And then, in this continuing discussion back in the United States in the period from '74 [1974] to '76 [1976], I think that the voice, the ultimate voice of real influence was Walter Rodney, and Walter Rodney then began traveling the country.  And I have in my archives a paper that he delivered that was just, just remarkable for its clarity and its depth of information.  And Walter's perspective was one that informed and turned around organizations like, I think Irving Davis' organization, the Patrice Lumumba Coalition, Elombe Brath, people in New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From New York, yeah--
Speaker 2: --that then took a perspective that was supportive of the MPLA.  Now, the other thing that was important was that the government of Guinea, headed by Sekou Toure [Ahmed Sekou Toure], somewhere in that period also, made a decision that through the whole African liberation committee and the members of the OAU [Organization of African Unity] in support of the MPLA of Angola and so they were declared the Africa liberation--the OAU liberation committee supported movement was that of the MPLA.  This was a tremendously important period.  I'm happy I was very involved in it.
Story_ID: 303782
Speaker 1: We founded, along with The Black Scholar, the American Friends Service Committee, the United Methodist church, an Angola support committee, and I was asked to be the chair of that committee.  And we would have then later in '76 [1976] a major conference here in Chicago [Illinois], welcoming people from the military front and the political front of the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola] of Angola.  That was quite a remarkable conference at that time because, you know, we were flying in the face of the Ford administration [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.], which was right on the edge of going into the military foray, military fray in Angola because when the MPLA government declared itself independent in November of '75 [1975], shortly thereafter, the South African government militarily invaded Angola, began to march from the south.  The FNLA [National Liberation Front of Angola] with new support from the United States CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], marched from the north and they were trying to take over this newly declared republic of Angola.  And had it not been for the Cuban support, that, that would have never happened, the independence of Angola.  It would have been overcome by South Africa.  Now, there's some very significant scholarship out there that really tells the story, but the South Africans invaded, assuming that the Ford administration was gonna send U.S. military troops to go right along with the South African troops.
Speaker 2: Why did the U.S. hesitate, do you think?
Speaker 1: I think they hesitated for a number of reasons.  Number one, I think it was still far away. I think they felt that the South Africans could handle it.  There was the whole factor of the black community in the United States, what would happen?  There was a force on the streets.  We had a march here in Chicago, for example, two, three thousand people, U.S. out of Angola.  They had a march--and you know, you think back about this and it was a bit remarkable.  It sort of fore- it forecasts the kind of popular mobilization of what happened later, but they had trade union marches in New York of eight, ten thousand people on Angola (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it's hard--right, it's hard to imagine getting, you know, a couple of hundred people--
Speaker 1: The American people.
Speaker 2: --worked up about Angola today, you know.
Speaker 1: Look at right now.  Look at--here we have one of the worst pandemics, worst crises in the world in terms of the HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] crisis.  You can hardly get seven hundred people who care about it, let alone march over these issues.  So I think it was a remarkable, remarkable story.  That period then of '76 [1976] and '77 [1977] goes right in for me almost immediately into my beginning then to professionally work--what I call professionally work, on the South Africa issue.
Story_ID: 303783
Speaker 1: I just wanna go back a minute to Walter Rodney.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and this may be--what do you, it seems to me that Walter Rodney was able to talk to--I mean when I reflect back to that scene in Cramton Auditorium [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and the divisive atmosphere.  It seems like Walter Rodney was a person who could bridge the gap, you know, between people--he seemed to be the one person that could go anywhere and deliver a solid message, you know.
Speaker 2: I couldn't agree with you more.  I think that he's one of the most remarkable, charismatic, informed personalities that has ever been produced in the West.  His knowledge of African history, of course, he was one of most profound scholars who was ever around, around questions of Africa, his commitment level.  That's why he was killed.  When I think in 1980, he was killed, I was at that time working for the Programme to Combat Racism in the World Council of Churches and we were convening a world conference on racism.  And we had invited Walter to be the keynote speaker.  He never got to make that because he was killed before that conference.  And I think he was clearly deliberately killed.  I think his death and the death of other people like Malcolm [Malcolm X] and Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] deaths, these deaths so clearly involve other levels of engagement with the killing than just the superficial figures that get identified.
Speaker 1: Yeah, later on, Maurice Bishop is killed in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's another one.  And, of course, in the death of Samora Machel, the death in that famous plane crash which, these are deaths that someday there needs to be a major commission to really investigate it, because with time, there will come--there'll be dislodged, bits of information that will really indicate much deeper levels of background and motivation and engage--involvement by other forces other than the small figures who get identified as having been the trigger people in this.  As we saw, I think, with the death of Stephen Biko in 1977, you know, and on the first, in the first level of looking at that, you'd say it's some crazy police who beat this man, they strip him naked, they put him in a car and they drive with him naked and dying, brain hemorrhaging for thirteen or fourteen hours, naked in the back of this police van.  But, in fact, if you probe it further, you find that Stephen Biko was the subject of cabinet meetings and deliberations about how to get rid of Stephen Biko.  So I think that we have to put that in the context of the use of assassination as a political weapon, particularly against people of color, particularly against black people in the United States and Africa and key leaders.  It's, it was that, it's the motivation for COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] on a much deeper level.
Story_ID: 303784
Speaker 1: Now, there was a lot of discussion about--and sometimes it was attributed to paranoia or ego-tripping, and people would say, "Well, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] has got my phone tapped," and all that, you know, it was popular.  People involved in the movement would say this stuff all the time.  But then in the late '70s [1970s], when the FBI files were released and opened, they found out there actually were, (laughter) the names were actually in these files. So, and so the shockwave kind of ran through some people that may not have even believed what they were saying themselves until they actually say that.
Speaker 2: I think that's very true, and I think it's very documentable.  I happen to know in my own case that working with one of the most reputable attorneys in this City of Chicago [Illinois], later would become a deputy corporate council for Harold Washington, he filed on my behalf and my family's behalf for my own family files and individual files under the Freedom of Information Act [FOIA] when it was still possible to do that, and several things immediately became clear.  One was that key files were never released to us.  For example, the Central Intelligence Agency [CIA] file, and I worked for the Mozambique government, so I had to declare myself as an agent of a foreign government as required by law.  And I know because of that, that the Central Intelligence Agency, I'm sure, monitored to a very large, large extent what I did.  I also know that the--as a result of his filing the Freedom of Information Act that there was a separate cross file kept on myself and with, my relationships with the African National Congress [ANC], which at that time was viewed as a terrorist organization officially.  And so I'm cross-filed in that file and as would be a lot of other people like [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers, for example, who was a very important figure here in Chicago.  I think also though that, in my particular case, my uncles were very politically involved.  My uncle, George Nesbitt [George B. Nesbitt], was one of the people that most documented the violence against black GIs, black soldiers, in the newly integrated [U.S.] Army during World War II [WWII].  And his letters to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] have been the basis of a lot of scholarship about how much violence went on.  Well, the Army, as a result of his letters, what they did was to segregate him to Australia and they sent him out into a rural part of Australia by himself.  That was his assignment, to get rid of him and to keep him from being able to be effective any longer.  So there is a major file on my uncle, George Nesbitt that--as well as material, supportive material.  I don't know if it will ever see the light of day.  You know, the United States has done as much--just like the South African apartheid government did--to expunge files.  You know, you hear all the time about what was done in post Stalin [Joseph Stalin] in Russia [Soviet Union], but you don't hear about what was done or is being done in this country to expunge files of people that were gathered.  And we do know some more publicized stories around the MacArthur hearings, MacArthur army hearings [sic. Army-McCarthy hearings] or senator, but it's always made to look as if it's an aberrant behavior, as if it's a total exception when, in fact, what we have seen is patterns that clearly indicate, especially with regard to activism in the black community, consistent patterns of monitoring and keeping information and also appointing, hiring, black people to serve as agents and agent provocateurs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right--
Story_ID: 303785
Speaker 1: These were the days of the red squads, the Chicago Police Department [CPD] had what they called a Red Squad, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct--
Speaker 1: --ostensibly to target Communist groups.  They seemed to be monitoring everybody in the city that was organizing for any reason, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  So a religious organization like the American Friends Service Committee, for example, is one of the first targeted. I'm sure that Bishop Jesse DeWitt, who was bishop of the Northern Illinois Conference of the United Methodist Church, the United Church of Christ.  Any--the West Side Christian Parish [Chicago, Illinois], any of these organizations that were at all speaking out on issues got files and were infiltrated.
Speaker 1: And I've--we've interviewed some of the members of the African American Police League and they've--and [HistoryMaker] Howard Saffold and [HistoryMaker] Renault Robinson and others talked about the consent decree with Judge Prentice Marshall, I mean, the discovery of some of the Red Squad files here and that decree that made it illegal to do that anymore, you know.  Do you have any thoughts about any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's only the tip of the iceberg because those would only be the ones that were related to the Chicago Police Department.  But what we--what you don't also hear enough about is what the Chicago [Illinois] offices of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] did, what was done by the federal offices of the FBI against people involved here in Chicago.  There's been a lot of discussion, for example, about the FBI's monitoring of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was very active.  Well, you can be sure that that included his monitoring any and all persons that were involved with Dr. King in the period that he was here in Chicago.  My own church, the Warren Avenue Congregational Church [Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side, which was the physical headquarters of Dr. King, I know that there were members of the church who were all interrogated, visited at home by the FBI just because the church was hosting the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and Dr. King's organization in the church.  My father [Rozell Nesbitt] was the treasurer of the church.  He told me many times about this and it ultimately was part of the pressure that led to the demise of that church as such on the West Side of Chicago. So I think that there is much more history to this kind of infiltration and pressure on people than ever has been revealed in this country's social history.
Story_ID: 303786
Speaker 1: Another example that would take us back to discussing apartheid South Africa is that I remember that in 1977 when I started working full time for the American Committee on Africa, I think in that period from '77 [1977] to '79 [1979], an organization [U.S. Labor Party] run by a man named Lyndon LaRouche--I can't remember the name of the organization, but it was a right wing, really eccentric, crazy organization.
Speaker 2: The Libertarian Party?
Speaker 1: It wasn't--I think it was a forerunner to that--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --but it'll come to me.  And they were doing two things, number one, they were systematically infiltrating all of the anti-apartheid organizations in the United States and providing the names, addresses, homes, telephone numbers of members of those organizations to the South African government.  They had a direct link to the South African government and representatives in this country.  Secondly, they infiltrated the African National Congress [ANC] in London [England], members of this LaRouche organization, individual members, went to London pretending to be sort of anti-apartheid activists when, in fact, what they were doing were infiltrating the circles of exiled South Africans who were part of the African National Congress and the South African Communist Party who were living in London at that time, which would be in the '77 [1977] to '79 [1979] period, so that in effect you have the Lyndon LaRouche organization actively collaborating with the South African apartheid government.  Now, that's the active part.  You also would have going on in that same period of time because now, we now know--not exactly the same period of time.  Just before that, you have things happening like the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] providing the information that leads to the discovery of the underground personality of Nelson Mandela.  Nelson Mandela when he was underground in that period of '62 [1962], '63 [1963] in that period and moving around, the reason he was caught by the South African police was information that came from the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.  So I think this is another whole aspect of this story that has yet to see the light of day.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, well, '77 [1977], you work full time for the--
Speaker 1: In 1977, I started working full time for the American Committee on Africa, based out of New York [New York] and organizing in the specific sector of what was called the Campaign to Oppose Bank Loans to South Africa.  I started working first with some major trade unions to get them to withdraw their bank accounts, their organizational bank accounts from any banks that were involved in making loans to South Africa.  There were a couple of Chicago-based organizations, Fur and Leather Workers Union [International Fur and Leather Workers Union], the Amalgamated Meat Cutters union, it's associated later with Charlie Hayes [Charles Arthur Hayes], which were among the first, District 65 and the Distributive Workers Union, with the famous figure [Cleveland Robinson] who had worked with Paul Robeson and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.  Robinson is his last name--it'll come back to me, but working with him, this wonderful trade unionist in New York, his organization was the second or third.  Then I think it was followed by the auto workers union [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW)].  They would, with great visibility and a lot of publicity, withdraw their bank accounts from banks, their banks who were involved to making loans to South Africa.
Story_ID: 303787
Speaker 1: So 1977, this is, the South African Consciousness Movement is boiling at this point, really--you know.
Speaker 2: In '77 [1977], you have happening in South Africa a number of things.  You have the Black Consciousness Movement really picking up, it's the post-Soweto period when the, all those young people influenced by the massacres of Soweto [Johannesburg, South Africa] and Alexandra [Johannesburg, South Africa] and in the cape, in Luonga [ph.], you have that group of young people who joined the exiled liberation movements and bring new force.  You know, by this point, you have serious guerilla armies of eight, ten, twelve thousand trained guerilla fighters who are based primarily at that point in Angola.  Very few are in Mozambique but, that they're ready--they're already infiltrating back into the country, and so you see a peaking, and a really serious increase in the number of guerilla actions that begin to take place inside the country.  The trade union movement begins, strikes.  There's a momentum growing that's gonna ultimately lead to the period of the late '90s [1990s]--I mean the early '90s [1990s], where the ANC [African National Congress], ANC's Oliver Tambo says, "We'll make South Africa ungovernable."  It's during that period that I start to work full time, so that from 1977 to '79 [1979], besides working on the bank campaign [Campaign to Oppose Bank Loans to South Africa], I think I spoke on about six or seven hundred campuses and was very involved in helping to organize divestment movements, movements on the campuses to get their monies dissociated from companies that were involved in any way with South Africa.  Toward the end of that period in '79 [1979], '78 [1978], very much encouraged by the late Eqbal Ahmad, this brilliant Pakistani scholar who died about two, three years ago.  I go to work at the Institute for Policy Studies [Washington, D.C.], and so I'm living in New York [New York], still doing some stuff, organizing around the bank campaign to get people to take their money out of banks involved in South Africa.  We had in New York, the New York Committee to Oppose Bank Loans to South Africa, and then I'm also working as a director of the Africa project of the Institute for Policy Studies.  And in that capacity, I was very involved in encouraging a couple of my staff, one of--both of whom would go on to great prominence, Elizabeth Schmidt and Kevin Danaher.  Kevin Danaher is a person who is probably the primary figure of the anti-globalization movement today.  He runs Global Exchange [San Francisco, California], which is the organization that recently brought in the international monitors to monitor the elections that we just had in the United States.  They were both, were sort of my--what's the word?--protegees I guess, although they were wonderful, I learned as much from them as they did from me.
Story_ID: 303788
Speaker 1: One of the most important contributions we made in that period was the piece that was the rebuttal to the Leon Sullivan approach, to the Sullivan principles that would have allowed U.S. companies to stay in South Africa.  There's a huge historical revisionism taking place these days that is projecting Leon Sullivan as if he was one of the great proponents of liberating South Africa when, in fact, he was one of the main people who wanted to disguise and maintain U.S. corporate links and underpinning of the apartheid system of South Africa.  And, of course, all of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his position?  Give us his position.
Speaker 1: His position at that time was that he was a reverend of a very large church, Baptist church [Zion Baptist Church] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He was, ran an organization called, something like Opportunities Industrialization Corporation [sic. Opportunities Industrialization Centers], got a lot of federal monies.  He also was a member of the board of General Motors Corporation [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].  And so we used always to jokingly talking about his coming to rallies in his Cadillac, in his gilded Cadillac, to talk about freeing the black people of South Africa.
Speaker 2: And you're not just kidding.  He had a gilded Cadillac, right?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I'm not kidding at all.  And this is--he would later go on to continue this thrust of urging people and nations to go the corporate way of joining hands with the likes of Shell [Royal Dutch Shell Group, The Hague, the Netherlands], and BP [British Petroleum; BP P.L.C., London, England], and General Motors as a way to emancipate themselves.  Well, he emancipated himself.  There's no question.  I'd love to look at his individual incomes and holdings all through that period of time, but he certainly did not in any way contribute to the ending of the apartheid system.  He, his methodology was one for sustaining apartheid, and that's why the piece that we did called, 'Decoding Corporate Camouflage[: U.S. Business Support for Apartheid,' Elizabeth Schmidt] was very important at that particular time.  It was heralded by the liberation movements inside the country, both the ANC [African National Congress] and organizations like the United Democratic Front.  So there was just hundreds of thousands of printings of that little publication which we did, and people should know that in South Africa then if you advocated for the disinvestment, it was a punishable act under the Terrorism Act [Terrorism Act No. 83 of 1967].  If you said publicly as Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] did many times that, in fact, U.S. corporate investment and corporations staying in South Africa only were bolstering apartheid and you called for the ending of those corporates--corporations' involvement, you could then be punished under the Terrorism Act, up to fifteen years in jail.  So there were many brave, brave South Africans figures and individuals and organizations that despite that, called for this ending of corporate involvement as an important component to be linked to the internal political struggle, the strikes, the school boycotts and the, also the guerilla struggle inside of South Africa.
Story_ID: 303789
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979], based on all that kind of work, I was invited to become the program and research secretary of the Programme to Combat Racism of the World Council of Churches based in Geneva, Switzerland.  And then that began probably one of the most crucial phases of my own work in solidarity with Africa.  I moved to Geneva, Switzerland.  I then would be working with a program that financed antiracism struggles literally all over the world.  And I began to meet people from all over the world who were involved in antiracism actions, whether they were Aborigines in Australia, or Maoris, Maoris from New Zealand, or people coming from the antiracism, anti-Semitism struggles in France or people from the liberation movements in Africa, or people from Native American struggles up in Canada.  I remember going to a place, Yellowknife in the Northwest Territories of Canada in the dead of winter, and being on dog sleds, going to meet with the Denali Indian people, who, today, have complete governance over all their land in that Northwest Territory.  But, at that point, they were fighting still against the racism and paternalism of the Canadian government.  It was a wonderful opportunity for me, and was a beginning of some work and associations that never ended, that have gone on throughout the rest of my life.  I worked with people who would ultimately be the basis of Chiapas [Mexico] and the struggle out of Mexico.  And all of this was funded by the Programme to Combat Racism of the World Conference- World Council of Churches.  There was backlash against all this.  There was a very strong--these were the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, 1980.  And the, in particular, I remember the CBS movie that was done, a CBS, '60 Minutes' show against the World Council of Churches, a vicious propaganda movie.  I remember an article that appeared in the Reader's Digest in that period, 'Karl Marx or Jesus Christ, who was the real master of the World Council of Churches?' [sic. 'Karl Marx or Jesus Christ? Which Master Is The World Council of Churches Serving?']  These were part of the offensive against organizations like the World Council of Churches.  I remember meeting repeatedly with church groups from Germany and the United States who didn't like the work that was being done by the World Council of Churches.  It was interesting because the United States was one--the United States' groups and organizations, churches, Salvation Army, for example, were amongst those most complaining against it, but if you were to look at which churches supported the work, the least amount of money to support the antiracism struggles came out of the very parts, countries, that were most vocal in opposing what we were doing.  It was an eye-opener for me to see how deeply entrenched institutionalized racism could mean and what it meant in terms of the pressures it could bring on a whole program.
Story_ID: 303790
Speaker 1: Right, now, and I think there's been a recent discussion in something I saw recently about World Council of Churches saying that the liberal thrust for World Council of Churches is actually outside the U.S.  It's not in the U.S. branch of World Council, you know, which I never really thought about it that way, you know, where it was, hm, it makes sense, you know, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think that those churches with the ecumenical bent have paid a tremendous price, because those more liberal churches are the churches that are under the  most offensive of the right wing evangelical churches today, and have paid the price, also declining membership, declining support, so that many of their members have been exposed to and have been hit by the kind of counter offensive that has come that's been attacking the liberal positions that many of these churches took on many, many issues.  For example, on the whole issue of same-sex marriages and gay and lesbian relations, the United Church of Christ has just recently paid a tremendous price.  And it's interesting that they've just now, a week ago, had the major networks refuse their adver--television, paid television advertisement that was just talking about their position on the matter, and that the major networks refused to allow them to put a paid advertisement on the air that just gave their position on the question of being a church that was open to gay and lesbians joining in that church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wonder if the network policy was as they stated it.  I mean, I don't know.  I hadn't paid attention in the past if other church groups had--or denominations, had ads on network television.  I'm not sure, I don't remember any necessarily.  But, I don't, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Their stated position was that they avoid controversy, that they have a policy of not taking any paid advertisements that may be controversial.  And that's very interesting.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought they--it was that they didn't take any religious advertising.
Speaker 2: No, it was around the controversy.  And I think if we, some--
Speaker 1: It was controversial (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's amazing, isn't it?  It's amazing, and I think that that's sort of an indication of what we're--the period that we are entering--
Story_ID: 303791
Speaker 1: For me, in nineteen--in the 19--period of 1983, I think I'd have to be in that group that said that we saw ourselves getting ready to work for the remainder of our lifetimes on being in solidarity with the struggles in southern Africa, especially the struggle in South Africa and Namibia, because by this time Angola and Mozambique, although they're in tremendous difficulty because of the South African-backed proxy wars that are hitting these countries, we see ourselves as being there with those countries throughout that period.  And then, for me, after a little stint trying to go to graduate school, I go into trade union organizing and start working first with the Service Employees International Union [SEIU] and then work for District 65 [Distributive Workers Union] here in Chicago [Illinois].  And always it's with a view to try to link the international with the domestic.  It's coming out of sort of Malcolm X's old adage that you couldn't understand what was happening in Mississippi if you couldn't understand what was happening in the Congo.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's interesting in the movie ['Malcolm X'] that Spike Lee made about Malcolm X, it was the international aspect of Malcolm X that was missing from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was most missing--
Speaker 2: --completely missing, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in what was otherwise a quite good documentary.  That whole international dimension is completely absent.  I always have found that [HistoryMaker] Judy Richardson's documentary ['Malcolm X: Make It Plain'] on Malcolm is really much better, I think, in that respect.  But even that doesn't go into it with the depth that Malcolm saw, the need to have those international connections.
Story_ID: 303792
Speaker 1: Certainly, we were firsthand exposed to this with regard to the book that we edited, Bob Van Lierop [Robert Van Lierop] and I, of Amilcar Cabral's writings and speeches, 'Return to the Source[: Selected Speeches of Amilcar Cabral]' where Cabral comes straight out and says to, in that book, now almost out of print, 'Return to the Source,' he comes straight out and says to the African American audience that we had gathered there in Bob Van Lierop's basement in Harlem [New York, New York]--I think it was in 1972 or so, Cabral says that it's crucial that we make change in the United States as the greatest contribution that we could make to solidarity with the struggles in Africa.  And in the '80s [1980s], that's what I begin to do.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that book--just to pause a minute--I think that book made a tremendous impact on anybody interested in the struggles in Africa.  And people--I know that book was really considered as one of the most important pieces to come out, you know, during that time period--
Speaker 1: Well, it's--that always makes me feel very good because I'd--the bibliography of the book, for example, was done on my kitchen table late, late into the night.  There were no computers at that point, with paste and, and scissors and two typewriters going, and Bob and I really put that together.  It was a great honor to have the close relationship that I had with Amilcar Cabral, and that my sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] would also have when she filled in for me a few times meeting with him and going to meetings where he spoke, so that there was a real relationship.  I had actually met him earlier when I worked for FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] at the Mozambique Institute in Dar es Salaam [Tanzania] and when Eduardo Mondlane was killed in February '69 [1969], February, Cabral came from Guinea-Bissau to Dar es Salaam for the funeral.  And I was one of the people who was helping with the arrangements.  I saw him in that period, so I knew him from there.  And then I also met him and spent some time with him when I was at the Rome [Italy] conference in June of '70 [1970] in support of the peoples of African colonies.  It was largely put together by the Italian Communist Party and trade unions in Italy.  It was at that meeting that these leaders of the struggles of the African colonies, Portuguese-speaking African colonies, of Guinea-Bissau, Angola, Mozambique, Sao Tome [Sao Tome and Principe], that they all met with the Pope [Pope Paul VI].  And the Pope gave his blessings to the struggle against Portuguese colonials.  It was a very important meeting.  And it was a very important part of their struggle, was this political work that they did throughout the world.  And it was, I think an important lesson for those of us like Bob and myself and other people, Craig Howard, for example who was with the African Research Group, and a number of other people.  I can remember Gayla Cook, a woman who went on to do film, that was, 'The River Niger.'  She was a real person who did that film.  We were all influenced very deeply by Cabral and others like him.  Samora Machel too, the same character, the same trait, of waging the political struggle, the importance of politically saying to the world what you were about and who was the, who you were struggling, and being very clear about that.  Those were things that were very important.
Story_ID: 303793
Speaker 1: For me, that then led to, I think, the fact that in 1987, the Mozambique government--I first would go into working with Harold Roger- with Harold Washington as a mayoral assistant in the City of Chicago [Illinois] until, literally, it was just, I guess, two years or so, and just as--just before Harold's death, the president of Mozambique, Samora--Joaquim Chissano approached me and said, "We would like to ask you to be a special representative of Mozambique in the United States, and to form organizations in support of us in the United States."  And I went to Harold Washington--I'll never forget this and said to Harold, "This is the invitation that has come to me.  I'm working for you as one of your special assistants, working under your chief of staff, and I wanted to have your permission to go on and take up this offer from the Mozambicans."  And Harold immediately, immediately understood the importance of my doing that work for the Mozambicans and it was then on a trip that I made to Mozambique that I learned that Harold had died.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1987?
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] and toward November, I think, just about toward Thanksgiving.  And I went to President Chissano, and I said that Harold Washington had just died--oh, I guess I must have been in the north and I called President Chissano.  Well, he made an arrangement for a helicopter to pick me up in the north of Mozambique, an army helicopter, bring me back to the capital of Maputo [Mozambique], put me onto a plane and shoot me immediately to a connection is in Lisbon [Portugal] and then a connection directly back.  They paid for the whole thing.
Speaker 2: This is a technical point.  Can you spell Chissano for us?
Speaker 1: C-H-I-S-S-A-N-O, it's Joaquim Chissano.  It's J-O-A-Q-U-I-M.  There's an interesting story that I won't be able to go into here, but Joaquim Chissano was a very--he was very familiar with African American struggles.  It was through Joaquim Chissano that Howard Fuller, who would later become Owusu Sadaukai, who would visit Mozambique on a somewhat infamous or famous trip that he made into the liberated areas of Mozambique during the guerilla war when Mozambique was fighting the Portuguese government.  But in any event, I got put on this plane by President Chissano.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, wait a minute (laughter).  What is that story?  Maybe we should have that story.
Speaker 1: That story is, in essence is that in the film, 'A Luta Continua,' is a bit of footage that shows an actual attack on the delegation that was marching with the FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] soldiers in northern Mozambique in Cabo Delgado Province.  During the march, the plane attacks the delegation.  And the reason that they were able to do that was that Howard Fuller and some others who had insisted that they had to be taken back to Dar es Salaam [Tanzania], which was a staging point.  Tanzania was the country to the north that supported the guerilla war, FRELIMO, in Northern Mozambique.  And Howard and others decided during the march that they couldn't do it anymore, for whatever reason and had to be--go back to Tanzania.  Chissano, I think, was the leader of the group said, this is--"We don't do this.  It compromises.  It makes us very weak to break off part of the delegation to take you back."  And what happened then was, Chissano told them not to do any publicity.  And no sooner had they got back to Dar es Salaam, then they held a press conference.  And on the basis of that press conference, planes then attacked the remaining delegations in Cabo Delgado and they could have been killed, but the actual attack is in the film, 'A Luta Continua.'  And so that's part of why it's a very famous moment in Mozambican historical lore about the march in liberated areas.  See, these marches were the height where they captured the whole nature of the guerilla struggle, that, that would ultimately be successful over Portuguese colonialism.
Story_ID: 303794
Speaker 1: But the scale of that struggle--the planes that were used were the planes that were coming from--Portugal being a member in NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], coming from the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration that gave, in 1971, gave the Portuguese colonial government $436 million in what was called, the Azores package.  See, I think one of the things we have in this whole history that's not told, is how integral the United States is to obstaclizing [ph.], to creating the difficulties, how much we're on the opposite side to the march for freedom taking place on the African continents again, again and again.  And in my lifetime, I've been very fortunate to see lots of this from the African situation itself and as a participant in the solidarity way or in more directly but that chapter in Mozambique is particularly one that I often think of as having a very strong American roots because, you know, remember Eduardo Mondlane, the founder of the Mozambique Liberation Front [FRELIMO], got his education here at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  He married his wife, Janet Mondlane [Janet Rae Johnson Mondlane] at the Warren Avenue Congregational Church on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois], so there is a, a strong American connection to this whole saga of the unfolding of the African liberation struggles.
Speaker 2: And for the record, Harold Fuller is currently living in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  He ran for city council, right.
Speaker 1: That's correct (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) one of the city council seats.
Speaker 1: And he was a former superintendent of education, of schools, I think at Milwaukee at one point.
Speaker 2: I think so too, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think he is openly now a black Republican, I think.  But I have always wanted to, to talk directly with Howard about what happened.  And so I got--I know this from the Mozambican side and I know it from Bob Van Lierop [Robert Van Lierop], but it is an interesting story because there were not that many African Americans except for people like Leon Dash [HistoryMaker Leon DeCosta Dash].  Most African Americans, ironically, probably went in and examined these struggles from the point of view of the colonial forces or the apartheid side.  Very few went in from the way that Bob Van Lierop and myself did through the liberation movement side.
Story_ID: 303795
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That Cabral Institute [Amilcar Cabral Institute of Economic and Political Research] was important at the time because there are so many people who were touched by IFCO, the Interreligious Foundation for Community Organization.  It funded Irving Davis, and funded the people who went to Tanzania in the early '72 [1972], '73 [1973] period, responding to Nyerere's [Julius Nyerere] invitation for African Americans to come and settle in Tanzania.  IFCO helped set lots of that up.  Irving Davis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The IFCO--let's go back again.  So we were talking off camera, so--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --let's go back and reconstruct this, but we were talking about [HistoryMaker] James Forman, one of our heroes tacking this reparations note on the--
Speaker 1: He tacks a demand for reparations on the door of 475 Riverside Drive and of the Riverside Drive Church [Riverside Church, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 2: In New York [New York].
Speaker 1: In New York, and out of that, the churches respond by setting up an organization that is called, the Interreligious Foundation for Community Organization.  And the person who is hired to run that is the Reverend Lucius Walker, who comes out of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and he is a counter to Saul Alinsky.  There's all kinds of important connections here.  And they--he goes ahead and sets this up and there really there is no slot for the people from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] who had initiated, Forman and others, the action that led to the founding of--to the obtaining of all these funds.  And I was one, amongst others, who was hired later by IFCO to work for IFCO and Lucius Walker.  And the chairman of the board of IFCO was at the time Harold Fuller [Owusu Sadaukai], who was at that time running the Malcolm X Liberation University [Durham and Greensboro, North Carolina].  IFCO continues to the present day, I think, and is related to another organization called Pastors for Peace.  But when I worked there in 1971, December, all fourteen of us who were the staff were fired.  In one day, everybody on the staff was fired because we refused to any longer to go along with the executive director's relationship that he was having with a woman on the staff.  And we had--we requested a meeting to discuss this and he brought us into this, his office suite at 475 Riverside Drive and fired, summarily, all of us.  Today, it would have been the subject of a tremendous lawsuit.  At the time, we did not sue, but it had a tremendous ripple effect throughout social change organizations at that particular time when it took place.  And IFCO also had a lot of significant international stuff that it did.  It was one of the leading funders of Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola].  Lu Walker viewed himself as a competitor to the American Committee on Africa, and a man named George Houser.  And I think that story of that organization is one that I hope future historians will really investigate carefully, and with real probing questions about its real role.
Speaker 2: Right, now--this kind of--it's really, it just, it strikes me as, is that it's not easy for the average person to understand what's going on African politics, let alone--I mean U.S. politics, most of the time, let alone African politics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or let alone the intersection--
Speaker 2: And we, you're right.  And we, I know we complain, those of us who are active, complain about people's apathy and so forth, but sometimes, you know, people don't know where one thing begins and another thing ends.  I mean as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you, how can you tell the players without a scorecard?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right and very few people have a scorecard.
Speaker 1: That's--exactly.
Speaker 2: Or any access to one, so it's--
Speaker 1: That's exactly the point, which I don't think is accidental.
Story_ID: 303796
Speaker 1: And it was not accidental also when you look at some of the other sinister game playing that was going on in that same period of time.  John Stockwell, who ran the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] station in the Congo, and has written a book ['In Search of Enemies: A CIA Story'] about the U.S. funding of Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] and other organizations, has--I heard him once say that there was various operations underway to control--create, control and manage African American involvement with Africa.  And so that many of these organizations, whether intentionally or not remains to be seen, begin to serve a much broader purpose and agenda.  A related concrete case, Roy Innis, who runs the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE] in this period of time, begins literally to recruit African Americans to become mercenaries to fight in the Angolan War [Angolan Civil War] with Unita, and he literally did that.  And so the approach that may have been made to you in Dayton [Ohio] conceivably could have been about much deeper things than just finding African Americans interested in Africa.  And in my own lifetime, I remember arriving, when I was with the World Council of Churches in Harare, Zimbabwe right after independence, right after--this is very important--to celebrate the new independence.  This is a great celebration in which they would have Bob Marley come and sing his famous concert that he gives in Harare.  I arrived there, missed the concert, unfortunately, great music, missed the independence celebration, but I was part of the World Council of Churches delegation to meet with the newly formed Zimbabwean government and meet the churches there.  And I remember on a free day, one day walking to a bookstore run by white Rhodesian woman in downtown Harare.  And I walk into this book store and the woman says to me, "Jose, are you back?"  And I looked shocked.  And she looks at me and she says, "Oh, you're not Jose, are you?  Are you a yank?"  And I say, yeah, I'm--that's what they often say in Southern Africa--are you a yank, a yank? I said, "Yes, I'm from the states."  She said, "Oh, I thought you were Jose, he was one of--he was here earlier.  And by this time I picked up immediately what she was talking about.  Well, Jose, it turns out used to come to the bookstore to buy pocketbooks during the period of '68 [1968] to '75 [1975], '76 [1976], during the period of the guerilla war for freeing up Rhodesia [Zimbabwe] from British Rhodesian settler rule.  And Jose was a Puerto Rican, black Puerto Rican from New York, who fought with the white Rhodesian colonial army.  There was no question about it.  She talked about him and his skills, how good he was at working and killing the terrorists.  She assumed, you see, that I would as be as anti-communist as any Americans.  And therefore, her language was in terms of killing the the terrors.  The terrors are the black thugs, the terrorists of the Zimbabwe, ZANLA [Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army], ZIPRA [Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army], ZAPU [Zimbabwe African People's Union] liberation armies.  And her assumption was I would hate these terrors as much as she did.  And here she was assuming that I was--and I think she must have had a romantic thing with this Jose that momentarily she mistook me for him, but there are some people, and I can't remember.  There's particularly African American scholar who's done a little writing on this chapter.  But this is related to what I was saying earlier about those organizations that begin to function, and fulfill the agenda whether they know it or not, of a much more insidious set of designs and objectives that are being played out through use of the African American community and its sentiments for Africa.
Story_ID: 303797
Speaker 1: Continue with your chronology.  Let's get to--now, we're right--1987 or something, and we're on the brink of South African independence (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're on the brink of South African independence.  I start working for the Mozambique government full time and would continue to work there through 1990 and '91 [1991].  And, of course, in 1990, you have the release of Nelson Mandela.  And I remember the great feeling I had, and great sense of joy of being in Madison, Wisconsin, in the Pacifica [Pacifica Radio Network] station, radio station, being interviewed at the very time that the story was being covered in this country of Nelson Mandela walking out of the prison.  It had tremendous meaning for me for much more than just what many people may have felt because in 1983, I had been smuggled inside South Africa by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of Southern Africa [Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference], financed me to come in with a group of people doing some training of the internal political forces, the unions, the church organizations, the community groups, the student groups, and they had a massive meeting to get training on doing sociopolitical analysis and nonviolent change, organizing.  And I was brought in to help train in those matters, but also to talk about the liberation movements because I could speak with some real insight and acquaintance about movements like FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front], about movements like the PAIGC [African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde], about the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola] in Angola, about the Zimbabwean struggle because of the work I had done in solidarity work, the work I had done with the Angolan government, the work I'd done with the Mozambican government.  So in '83 [1983], I was smuggled inside the country.  I was there for about a week, and they had people come from all over the country.  I was there under an alias and at the very end, one morning about two or three in the morning, there was a decision taken to get myself and two other people out of the country right away.  And we were literally put in nuns' outfits with a thing around my head.  My beard had to be shaved off, and we were driven to the boarder with Lesotho from inside of the country in what today is the eastern cape and there we were driven to that border.  We gave back the nuns' outfits and we just walked out and walked across the border.  Now, in fact, as subsequent events and other history has shown, it could have been possible that the South Africans' secret police and the security could have still done something to us.  There were a number of key ANC [African National Congress] people who were killed or kidnapped and killed from within countries like Swaziland and Botswana and Lesotho, even the killing, as I mentioned before, of Dulcie September, but we were--I was an American, another person was a Kenyan.  I think it involved other questions that they didn't step it up.  I'm sure they knew that we had fled, but the person that dropped us, who was an Irish priest, was picked up after dropping us, and he spent two weeks in detention and torture, questioning, all of that.  And it was on that trip that I began to get a real sense of the scale of the insurrection, the struggle going on in South Africa, and also of the scale of what was being done in the counter offensive by the South African government against its opponents, the all-out strategy that the South African government was doing at that point involved massive killings of people, intense torture, disappearances--all of the things that would later begin to surface.
Speaker 1: I think one of the things that people, I think the general public could even pick up on here was the, the pitting of the KwaZulu Nation against the other people in South Africa.
Speaker 2: By--that's, that part of it and it certainly comes up right after the release of Mandela and right after the elections, up to the elections and right after, that use of the KwaZulus in the war, the violence that they unleash, but I think it's important that that be situated within the overall counter offensive that's waged by the South African government and its allies.  That's not just the Zulus, but it's also the RENAMO [Mozambican National Resistance Movement] army in Mozambique, there's Unita [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] in Angola and the scale of the killings that take place, the scale is particularly--and I've seen a lot of discussion about this.
Story_ID: 303798
Speaker 1: It's particularly hard on the neighboring countries to Mozambique.  I had--a small illustration of this is the whole period of killings of people on the trains, leading up to the elections.  I don't know if people would remember that there were people, workers near Johannesburg [South Africa] in big cities, that just get on these trains.  It's part of the apartheid setup, that they have to get these trains and they would be getting these trains, and then suddenly someone would get on open fire, mowing people down with machine guns, and ten or fifteen people in a car would be killed.  And they'd always say that the killers had funny, foreign accents.  Well, the killers were part of a South African apartheid government orchestrated campaign to wreak total havoc against the newly emerged South African government, the Mandela [Nelson Mandela] government, and against the front-line states, Mozambique, Namibia, Botswana, Zambia and so you have--and then Angola.  You have these wars, the war in Mozambique would ultimately be a war that would kill a million people, that most people in the United States have never heard anything about.  And part of why the Mozambique government asked me to work for them is to counter people in this country who are helping that war to take place like Pat Robertson, for example, who, to this day, has never, ever had a single moment of being held responsible for bringing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, he's the--
Speaker 1: --onto his 400 show or whatever it's called.
Speaker 2: 700 Club ['The 700 Club'].
Speaker 1: 700.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pat Robertson is the evangelist--
Speaker 1: The evangelical--
Speaker 2: --the television network Christian evangelist who runs 'The 700 Club,' right.
Speaker 1: Never been held responsible for bringing on his show representatives of RENAMO [Mozambican National Resistance Movement], where he would--I have seen--the footage is there, where he would laud, praise and encourage the killing and war that was conducted by an organization like RENAMO.  And the connection of that to the Inkatha [Inkatha Freedom Party] and Buthelezi [Mangosuthu Buthelezi] is that many of these killers were trained in the same places by the South African army--
Story_ID: 303799
Speaker 1: The war--the methodology of children being used to kill people comes out of that period of time.
Speaker 2: Now, this is important because this is the model (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: --that's being used now--
Speaker 1: Precisely.
Speaker 2: --in Africa, now--
Speaker 1: It's all over Africa.
Speaker 2: --in these different disruptions and mass killings--
Speaker 1: Whether it's Sierra Leone or Rwanda--
Speaker 2: Liberia.
Speaker 1: Or Burundi, Liberia, in parts of Nigeria now.  I first really began to see what--the Mozambicans taught me this in '70 [1970], '71 [1971] when--no, it was later than that.  It's '90 [1990], '87 [1987], '88 [1988], '89 [1989].  It was '88 [1988] that the Mozambicans had me interview a group of captured RENAMO [Mozambican National Resistance Movement] children.  They were average age 10, 11, 13, and with Mozambican officials, who could speak their languages--most of these children could not speak Portuguese but captured--with the Mozambican government officials present--not always present.  I also had time with these children by myself.  I interviewed about fifteen of these captured ten, twelve-year-old soldiers.  I'll never forget one who--he couldn't recall whether he used a sword or an axe to chop the head of one of his neighbors in the village.  He couldn't recall.   His big crisis with me was trying to remember whether it was a sword or an axe that had split open the top part of the head of this neighbor.  He killed him, of course.  I talked to twelve, thirteen-year-olds who had killed eight and ten different people, who'd talk about that like--and what I saw then--what the Mozambicans exposed me to was a pattern of death that would be, as you point out, used to the present time with African--and they, it was very cleverly done because not only--they would take these children and have them kill first their own relatives, so that the child would feel that he or she had done something so remorseful that they could never be redeemed.  And in addition, they would dope 'em up.  They told me--they showed me some of the children, where they'd have their--they'd cut up their thigh and they put pills, hallucinogens down inside to get them ready for the fighting or they'd give 'em daga [ph.], which is dope.  Details exist about this.  As I'm hearing this and being just overwhelmed with this information, I'm beginning to realize this is something that is much, much bigger.  And there is a number of brilliant books about this that emerge, and, ironically, some works done by the U.S. state department [U.S. Department of State] in what was called the Gersony Report about the horror of this war that's taking place.  But, again, the war in Mozambique that I've been describing in such detail is very directly related to the things that the Inkatha [Inkatha Freedom Party] forces are doing inside of South Africa.  And all of this begins to come out in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission hearings that Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] chairs.
Story_ID: 303800
Speaker 1: This was also a part of a saga of my own life because at this point in 1992, I guess, '90 [1990], '91 [1991], I start working for the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation] here in Chicago [Illinois] as a program officer.  And while I'm working there, I get a call from a friend of mine from the new government, Dullah Omar, who is the new minister of justice, and he says to me, "Prexy [HistoryMaker Prexy Nesbitt], we're gonna embark upon something that's never been done before, which is a process to examine all of our history and approach it with a reconciliation, just to get the truth out there of what happened.  We're gonna need support from people and institutions, and organizations in the United States.  Will you help and work as a fundraiser for us?"  I said, "Well," we were having dinner at the time.  It was on a trip I made for the foundation to South Africa.  I said, "I don't know.  I'd have to ask the foundation and if I can do this."  In the end, the MacArthur Foundation didn't want me doing it.  In the end, I couldn't do it.  Dullah Omar has since died, but the Truth and Reconciliation Commission process did take place.  It is an extraordinary chapter of all humankind, and is very centrally linked to this tremendous figure, Nelson Mandela.  For me, this whole emergence of Nelson Mandela is often portrayed in the wrong way because too often people just see it with the South African view.  All they see is South Africa.  What they don't see is all the regional countries and peoples, and deaths that also contributed and how it's all one tremendous history.  And for me, that has had very personal relationships, Graca Machel is like an older sister to me.
Speaker 2: That's his current wife.
Speaker 1: His current wife, who was the widow of Samora Machel, and I can remember when Samora was killed, assassinated in my view, Graca, for the next nine months never came out of black clothes, rarely left her house.  And her son finally said to her one day, he said, "Mama, will I ever see you not in black?"  And it was shortly thereafter with the encouraging of a lot of us, who were her friends, that one day on a trip there, she shows me a photo.  And in the photo is a man and a woman looking at a sunset, holding hands.  And I look at the photo.  And she says, "Do you recognize who that is?"  And I said, "Well, of course, there you are."  And I think, no, it can't be.  Is that Madiba, is that Nelson Mandela?  And she said, "Yes."  And the reason I'd known it was Mandela 'cause I could see security guys off to the side.  And sure enough, this was the beginning, the very, very, very earliest period of their courtship.  And they were very secret because from the beginning, they never wanted to hurt Winnie [Winnie Mandela].
Story_ID: 303801
Speaker 1: I had a couple of things to ask you.  And I wanted to get back to the Truth and Reconciliation [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] hearings 'cause they were--in the black community anyway--in the political community in the black community, there was a lot of discussion about whether that was, about the value of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The right way to go, yeah--
Speaker 1: --of those hearings and also about Winnie Mandela and what your analysis is of her demise, you know--
Speaker 2: There is no question, but that there were shortcomings to the Truth and Reconciliation process. Was it the right way to go?  It seems to me that in the first place, it's consistent with the whole history of liberation struggles, that individual perpetrators of racism and apartheid injustice were never viewed as the enemy.  They never had that as part of the struggle.  They always saw them as being the products of a system that taught them to act a certain way.  So that, for example, within the ANC [African National Congress], on the prison, on Robben Island [South Africa], they converted the prison guards.  They turned them around.   Lots of these were ignorant, uneducated, Afrikaner, Boer, where we would call them southern hillbillies, many of them whom couldn't read or write.  And some of them have been turned around and are today members of the South African Communist Party, and some of the closest operatives with the work that goes on in the country.  So that was a cardinal part of the struggle and it goes back to the point that many of us were schooled in by the ANC [African National Congress] and the PAIGC [African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde] and FRELIMO [Mozambique Liberation Front] about the political character of the struggle.  FRELIMO, when they conducted the military war against the Portuguese, they never killed, captured Portuguese soldiers.  They saw them as ignorant.  They knew that there was a draft evasion rate that was about ten times the rate of evading the draft in Vietnam--evading the draft for Vietnam that took place in the United States with Portuguese soldiers going all over Europe trying to avoid going to these wars in Africa and so as a result, they never saw the individual Portuguese soldier.  And I'm suggesting that consistent with that is this sense of reconciliation and truth.  It also is rooted in this African, the fundamental African acceptance of things.
Story_ID: 303802
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the Truth and Reconciliation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we were talking about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  And you know it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  And I was saying that that comes out of the African sense of Ubuntu.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It comes out of the African--
Speaker 1: And you know the critique that even black people apply to it here when they saw it.  A lot of people were angry.  They said, said, "Why aren't they going after these monstrous guards and public officials that participated in the torture and mass murder of people and disenfranchisement of people.  Why aren't they doing that?"  Look at what the Jews did after World War II [WWII].  They made sure--they said, "We will never forget.  We're going to get every last one of 'em."  They hunt 'em down all over the world.  They have organizations.  They made movies to celebrate this, you know.  'Boys from Brazil' ['The Boys from Brazil'] different movies, you know, so how do you--
Speaker 2: I--first of all, it's not in the African approach to things that way.  It doesn't fit in either the political approach or the cultural framework.  I think it's also a function of a clarity that they have that ultimately Africa belongs to--that no matter what else happens, Africa is theirs.  The future is theirs.  It wouldn't--it has been unalterably changed, the entire landscape, and there is a clarity and certainty about that, despite the difficulties, despite the economic situations that haven't changed, despite the injustice and those that got away, the unalterable fact is that it has been changed forever, and the government that once imprisoned the ANC [African National Congress] is today history.  The few remaining members are now in the ANC, so that is a huge change.  Now there are new sets of problems that are characterized, the new government.  And there were injustices done, some of which are still being addressed.  It includes, for instance, how do you go after the big--Samora Machel used to always say, "There is the monkeys and the monkey grinders."  What they really want to get now is the monkey grinders, not the monkeys--those who were the racists and those who were the army and those who ran the apartheid system, they are in a sense the monkeys, but the big monkey grinders were the corporate structures that were behind sustained global apartheid and global racism and that's the much bigger enemy that they have as part of their political perspective.  And I--it registered with me.  It has always made a certain sense with me.
Story_ID: 303803
Speaker 1: I also think it stems out of a vision that was fundamentally difficult for many African Americans to accept, and that vision comes down to a simple thing, the view of Africans, in general, is that Africa belongs to all the people who--all the people who live in Africa are Africans.  That, for African Americans to accept white people as Africans is untenable.  They can't--we, and I don't include myself in the group, but I'm trying to look from that perspective.  It's too hard.  It's too hard for us to accept.  But I think what you have to, what people didn't understand is that when you have an entire culture of six hundred years, you speak twelve different languages, you've given the world its most famous Nobel Prize winners, you've given--you've got a history.  You're not, you're not wallowing with no name as African Americans, many of us are.  There is a clarity and a certainty that just makes you much bigger as a person.  I think that's part of the difference and the perspective.  But for African Americans to accept that whites can be Africans, it's too hard.  But I ask and urge people to read that history much closer, to read the South African history.  I was present and was one of the people invited to be present at the first meeting of the ANC [African National Congress] after it was--the first meeting ever of the ANC after it's come back into the country, just before the elections.  This must have been in '92 [sic. 1991] and it was held in Durban [South Africa] and it was a huge hall.  And I was there when--it was just extraordinary, Oliver Tambo was there, and Nelson Mandela and Joe Slovo, and Ahmed Kathrada, and Modise [Johannes Modise] and all of these people.  And I remember a moment when they called Albie Sachs' name.  Now, Albie Sachs represents on one level, everything many African Americans can't tolerate.  He's Jewish.  He's a man.  He's a white man.  He's written a lot.  He's a professional, but Albie Sachs for those black South Africans, when they called his name and he started walking from the back, people started dancing and they started singing and he when threw up the stump of his arm, that's all that's left.  And people knew he's looking at them with only one eye, they don't see him as Albie Sachs, Jewish man.  They see him as one more who has contributed to their struggle.  That's all.  And he is as African as any of the black Africans who also, countless numbers who lost their lives.  That's difficult for many African Americans to understand and sad, to me, that that's difficult for us to understand.
Story_ID: 303804
Speaker 1: But you had another question too, on the--
Speaker 2: Oh, Winnie Mandela (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Winnie Mandela--
Speaker 2: --and her kind of demise from popularity and so forth, what was--what's your analysis of that?
Speaker 1: I think Winnie is a victim.  Winnie is a victim in a way that we should really be able to understand because we've had so many in our struggle who have been victims too.  She is one of the most profound heroines of the struggle.  She did things when--and showed a courage that was just unmatchable by many, many other people.  But in the moments of her needing the most support that she needed, she never got it from the movement, itself.  And there were many others like her who didn't get that, and as a result, there was weakness that she showed, and things she did that compromised other people.  I have no doubt in my mind that her bodyguard killed that young boy.  It is a function, problem with homophobia that is--we see rampant in a person like Robert Mugabe or in the comments of President Sam Nujoma today.  She clearly has not shown any kind of control around her own personal taste, and consumption patterns in the country, which is not leadership in any way towards creating a just and equitable new society.  But, again, I go back to the tremendous contribution she made, and in her personal life, her relationships that she had while the president [Nelson Mandela] was in prison was very bad.  Now, I've heard people say in response, kind of vulgarly, "Oh, of course, that's understandable, anybody would want some after--that brother's been in prison twenty-seven years."  This may well be, but it was done without discretion.  It was done without discipline, and many of the things she's done were done without discipline.  She's an extraordinary personality, extraordinary figure but in the moments that she most needed support and guidance, the movement failed to give it to her, and what resulted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or perhaps couldn't give it to her--
Speaker 1: Or in some way cases, it couldn't.  I remember when I was illegally in the country, there were tremendous communication problems within the movement at that time because of infiltration, because of the agents, pressure from the South African surveillance, and harassment and repression.  So people, so it varied to people being killed, difficult time to convey simple directives.
Story_ID: 303805
Speaker 1: There's another big, big issue, I think, that I'd be remiss if I didn't ask about, and that is the distribution of land, you know, Robert Mugabe is in the news now, and he's, it's been stated by the press that he's desperate for political support, so now he's talking about redistribution of land.  But after the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe, Ian Smith, who is, the former white president, was allowed to retire to an estate and, you know, out of proportion with his--well, I mean it's an estate.  And then, in South Africa, likewise, a lot of the rich South Africans, the powerful people have maintained a level of property and wealth that seems to--I mean it irritates--I'm sure it irritates the black South Africans or maybe even the white South Africans or any progressive person looking at it.  But I mean what is--do you have a take on the distribution of land and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My take on this is, my take on this is that the other additional pieces--you just can't have land alone.  Land, just getting land doesn't feed people.  You gotta feed people, and you need--when you're getting land, you need capital.  You're getting land, you need training, when you're getting land, you need management, you need resources, you need equipment.  None of that came forward with the land that Mugabe confiscated.  And as a result, one of the things that's happened is that while there's been some land turned around, there isn't a--it's become a beggar country.  And what was once one of the most productive countries in the whole region, had become a complete beggar country today, because there has to be a plan.  And in the South African case, there has been more of an effort to plan, and create the conditions for the redistribution of land.  Now, it's been stepped up because of Zimbabwe, and there is a landless movement in South Africa that is putting more and more pressure to step it up even faster, but, again, it can't be done without also continuing to feed your people.  That's the dilemma that also all of the settler countries recognize at the movement of independence.  You've got these settlers who have been, have become the largest source of the creation of the food and produce that you've got to have to feed people.  You can't just alienate them overnight without having in placed a mechanism to be able to replace that.
Speaker 1: And by mechanism, you're referring to?
Speaker 2: The training, the capital to--the personnel to run farms that are sixty thousand acres, a hundred thousand acres.  We know from what's happened in this country, you know.  That takes planning.  You can't just turn it over and then people are able, especially people who have never been prepared to run things of that scale.  The overall impact of it all is that while it's horrible and it comes from a horrible history that many Africans who work on those big sixty-thousand-acre places are not paid well and they have not been advanced, they also become unemployed.
Story_ID: 303806
Speaker 1: And so the impact of all that on Zimbabwe has been, you created a people who became landless, who had no food and had no jobs any longer.  All that has to be taken into consideration when you begin to move.  Now, it's also true that, according to the conditions of the, what was called the Lancaster House Conferences that led to Zimbabwe's independence, Britain, and the United States and West Germany were supposed to come through for Zimbabwe with some of the capital and support that would have made those transitions, it didn't happen.  It didn't happen for obvious reasons, it did not happen.  But that did not mean that in turn, it justified Mugabe [Robert Mugabe] taking all that land and in actual fact, what people have found more and more is that, look at who the land went to.  It didn't go to all those peasants, and members of ZANU-PF [Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front].  It went to his buddies.  It went to his cronies, many of whom just let it sit idle.  They were given six, seven, and eight different farms, which would then just sit idle, not be used by his buddies to such a degree that Mugabe, himself, reversed their own programs and stopped giving all that land.  And in fact, insisted this--from some of his cronies that they had to give the land back to him, that he had managed to give to them.  None of that, none of all of that helped the agricultural workers who had been dependent on those farms for a living.  None of it helped the overall problems of producing, of production of foodstuffs for the people of Zimbabwe.  So once a nation that was producing surplus for all the rest of the region becomes the biggest net importer of food to try to feed--and then he turns that into a weapon.  He says, "If you aren't a supporter of ZANU-PF, we aren't gonna give you any of these sacks of grain that are coming into the country."  All this I observed firsthand.  None of this is propaganda.  I observed this.  You can check with the Zimbabwe Council of Churches on thing like this.  You can check with the United Nations [UN] people, international donors, people who've lived in the country.  Horace Campbell's book ['Reclaiming Zimbabwe: The Exhaustion of the Patriarchal Model of Liberation']--Horace is a sort of latter day, latter day Walter Rodney.  His book on the patriarchal model of Zimbabwe--it's published by Africa World Press, it's one of the best single sources for this whole, sad saga of Zimbabwe.
Story_ID: 303807
Speaker 1: What would you consider to be the key crisis in Africa?  Now, there're a lot of things going on.  I mean, and it's--sometimes, when you look at the continent, African Americans view the continent as, you know, those who are interested in it, are probably largely depressed these days when they see what's going on in Africa as a whole.  You know, it seems there're so many problems with--from AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], to economic problems, political problems, corruption.  And what do you see as the key crises in Africa and how do you think the African Americans can help the kind of--
Speaker 2: I don't think we can visit Africa.  As you were saying earlier to me, I don't think we can visit Africa in our high heels.  Too many of us visit Africa in high heels and safari suits.  The best trips that I've made to Africa have been trips where I went penniless, and where you are with just ordinary people on those buses with all those chickens, and all that smell, and all that dirt, and those bumpy breakdowns and--because I think that then you begin to feel the strengths and vitality that yet remain in Africa, and counter, run as a force counter to these endless array of problems.  That's what I think has sustained me in forty years plus worth of involvement in Africa.  And I don't, I don't agree with the Afro pessimistic view.  It's horrible stuff happening in Africa, but I also think that given the limitations and all the forces arrayed against African peoples, it's amazing what is done in Africa and a source for inspiration for the rest of us.  Now, being more specific, I think you don't talk about just Africa.  Africa, that's mystical.  It's mythological.  You analyze what's happening in specific situations and countries of Africa, what specific leadership is doing, what specific organizations are doing, what are the issues and the concrete manifestation of those issues in particular situations.  What, there is--as much as I would like to just applaud the African Union, for example, you can't look at the African Union without understanding what Thabo Mbeki is doing in South Africa or how that's related to Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo] in Nigeria and how that's related to what Shell [Royal Dutch Shell Group, The Hague, the Netherlands] is doing in Nigeria, or to the coup attempt that took place in Equatorial Guinea but was overthrown and was--the Equatorial Guinea government overcoming that was aided greatly by the new South African government, and the Zimbabwean government, capturing mercenaries, that was a great move in a continent that has historically had so many coup d'etats take place.  You can't understand all that without also following the role of Margaret Thatcher's son [Mark Thatcher] in financing and engineering the coup attempt in Equatorial Guinea, but how much in this country have we heard a single word, a single word about Margaret Thatcher's son, Ron Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] best buddy, Margaret Thatcher, her son running this coup and now facing possible jail time.  We haven't heard a word.
Story_ID: 303808
Speaker 1: That's not atypical in this country because we're in a situation where systematically the press denies people any knowledge of Africa in this country, systematically.  Whether we analyze curriculums in primary schools, urban settings across this country, or whether you analyze major dailies or the TV press, or the radio, it is almost systematic the extent to which Africa is negated and blacked out and so understandably, we--Africa does not have a constituency in this country (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a--
Speaker 1: --just a few of us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, there was a book--I think there was a book by, I think it was Larry Elder who wrote this book about what we don't owe to Africa, 'cause he describes--well, there's been a couple of books written by African Americans who go to Africa and they write these--
Speaker 1: And there's one that is just the tragedy of all tragedies.  It's the one, where the brother comes and comes back and says, "The best thing that happened to us was that we never end slavery."  That slavery--'cause slavery meant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Slavery was the best thing that happened, yeah--
Speaker 1: That's right, that slavery --
Speaker 2: --get us out of Africa.
Speaker 1: --happening to us kept us being in Africa.
Speaker 2: And that old saying that you always hear, "I ain't lost nothing in Africa," that's a standard quip that black people would use when they didn't wanna get involved in Africa--
Speaker 1: That's sad because that's--
Speaker 2: --from the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] days all the--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --way to the--
Speaker 1: That sentiment is mounting again.  Students at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], where I teach, wait for the day that I'm gonna talk when I teach my African American history film course, the day I'm gonna talk about Eddie Murphy's film 'Coming to America,' because they love the attack that I launch on the ignorance and viciousness of this system as portrayed in that part of that ridiculous film that has to do with the encounter between African Americans and Africans.  And I think that that's very much part of what is the challenge that we face in this period, is how do we build real relationship to Africa for more, particularly for African Americans but I don't limit it to African Americans.  I think it's, I think Africa is in part of all of us, in all of us, different degrees, maybe different historical experiences, but I remember a Jewish girl that once confronted my whole class saying, "I am an African woman."  And the brothers and sisters in the class went crazy trying to cut her apart, but she was very clear on one thing.  She was clear that if you trace the evolution of humankind, the roots are Africa.  And that was her position.  She was arguing that all of human stock comes out of Africa.  Now in this age, where you, where evolution is so dangerous a concept to even talk about, people may not be very clear about that any longer.  But, in fact, there are many other ways in which at the heart of many things that have happened with human history is the African continent, and key parts of Africa, and I think that was for all of the world, not just simply for African Americans alone.  There're many, many parts of the world that can claim a relationship.  And many parts of the world do much more with Africa with that relationship than what we as African Americans do.  I have visited parts of northern Sweden, parts of Ireland, parts of Japan, where the solidarity and the work goes on from little tiny villages in those all those countries, with issues and problems in Africa, would put any of us, who are African Americans, to shame with what we don't do.  And I don't fault that, but understand it in the context of understanding how minimal is the knowledge that we yet have and how slim is that bond.  It's a very strong emotional bond but a substantive bond is very slim as a result of historical understandable forces that have kept it very slim.  And part of our challenge is to make that emotional bond be one that's based on real meaning, and actual exchange, and actual substance.  Some of that is beginning to happen in a very encouraging way.  I'm very encouraged by the growing numbers of Africans coming to this country who are rooting themselves in African American communities and forging relationships with African Americans.  I'm very encouraged by the growing numbers of young African Americans who have studied in Africa.  I can remember when I went to the University of Dar es Salaam [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania] in 1965, I was the first.  There were no other--there was no university before 1963, so I was one of the first, but, now, there would be two or three hundred who have had real involvement in Africa, and I think over the whole term, that becomes a very encouraging prospect.
Story_ID: 303809
Speaker 1: You could probably talk a long--I'm scared to ask this question 'cause you could talk three or four days about this and we'd probably never get a--but what do you think is the African American's approach--I guess what I'm trying to say, if I can, I'm trying to form a question out of this.  But African Americans see Africa as a cultural touchstone or something or a place to return to, to revitalize what they consider like a white culture that they've, you know, digested here, what do you see Africa's value in that sense 'cause I--and part of the crisis, I think, when we encounter Africans in this country is that the Africans are coming here too, for educational reasons and economic reasons that have nothing to do with preserving necessarily African culture in Africa.  So, or even transmitting it, but there's an exchange that does take place.  So do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: My thought is that, first, what are we talking about?  And I think it's--there's a certain obtuseness about it, a certain vagueness about that African entity that we so desperately grasp for.  I don't think we're gonna find it in Africa.  I think that the particularity of our experience here in the United States means that ultimately, we're going to have to resolve our issues here in this country, hard as that may be to swallow.  We are aided, however, in my view, by a real knowledge of African history, of African countries' history, of African personalities, of experience, of leadership in governance in Africa but we have to get real understanding of specifics.  It can't be just based on a mystical, cloud-like situation that we can conjure up as opposed to understanding the real things and relationships that have happened.
Story_ID: 303810
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: It's a big question.  It's a big question that hits me at a particularly crucial moment.  I have just been following the tremendous revelations in the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] about my own community, in which I was really birthed, Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], and the story that you may have seen about Pyramid West Development Corporation [Chicago, Illinois] and Cecil Butler.  And it's a story of this tremendous amount of money that goes into a model of organization in the community that, a lot of it gets siphoned right through into the hands of just a few, $150 million gets siphoned right through.  And my father [Rozell Nesbitt] was a founder, board member of the Pyramid West Development Corporation.  He was a founder, board member of the North Lawndale bank [Community Bank of Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].  He helped Cecil Butler get his children into Francis Parker School [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] where I went to, and I read that story and almost wept, thinking about what my father would think about reading this story.  I also was reading it at the same time that I've been looking at a CBS '60 Minutes' interview with a man named Tokyo Sexwale, who is a great figure from South African liberation story and was the former premier of what was called Transvaal [South Africa] and became the Gautang province where Johannesburg [South Africa] is located.  He is now--was a prominent friend of Chris Hani, the great leader (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Assassinated--
Speaker 2: --who was assassinated--
Speaker 1: --leader of this--
Speaker 2: There's just some extraordinary footage of just, Tokyo just devastated when he learns and comes to see Chris Hani's body lying in his driveway.  He, today, Tokyo Sexwale is one of the black billionaires of South Africa and in the '60 Minutes' footage, it's like Tokyo Sexwale had suddenly forgotten what made it possible for him to be one of these black billionaires.  It's sort of--it's analogous to when I sat and listened to Alan Keyes pretend that the drive for affirmative action had not helped him become a lawyer, a presidential candidate and all the nonsensical things he's also become.  My hope, therefore, is that all this never--this becomes boulders in our path that will be dislodged towards black people and other oppressed, suffering people, whatever color, in my view, and I think that's the view of most of the black people in this world.  We're big people, big in the sense that we can envision a big church.  We envision a church that embraces many, many people in our view.  I don't think that most of us just see change just for the sake of a narrow few.  I hope that we continue, we remove the boulders and continue on down the road towards a fullness and a sharing in an equitable society where everybody gets a decent house, a decent place, a decent set of meals, decent opportunity for as much education as they possibly can have.  It's gonna be a lot of struggle because all the things in this country are so, more and more systematically geared against that kind of a vision.
Story_ID: 303811
Speaker 1: Tell me this now, when you look back on your life and all the things that you've done, and you're still young, by the standards that we use to interview (laughter) people, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: The major, major, single major thing that I would've done differently would have been to somehow or another manage to finish my Ph.D.  In some ways, it's not a substantive piece.  It's a process piece because it would have enabled me to have had more mobility and capacity to affect more change, to have touched more people in the things that I have tried to touch people with in my lifetime.  Certainly, there are things that have happened like the deaths of all my primary family members that would have permitted me to have done other things I think more consistently and not have had periods of being dislodged.  I think when my sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] was killed by an African American lawyer [Nobel Harris] here in the city was a particular--led to a particular period of dislodgement, I call it, for all of us in my family.  But these are things that are regular boulders that are put in the paths of people, of people in this country, and according to what class and rank you have, and your resources are more or less difficult to get them out of the way and to continue on.
Story_ID: 303812
Speaker 1: When you look back, likewise, at the things you've done so far, what would you consider, at this point, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I have a nine [Samora Nesbitt] and a ten-year-old [Jele Magdalina].  I have a fifteen-year-old daughter that I have no contact with.  I think I would say to all of them that I have tried consistently to support the struggle of other people as if it were my own struggle, and to fully participate in the struggle of my own people, to change, to get a new dispensation, a new order, and tried to do that with integrity, whatever cost was involved, and I think that's the legacy that I leave them.  I hope that's the legacy.
Story_ID: 303813
Speaker 1: How does your family, your--from your parents [Sadie Crain Nesbitt and Rozell Nesbitt] to your brothers and sisters, how do they react to your occupation and the things you do?
Speaker 2: When--my parents are all gone, my one sister [RoAnne Nesbitt Harris] is gone.  I have many cousins, aunts and uncles.  The Nesbitts are still quite an entity, and I can say that with only one exception, which was a somewhat glaring one because he became an informant for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], with that one exception, all of them embrace and are very proud of all the things that I have done, all of the things I've done.  And I would see it as consistent with what we, as Nesbitts, represent, and came from, came into, put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything that we have not asked you that you think we should or that you wanna talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, there are a hundred thousand things I could yet talk about, but if there was any one thing that I--there are many things literally that I could still talk about, but I can't think of any one thing.  I think that one thing that I maybe would mention is that there are tremendous models that I was exposed to, role models that today's generation of young people don't have the advantage of having such great role models.  I mean by that, my parents exposed me to Paul Robeson very early in my life.  They exposed me to W.E.B. Du Bois.  They exposed me to Roland Hayes.  They exposed me to Mahalia Jackson, they exposed me to Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  They exposed me to Robert Hayden.  Robert Hayden was almost like an uncle to me.  I think that these figures, these giants yet exist, people like them yet exist, I know people like them exist, but we don't have good channels of exposing young people today to these types.  I questioned my class the other day, a class with another class present too, of almost fifty-five young people present at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and asked them if any of them had heard of Paul Robeson.  There was not one, not one.  This is a college-aged group.  It says to me the tremendous work just has to be done for them.  But this says something to me too about what do they then pass on to the children and young people they'll have.  (Laughter) And I think that's a serious problem.
Story_ID: 303814
Speaker 1: Well, the last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I made the road by walking.  That's how I'd like to be remembered.  It's a great Kenyan expression, and it came out of a dialogue between I think Paulo Freire, the Brazilian educator, and Horace [sic.], Horace from the Appalachian Highlander Center [Highlander Folk School; Highlander Research and Education Center, New Market, Tennessee], Myles Horton, and the two of them had a dialogue, and there's a book out there called, 'We Make the Road by Walking[: Conversations on Education and Social Change,' Myles Horton and Paulo Freire].  And that book, the title comes from a Kenyan proverb, "We make the road by walking."  And it says you have to get out there and be engaged and involved and do things, and that's--I've tried to make the road by walking.  It comes from going through the really beautiful, thick, African savannah, where the elephant grass like in Moxico Province of Angola, is five and six feet tall.  It's beautiful grass, blades that are just like personalities.  You know, you make the path by constantly walking through that grass.  And that's what I've tried to do.
Story_ID: 303815
Speaker 1: Who, what and when.
Speaker 2: What this picture is, is a picture of myself with a chief, whose last name I can't remember.  He's a leading trade unionist from Nigeria and this was taken in Nairobi [Kenya] in the year 2002--2001 at the conference of the, trade union conference for all of the trade unionists in Africa, and this is at a break in that conference.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.  Next.  Nineteen eighty-three [1983], it sounds like.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself at the World Council of Churches, just outside the World Council of Churches.  It's just as I was finishing work with the Programme to Combat Racism, so it's taken at the headquarters of the World Council of Churches in Geneva, Switzerland.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture I'm very, very fond of.  It's a very unique picture.  It's in 2000, Christmas of 2000, Graca Machel and Nelson Mandela invited us to dinner at their house.  And you here my son, Samora Nesbitt, who is to Mr. Mandela's right or on the left as you look at the picture and then my other son, Jele Magdalina, who is on the right as you look at the picture.  I was supposed to be in that picture, but I kept feeling guilty about Mr. Mandela's eyes, because he has great difficulty when photos are taken because of an injury he sustained at Robben Island [South Africa].  So I didn't--I felt guilty, but now I wish I had been in the picture.
Speaker 1: So he can't deal with bright light, and that sort of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He can't deal with--that's right.
Story_ID: 303816
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself outside Maputo, Mozambique on the beach of Mozambique, one of these famous beaches.  Mozambique has the most beautiful beaches in the world.  And this picture was taken about in 1998, something like that.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This is a clowning picture of myself and my son, Samora, Samora Nesbitt when he was about five years of age with my hat on.
Speaker 2: This should be a point and counter point.  This is a picture of myself at five years of age when I went to visit my uncle in Washington, D.C.  So this would have been taken in 1949 with the cowboy hat and the holster and trying to look like Hopalong Cassidy or some such childhood hero.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself taken in about 1972 or '73 [1973] with Brandon Phillips [ph.], who is one of my sort of godsons.  Who--it was taken outside of his home in California.
