Story_ID: 639794
Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Isobel Neal. It's I-S-O-B-E-L, Neal, N-E-A-L.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Margaret.  M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T.
Speaker 1: Now the first name is spelled in a way, I know a lot of people probably ask you why was it spelled that way, I-S-O-B-E-L.  I mean a lot of people--
Speaker 2: I think that was my mother's little twist on the usual spelling.  I don't know why.  It's always been I-S-O-B-E-L.  I have an aunt I was named after.  But I'm not sure how she spelled her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in New York City [New York, New York] in, on July 28th, 1933.
Speaker 1: All right, and (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on one second we're rolling.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I am retired at this moment.  I've done a lot of different things.  I've been a teacher with the Chicago Board of Education [Chicago, Illinois] for twenty years, ten in the classroom and ten as a homebound teacher for physically handicapped children where I did visits to the home.  Then I took a little break and then opened up a art gallery for ten years.  I'm doing volunteer work now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have several boards that I sit on and I go to meetings and help do good things for the city of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's good.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Thursday, January 22nd, 19, oh no, no, no, I'm sorry, 2004.
Speaker 1: All right, we gotcha.
Speaker 2: You want me to start again?
Speaker 1: No, that's all right.  That's fine.  And where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your address, but--
Speaker 2: Oh, we're sitting in my living room at my house in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 639795
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's hard to say.  My favorite food.  You mean a dish?  Probably chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Somewhere warm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Something I say all the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or something that you like to quote?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 639796
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you please give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Sadie, S-A-D-I-E, Dean, D-E-A-N, Hoskins, H-O-S-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in September 24, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where?
Speaker 2: In Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Montgomery, Alabama.  Okay.  What do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to her grandmother.  Her grandmother's name was Margaret, although they called her Maggie, or Mother Dear, but it was Margaret Foster [ph.], and I believe she was born somewhere near Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this the great-grandmother that was born in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She was five when slavery ended and there's an interesting little story that my grandmother told about it.  I guess they were planning to leave the next morning and they tied a string around her big toe to pull and to wake her up so that she could go with them when they left, and either she was sleeping soundly and didn't feel it and wake up, or they didn't pull the string, but she got left, and I don't know who raised her from that tender age of five, but she was on her own because her mother had been sold off to Texas.  That's what we know about her early beginnings.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, just to be clear, are these two separate things?  Was her mother being sold off, did that precede her being left (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, that she was left with, I don't know who was in charge to raise her.  They were all leaving and didn't take her with them.
Speaker 1: There were two traumas then, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So she stayed around Montgomery and was raised--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but I don't know what circumstances.  In those days, I think, a lot of people raised other children that were family related or maybe even not, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you know anything else about her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  She lived long enough to come to Atlantic City [New Jersey] with her daughter, my grandmother, and to, I know she was a seamstress, and I know that she worked for my grandmother's father and worked in the store as a seamstress.  So, I know a few things about her, yeah.
Story_ID: 639797
Speaker 1: Any other stories from your mother's [Sadie Dean Hoskins] side of the family?  What about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Pauline Louise Gassenheimer [ph.], and her father was this merchant that I mentioned that my great-grandmother worked for as a seamstress and he came from Cobden [ph.], Germany as a young boy and arrived in the South and what I know comes from an obituary of his when he died I think in the '40s [1940s] sometime, and he was around a lot with my grandmother, and, in fact, through high school, I guess, and she was packed and ready, her trunk was packed and ready to go to Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York], but the stipulation was that she was going to go to Vassar as his--as a white child, and that she had to give up contact with her mother, and so that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she could have passed?
Speaker 2: Right. But she said, "No."  And he was still around, I guess, after she married, and her stories that she mentioned that he would be generous with some philanthropies that she was involved in.  Some trees that were planted somewhere for school that she asked for help with.  So I know he was around, but he had some sisters by then, I guess, who came over from Germany, and they found him a wife to marry, and that was the end of that relationship.  So--
Speaker 1: Because he couldn't have married anyway, probably according to Alabama law, he probably could not have married her anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so, right, right.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So now, any other stories about that side of the family that's interesting?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother married a pharmacist named Ulysses S. Dean [ph.] from Nashville [Tennessee], whose family was from Nashville, and he still, he had a drugstore in Montgomery [Alabama] and they had several children.  My mother was the last and she was three when she left Montgomery with my grandmother and her mother.  They wound up being, she really went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] because she had a half-brother there.  And so she left--
Speaker 1: So she left Mr. Dean--
Speaker 2: Yes, her husband in Montgomery--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he tried to get her to come back, but I don't know what the problem was, but she didn't go back and he stayed there, and that was the end of him.  So I never knew him as a grandfather, but I have a picture of him.
Story_ID: 639798
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your mother's [Sadie Dean Hoskins] life in a minute, but let me ask you about your father's ancestors.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Wilfred, W-I-L-F-R-E-D, Laurier, L-A-U-R-I-E-R, Hoskins, H-O-S-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: May 30th, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, what, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Jamaica, I think in Falmouth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: His parents were Ethel Doyg [ph.] and Henry Hoskins [ph.] and I know that there are relatives they have down there and we visited my father and mother went to Jamaica quite some time ago and visited and we've had relatives visit us in New York.  His cousin was married to the mayor of Kingston [Jamaica], and his name was Russell LeWars with three beautiful daughters.  They had three beautiful daughters.  One was Miss World, Miss Jamaica once, and her name was Barbara LeWars [Barbara LeWars Manley], and she married Michael Manley's son [sic.], and had a son, but then died shortly after giving birth to a son.  She had cancer.  And her sister, Marguerite [Marguerite LeWars Gordon] was in 'Dr. No.'  She was the girl in the wet tee shirt, she was a gorgeous redhead.  She was in that movie 'Dr. No' that was filmed in Jamaica.  And the third daughter was Janet [Janet LeWars].  I don't know much about Janet.  I think she lives in Canada, but there's still relatives there.  I haven't talked to them in a long time, but I'm not the best correspondent, but maybe when I get going with my project, I'll get back in touch with them.
Speaker 1: So they're doing pretty well.  They're doing fairly well in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now is there a story about how your father got to New York?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  No I don't know that.  I just know that they came around the time he was ten or so and he had an older sister, a younger sister and then a brother was born and I don't know whether he, the last one was born in the states or not.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Round from about 1900 on, there was a big migration from the West Indies to New York from Jamaica, Antigua and all the different--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Barbados (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: My grandfather, the last, I don't know all the things he did, but I think he worked on the railroads, he was a porter or something.
Speaker 1: Okay, here in the states when he came over?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay. J. A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] even has a story about being a porter on the trains.  He was a Jamaican immigrant, you know, coming over (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 639799
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Sadie Dean Hoskins], what's her personality like and what does she like to do?
Speaker 2: Mother is no longer with us, but she, I guess, was raised a lot by her grandmother, 'cause my grandmother [Pauline Louise Gassenheimer (ph.)] had to work, so her grandmother raised her.  My great-grandmother did a lot of, spent a lot of time with her, and, I think that she was a very giving person, and very strict though, with me.  I think by the time my sister was born, she was a little tired, so I'd say we had different mothers because she, you know, after a while, got tired of chasing children around.  But--
Speaker 1: So it was just the two of you?
Speaker 2: No, I had a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a brother, in between, died about ten years ago.  In Jamaica, by the way.  He went for a vacation and had a massive heart attack and died.  It was quite traumatic.  But mother was just a very warm and wonderful person to me.  We didn't grow up having a lot of toys and stuff.  My father always worked hard, but, you know, he would come home with bags of cookies that were rejects from the cookie factory and that was a big treat, and mother made doll clothes for my dolls for Christmas.  She just was a wonderful la--that seamstress runs through my family, you know, with the women.  My great-grandmother, as I told you, and my grandmother was a seamstress in New York.  She moved from Atlantic City [New Jersey] to New York [New York] with the family and my mother finished high school in New York.  But, so they all sewed, and could do furs and things that were quite advanced.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did your mother have a chance to go to high school, college?
Speaker 2: She finished Modley High School [ph.], but no, she didn't go to college, and she married young.  And, she went back, she taught sewing for Singer [Corporation] sewing machine.  She did a lot of different things.  She last worked for Chase Bank and she worked with the Rockefellers, you know, with them in the personal executive suite at the end.  And then she worked for the State [of New York] for a number of years, and so, she did a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know that.  I don't know that story.  I think my mother, my father [Wilfred Laurier Hoskins] was a lot older than my mother, so I think my mother met him through his youngest brother who was more her age, Gene, and he was the party person in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My Uncle Gene, who had me out when I was sixteen, for my sixteenth birthday, seventeen, I forgot.  Seventeen, had me out touring the bars in New York in Manhattan.  My mother planned a surprise party for me, but I don't think she knew where we were, but we were having fun.  He was the fun guy in the family.
Story_ID: 639800
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father [Wilfred Hoskins].  What kind of personality did your father have and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Dad was a contractor at the end, and sold building housing supplies.  He also had a cab.  He had his own taxi cab when I was young.  He was, he tried to, he had an idea to open up a laundromat, but I don't think he got the license or something happened there.  But he liked working for himself.  He was a hard worker, he was a person that could do anything with his hands, he could fix anything.  He also taught my brother how to fix, you know, everything, so he was just a-- both of them were.  Mother [Sadie Dean Hoskins] made slipcovers and they, I don't know, could put down linoleum.  He could do everything.  It's so hard to find that kind of guy now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right (laughter).
Speaker 2: He was a diamond in the rough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not a lot of conversation from him, and a hard worker and a real sweet guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have a chance to go to school or anything?
Speaker 2: He had finished high school, that's all.  Yea, yea.
Speaker 1: So he had a number of different jobs and worked hard and wound up as a contractor?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 639801
Speaker 1: Now what is your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember looking out the window across to another building at somebody who was waving and trying to talk to me, a neighbor, and this must have been when I was about two or three, because we left Manhattan [New York, New York] and didn't live that kind of close to, you know, another building, but I remember that person.  And I also remember a friend of mother's [Sadie Dean Hoskins] who had a little boy and we used to walk along Broadway [New York, New York], you know, or get pushed in the buggies together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your neighborhood like when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up really in Brooklyn [New York] and it was in mixed--We lived in several homes there, but they were brownstones, wonderful old architectural features like dumb waiters, and wonderful woodwork that I hated because I had to dust it, and didn't appreciate that at all, but they had, you know, windows that opened into shutters that you could close off and coal being dumped down a grate into the basement, and you know, you had a coal burning stove.  I grew up in a neighborhood that was mixed with Italians I played with in the street and Hungarians who lived next door, and Jewish people were across the street, and there was just a mix of everybody in those days, and nobody knew that anybody was any different, so I guess it was kind of a different day.  But, it was lots of fun.
Speaker 1: Did you live in any--in a specific neighborhood most of the time when you grew up, or did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I lived, I grew up in what is now considered Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York], and it was all mixed then, in terms of population.  It was not all black, and neither were the schools, but I went to public schools.  We walked, neighborhood schools.  We walked to school, and were walked by my mother who wasn't working when I was little.
Speaker 1: Thirty years after you were born, or maybe even more, Bedford-Stuyvesant would become like almost a code word for, eyesore community or slum, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: '60 Minutes' did a documentary on it and people talked about how bad it was, but when you were growing up, it was a lot different, right?
Speaker 2: A lot different.  Jacob Lawrence lived in the neighborhood.  One of the tenants in our building was Meta Warrick Fuller's [Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller] father-in-law, and, you know, when I think back on the opportunities that mother had some real great art early.  Didn't happen.  I guess you just weren't focused on, or she wasn't focused on it.
Story_ID: 639802
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights and sounds.  We were, I remember playing stickball in the street with an Italian family named Morenos [ph.], and being interested in their lunch, which was fried pepper sandwiches that I did never have, so green peppers.  And all the sounds were, well they weren't gunshots for sure.  We played, we had fun.  We had a lot of snow, I remember one winter we made, it was all shoveled and piled up on the curb, so we made a long tunnel the whole length of the block, and crawled down this, in this tunnel and had great fun.  You know we played stickball, we played jacks.  We just did a lot of stuff that nobody does anymore.  Hula hoop that's I think the only thing that has survived that children do sometimes now.  We entertained ourselves with things that didn't cost very much money or anything.
Speaker 1: So the hula hoop was out prior to 1960?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a hula hoop.  Oh yea, I had a hula hoop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That wasn't new.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's really an old, they were down--they were in the colonial times, the hoop, yeah.  Very old game.
Story_ID: 639803
Speaker 1: What kind of little girl were you?  What did you like to do and what kind of personality did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I remember playing house with my brother [Robert Hoskins (ph.)].  I was three years older than he was, so I was, of course, in charge.  We would, on Sunday mornings, I guess my parents [Sadie Dean Hoskins and Wilfred Hoskins] liked to sleep in, and we would take sheets or something and make a tent in the living room and just played house.  I don't know.  It was just make your own entertainment.  There certainly wasn't any TV.  We didn't listen to the radio, so you had to make your own entertainment.
Speaker 1: Was that fairly common that people didn't listen to the radio that much, or--today everybody's watching television(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You weren't tuned into the, you know, or at least our family wasn't.  I mean I grew up reading books and, as I said, playing and learning how to sew and how to do embroidery and stuff like that.  I mean, with a plain little empty spool of thread, you know, some nails around the top and you make this thing that comes out and you make a potholder out of it, wind it around the (unclear), sort of, I don't know what you call it, it's not embroidery, but, you just kept busy when you weren't having fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of creative--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think so, more than I see children doing that now.  At least my grandchildren are busy doing things like soccer and skating and music lessons, and I had music lessons too, 'cause I played the piano and had lessons long enough to make a little record of a classical piece that my piano teacher insisted on me playing.  And I was glad to do it because it was the only thing now that my mother knew that, you know, the money was spent for.  Yes, she did play the piano once.  But, no, children just do different things today.  And I don't say it's any worse or any better, I think we grew up in just a different kind of era and time and what you did with your time was different.
Speaker 1: Now what books did you like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I read all of the Bobbsey Twins stories, all the Carolyn Keene stories I read.  You know, growing up as a young girl, yeah, I read those old stories.  I don't think I was anything particularly, I was very competitive in school.  I grew up in a time when the first row, the first seat in the first row was where you wanted to sit and be because that meant you were the best in that room, and so that's what, that kind of atmosphere is what I grew up with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: You write a little poem and the teacher thought it was cute.  She sent you to the next room to her friend to show her friend this little poem you wrote.  I have a little dog, he's so nice.  His name is Colin.  He eats rice.
Speaker 1: Did you write that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, third grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: Brilliant, huh?  But anyway, that's what, and we had a black principal by the time I graduated and he was early on in the system, but we used to line up to go to assembly and somebody would stand and play the Victrola and we'd all march into the music and sit down and we had a program.  You know once I was in a play, a shadow play.  What was I?  What was that story with?  I can't think of it now.  Somebody--the princess that lets her hair down?
Speaker 1: Rapunzel.
Speaker 2: Rapunzel.  Thank you, thank you.
Speaker 1: Did you have to have prop hair, or did you have hair that--
Speaker 2: No, my hair was long.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I wore braids most of the time and I wore braids to high school and I remember my grandmother, I came home and I said, "Grandma, nobody's wearing," I went to the high school out of my neighborhood and took the "L" [elevated] train and I so I said, "Nobody is wearing braids, Grandma."  And she said, "Don't worry about everybody, you be different."
Story_ID: 639804
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: P.S. 70 [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  P.S. 70.  That's right, in Brooklyn [New York] they don't give 'em names, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it wasn't named, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it's named now.
Speaker 1: That's right.  P.S. 70.  Okay.  Well, so you were a good student, I take it from what you said?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, I tried hard, did my homework.  I liked school.  I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any outstanding personalities around grade school, students or teachers?
Speaker 2: No.  Nothing special.
Speaker 1: That had particular influence on you, teachers?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really think so.  I just knew that I, you know, my parents [Sadie Dean Hoskins and Wilfred Hoskins] expected me to work hard in school and for me to do the best job I could.  If it didn't go exactly that way, it was not going to be the end of the world, but that's what the general expectation was.  And all the way through school my father was very strong in laying down the concept that I would be able to take care of myself should I need to, that I was not going to be dependent upon being married or whatever.  That I should be able to be an independent person to take care of myself.  That's what his main goal was for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's difficult.  Some fathers, you know, who, you know, urged their daughters to marry a guy that can take care of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  I guess he saw his mother, and because at different times both grandmothers lived with us, and I made the connection.  I don't know whether that was something he thought about, but I think that that was the idea that you take care of yourself, be able to take care of yourself.
Story_ID: 639805
Speaker 1: Was art important to you growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think any more so although I remember that I commuted, when I graduated from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I commuted to NYU on the train and I would sit and sketch, but I wasn't that good, and I was interested, but I don't think that I had any real talent in art, but it was something that showed up on an entrance test I took as college in my senior year I think, and art came out very, very strong, and I thought, Well, that's kinda funny, and it just got put on the back burner because I was trained to.  I graduated with a degree in history.  My electives were in education and I was gonna teach high school history.  That's what I planned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't wanna get you too far out there but so in grade school you weren't known for art or anything?
Speaker 2: No,
Speaker 1: Did your parents take you to any galleries or museums?
Speaker 2: No, I just had a friend that, we were very close and when we graduated from college, we said we were going to live down in SoHo [New York, New York], down in the [Greenwich] Village [New York, New York], they called it then, and we were going to have a walk up flat so obviously I was wanting to do something art wise, but I don't, it wasn't anything special.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It still sits on the back burner, something that I'd like to do, maybe in--with ceramics or something.  I don't know one day maybe I'll sit down and actually take the time to do, to try my hand at something, but it's always been on the back burner.
Story_ID: 639806
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school.  Now what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to Franklin K. Lane High School which was in Queens [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So, how was that experience?  How was high school?  Was that--
Speaker 2: I don't think that there was anything special about high school at all.  I didn't, I was not athletic.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was--
Speaker 1: --get involved in sports or anything.
Speaker 2: No, nothing, nothing special.  I belonged to regular organizations but I didn't, there was nothing outstanding there.  I don't remember.  It was a big school.  We would leave school, we had a little gang of friends all going and we'd leave school and run off the train down the steps to a little ice cream parlor and they were, of course, four places, there were five of us, so whoever was the last of the, in the ice cream parlor had to sit at the end 'cause there were five of us and nobody wanted to sit on the end so there was a race to get in there to have hot fudge sundae almost every day.  Can you imagine?  And we didn't quit there, we went around the corner to the fish store and had fried potatoes, a bag of fried potatoes (laughter). We walked home.
Speaker 1: How big are your friends now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were just amazing about that.  So it was like fast food stuff now, my goodness, after school.  But that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Kids crave fat, I guess.
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was, but now I just have, you know, the regular high school experience.  I don't think I was, not voted the most outstanding anything.  It was just a good solid school and time passed.  I went to high school three years because I went to a junior high.  In New York they had junior high so I had my first year in another school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is in 1946 when you were in high school, when you started high school?
Speaker 2: No, let's see, yeah, no, '47 [1947] because I graduated in 1951.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Okay.  What was your favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: I liked sciences.  I like the sciences.
Story_ID: 639807
Speaker 1: Now you majored in history in college.  Now I'm trying to figure this now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, see I was, it was I guess the beginning of going everywhere because by the time I finished high school [Franklin K. Lane High School, Queens, New York, later, Brooklyn, New York], I had a good solid science background, and I thought about my grandfather, what was I gonna do.  So I was gonna be a pharmacist like him, and so I applied and went off to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and I applied to the School of Pharmacy [University of Michigan College of Pharmacy, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And, I got in there and I also got in Purdue [University, Lafayette, Indiana], but I didn't wanna go to Purdue because that was a six year program, and that was too long.  So, I picked Michigan and it was four years, and, of course, the first year I could see why it was six years at Purdue, because I had no time at all from eight in the morning until seven at night.  I was either in lecture, lab or recitation for three different sciences.  That was the first year.  I was taking phys ed [physical education] at night and that was the lowest number of hours.  So every year you had more to do.  So, it was more dedicated than I thought and planned so after a year of that, I said I don't think I'm gonna be a pharmacist.  After I made, had my lab coat, made my little bottle of oil of wintergreen.  I said I think I'm switching to literature arts and sciences and that's what I did.  And that was the end of pharmacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when you were at the University of Michigan, now this is 1951.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Didn't you start in '51 [1951]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there many other black students at the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I made some good friends, mostly from Detroit [Michigan], mostly from the mid-west.  Yeah, they made fun of me 'cause I guess I sounded like a New Yorker and so they laughed my accent away, whatever accent I had.  I never said "thoyty-third" [ph.] or the "boyds" [ph.] and the "goils" [ph.].  I didn't talk like that but they heard an eastern accent and somehow or another it just disappeared.  Some people say they can hear it still, a little bit, but anyway, it was laughed out of me, whatever was funny.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you wind up choosing the University of Michigan from New York, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, because I knew I wanted to go away to school.  I never been--I wanted to go away. And, I didn't know anybody there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that never crossed my mind.  I was just interested in, I guess, where I could go that had a school of pharmacy as I said.
Story_ID: 639808
Speaker 1: Now did you finish talking about your high school [Franklin K. Lane High School, Queens, New York, later, Brooklyn, New York] activities?  Were you involved in anything special in high school?
Speaker 2: Not that I can remember.  I would have to go back to my yearbook to see what clubs or something maybe.
Speaker 1: You were not an officer or anything, or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't graduate with honors or anything?
Speaker 2: I graduated, not as, you know, any of the--I don't even know if they had valedictorians or not.
Speaker 1: You would have had to make a speech?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I wasn't that, I'm not even sure they had those slots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had probably had placement.  I think you were, I think you were ranked out of the class.  It was a big class, a thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Big school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Nothing special I remember about high school.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I like getting away to the new place.  I knew I didn't want to go to school in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a mixed high school too, like your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was mixed.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Black folks would have been, what do you think, what percentage of the population?
Speaker 2: Maybe 10 percent.
Story_ID: 639809
Speaker 1: So University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  So you changed your major there to liberal arts, and you ended up focusing on history, or--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well who--what influenced you to focus on history?
Speaker 2: I liked history. What I really think I was moving to was archeology through history.  If I had known about it, I probably would of, but I didn't know that that was something viable, because in that time most people were, most girls, were urged towards nursing, teaching, or social work.  And so I think history was just something I was interested in.  I took the electives and did the secondary education with them, but I don't know what else I was gonna do with history.  I must have had some good history teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there, up to that point in your life had there been, had you heard much about African American history or African history?
Speaker 2: No, that's interesting.  No.  Went to school in New York [Franklin K. Lane High School, Queens, New York, later Brooklyn, New York] in a time when there were mixed schools.  The only person that told me anything about African American history was my grandmother, and unfortunately, I didn't believe her.  It wasn't in my books.  What was she talking about?  What, Reconstruction [Era], what was she talking about?  There were black senators, representatives.  I thought she was crazy.  Isn't that sad?  That is really sad.
Speaker 1: I guess with the lack of institutional reinforcement, you just--
Speaker 2: And then you see nobody talked about that period aft--for a long time.  That whole subject went dead and quiet.  People did, I don't know what was going on.  Maybe just survival of getting through your life and doing, you know, focusing on other things, but it certainly wasn't looking back at your roots, or even talking about your family history.  None of this my mother [Sadie Dean Hoskins] told me.  I mean you just didn't, I mean people didn't--it was like something that wasn't good to talk about.  The only stories I heard were from her.  And she talked about the South.  And she talked about magnolia trees and she talked about, you know, the beautiful wisteria and the crape myrtles, and guess what, I bought a house in South Carolina.  I knew nothing about the South, and I planted a magnolia tree, I had crape myrtles and I had wisteria growing.  It's like I've come back to something that was seeded a long, long time ago in my imagination by this grandmother and she showed me no pictures at all.  I mean she, she was interesting, really, 'cause she listened to Dave Garroway and somebody else.  She was someone who listened and learned about things that were beyond, you know, the ordinary.  And she kept saying, I remember, "You ought to buy some land out in the desert land, out in Arizona."  I thought, Grandma, there's something wrong with her, but she was just a different kind of person and I don't know where it came from but I just remember that about her.
Story_ID: 639810
Speaker 1: And so now you're at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and you gravitate towards history, so basically, American history, was it ancient history, European history--?
Speaker 2: No, it was American history, American history.
Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of your teachers at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, I don't, I did have some wonderful teachers of note at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  I can't recall the names offhand.
Speaker 1: At the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: That's terrible, yeah.  No, they were at NYU.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The notable ones?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, is there anything about the University of Michigan that stands out?  Now you were there until '54 [1954] or '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: I had a lot --- no, no, no, I was there until '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: '53 [1953].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I finished at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  I enjoyed Ann Arbor [Michigan].  We had a nice group of gals who were pledging.  I have some pictures from pledging days.
Speaker 1: What did you pledge?
Speaker 2: AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but I didn't, I mean it was a pledgee or whatever you call it, but anyway I had a lot of fun.  There was a great group of guys (unclear) and other people that we kept in touch with over the years with some of these people.  It was really fun.
Speaker 1: So you met [HM] Earl [Neal] down there?
Speaker 2: I met my husband, yeah.  He was in [University of Michigan] Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we went back to Ann Arbor on our 25th Anniversary and didn't recognize the place, of course.  It had grown so much bigger.
Speaker 1: Ann Arbor is known as kinda like a quintessential college town, and everybody kinda likes it as a college town.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but we had been used to, you know, his involvement with the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois] over the years as a trustee and so that we more down to Champaign-Urbana [Illinois], so that the size of the town just was so different to us 'cause it was so much bigger.  But--
Speaker 1: Well the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is huge anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was big then, but it is huge now.  It really is.  There is a whole campus that wasn't around when we were there.
Story_ID: 639811
Speaker 1: What did--did you get married and leave school?
Speaker 2: No, I went back to New York.  [HM] Earl [Neal] was graduating and he met my folks [Sadie Dean Hoskins and Wilfred Hoskins] and convinced them that Michigan was too big for him, for me to stay, and so my folks yanked me back, I mean not that they would listen to him, but I got yanked back to New York and that's why I finished at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  He was going into the [U.S.] Army so--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he got you back home and then went to the Army?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  When I think about what happened, yes, I think that's what the story was, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So you finished at NYU and who were some of the professors at NYU?
Speaker 2: Oh, Larry [Crowe], I should have done my homework.  I don't remember those folks' names.  I'm sorry, I really don't.  I don't.
Speaker 1: Well American history, now you say you kinda majored in American history?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, was--
Speaker 2: You have some names, too--
Speaker 1: Well, perhaps, I don't know.  I ask you this--
Speaker 2: Putnam, Putney, Putney [ph.] comes to mind.
Speaker 1: I think there's a Putnam, yeah.
Speaker 2: Putney, like I first said, but boy I'd have to sit and think about this.
Speaker 1: Some of these, in the New York area, I know you had Eric Foner, I think--or Philip [S.]  Foner, was writing then.  His son Eric [Foner] is now a very famous historian--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --But they were part of, there's a tension between historians in those days regarding Reconstruction [Era], just what you mentioned a moment ago, Reconstruction and the interpretation of it, I think, because I think prior to the early '60s (1960s] the interpretation of that was a southern interpretation, southern lost cause and all that sort of thing, you know, sort of thing.  'The Birth of a Nation', you know, model of what happened when blacks got free, they destroyed everything.  The Klan had to put them back in their place.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was actually taught (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That wasn't quite, that's not what I remember.  I would think this would have been early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because I graduated in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Was there any tension over those historical interpretations when you were in school--
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: --discussing that?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: The early '60s [1960s] being the--
Speaker 2: The '60s [1960s] changed everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the 100th Anniversary of the Civil War and historians put the Civil War right in the center in the bull's eye of everything they were doing in those days, and a lot of dialogue and discussion about what, you know, was it interpreted correctly or not, you know what's going on there, so I don't know if you, you know, took part in those kinds of discussions or watched that?
Speaker 2: No, no, I think I was just on the edge of that before that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  Okay.  All right.  Anything outstanding about your, the instruction at NYU?  Did they teach you something that you, you know, would kinda changed your life or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't remember any life changing.  I was, I can't say so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well--
Speaker 2: Did you ever know of an Albert Caines [ph.]?  I was in school with him.  You remember he became the [U.S.] Ambassador to Liber--not Liberia, Libya.  Remember he was, he was a negotiator for some of the hostages that were taken in Liberia, not--Libya, Libya.
Speaker 1: In Libya.  Okay, I remember that name.  Right.
Speaker 2: He was in school with me.  He was a good friend of my parents.
Speaker 1: What's his name again?
Speaker 2: Albert Caines.  He was a Brooklynite, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I just happened to think of that.
Story_ID: 639812
Speaker 1: Now you graduated [from New York University, New York, New York] in nineteen fifty--?
Speaker 2: Five [1955]. From college.
Speaker 1: Was [HM] Earl [Neal] back from the [U.S.] Army by then?
Speaker 2: Not quite. Was he back?  I think he was, yeah, I think he was 'cause we got married in September [1955], so yeah, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was back in Chicago [Illinois] studying for the bar.  That's what he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I guess shortly after graduation you moved to Chicago with him?
Speaker 2: After we got married, in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No Isobel did not move to Chicago until she got married.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: That was a different day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So you moved here in the fall of '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, moved in with his parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did they live in Chicago?
Speaker 2: They lived south, on Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], 7749 at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now how did you like Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved Chicago.  I had been here a couple of times and met his folks and friends and I had been here earlier, too, with my parents [Sadie Dean Hoskins and Wilfred Hoskins] 'cause my uncle lived here, had a pharmacy in Chicago.  So we all came out to see him once.  But I fell in love with Chicago.  I really did.  It's a beautiful city.  It's much easier to live in, friendlier than New York, but I like going to New York, you know, when I had family there to visit.  Any excuse was good for a short time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But living everyday living in Chicago is very hard to beat.  It's a very livable city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots to do and, you know, you don't need a suitcase of money to do it.
Story_ID: 639813
Speaker 1: Now when you came out of NYU [New York University, New York, New York], you had a, was it, did you have a master's in history by the time you came out?
Speaker 2: No, I just had a bachelor of, what was it, art--
Speaker 1: Art history?
Speaker 2: No, I had B.A. in history.
Speaker 1: A bachelor of arts in history?  Okay.  I think it was something I read and got it mixed up--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a master's in anthropology, but that was much later after my son [Langdon Neal] was grown and off to college himself.  I took a sabbatical from the [Chicago] Board [of Education, Chicago, Illinois] and went out for what was to be one year, in California, Santa Barbara, and got invited into the [University of California: Santa Barbara] doctorial program, and didn't finish that program because [HM] Earl [Neal] got sick in my second year out there.  I finished all the classwork up, and he got sick while we were off on vacation and had what was a ruptured appendix, but we didn't know it.  We were on a boat, a sailboat.  It was quite a to-do, up and down.  Can you imagine with that kind of pain up and down the side of a boat into, row into a hospital to get checked and they said, "Oh, I think he has the flu," but he was a raving--really full of fever and pain, and I got him off again and we, you know, to come home, and then it was diagnosed here in Chicago [Illinois] that, which was a blessing because if they had known what was wrong with him, they would've operated and  (unclear) and he wouldn't be around, believe me.  Because they would have opened him up and that wasn't what happened to him, so he was okay.  They just filled him full of antibiotics and it mulled over and they had surgery later.  So that was the end of my California days.  I came back, back to the real world.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I had two years there and it was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 639814
Speaker 1: Tell me about, now you became a teacher here in Chicago [Illinois].  Did you first teach handicapped students, or did you--
Speaker 2: No, no.  When I came to Chicago, I really worked one year with the Chicago Department of Welfare [later, Chicago Department of Family and Support Services].  And I worked with children's division, was a caseworker with foster home children, so I had to learn the city real fast 'cause they were sending me everywhere.  And I even went out to St. Charles [ph.], which is kind of interesting in that some of the children had been--I wrote letters, you know, boys sent to the boys' school out in St. Charles [Illinois School for Boys, St. Charles, Illinois], so I did some foster checking on parents and I'm checking on foster home placement and things like that, but later on in life, it turns out that I had written to my son's father-in-law who ran the prison out there.  And, you know, also met his sister in college, in Ann Arbor [Michigan] and then later when Lang[don Neal] came home and said he was dating somebody named Sublett [ph.], I said, Sublett, Sublett.  That's a very unusual name.  Ask her if she knows anybody named Vernett Sublet [ph.].  Her name was Jeanette [ph.], and, of course, he came back and said, "My goodness, mother, that's her aunt."  I said, "Well, I went to school with her."  Small world stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so you worked for the Chicago Department of Welfare?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I did that for a year, and evidently, I was looking for, I missed some timing anyway, I was gonna substitute teach.  And, Earl's [HM Earl Neal] parent, his mother [Evelyn Smith Neal], was a teacher, and so she said--I know what it was, I tried to get on with the history, you know, department, in high school, and there were no jobs, and I remember them saying all of the histories here die with their boots on, you now, they don't have many positions, so she advised me to go back and pick up some elementary ed [education] classes.  So after Langdon was born, I started taking some classes at night at [Chicago] Teachers College [later, Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and I picked up enough to, to, you know, take the exam and teach elementary school and that's what I did.  That's how I got to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this puts us at what year?
Speaker 2: This puts us in '57 [1957] when Lang was born, fall of '57 [1957] maybe.
Story_ID: 639815
Speaker 1: So what school did you teach at first?
Speaker 2: I started at Mason [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], my first job, I think I was subbing there.  But anyway, I had a little third grade class at Mason at 16th and Keeler [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and I was on that early shift and I had to be there, I guess, I don't know, at 7:30 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say the early shift,--
Speaker 2: Schools were in shift then.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They had two shifts.
Speaker 1: People don't understand why.
Speaker 2: Why?  Because there were two few schools, too many kids to get in the school at the same time, so they divided in two.
Speaker 1: This has something to do with burgeoning black population, right?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Swell in the city [Chicago, Illinois], and not enough facilities to handle all the people.
Speaker 2: Right, late '50s [1950s], yea.
Speaker 1: And the black people being pinned into a certain geographical area that they couldn't leave basically, in terms of living.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So the students went to school in shifts?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: And, in mobile to the call of Willis Wagons, remember that?
Speaker 1: Right.  The famous Willis Wagons.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So then I went from after that, you know I really think that was before Lang was born.  Yeah, that was probably '55 [1955], and then after he--I took a two-year maternity leave and then went back into Shakespeare--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Shakespeare School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  And I have some little pictures of a couple of classes.
Story_ID: 639816
Speaker 1: How did you like teaching in the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] in those days?
Speaker 2: It was not bad at all.  I mean I had thirty-eight, in your class you had thirty-five kids at least. It was doable.
Speaker 1: You had three year old, I mean third graders?
Speaker 2: Third grade, fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Fifth grade. I had some fifth graders, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And from Shakespeare [School, Chicago, Illinois], I went to Beethoven [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and when Beethoven opened, I'm trying to remember, like in the '60s [1960s], or in 1960.  I think I have one picture.  Maybe it was '65 [1965].  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Where was Beethoven?
Speaker 2: 47th and State [Street, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right on the corridor with all the major housing projects?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was that experience different from being at Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] and Shakespeare [School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, it really wasn't.  Really wasn't.  It,--the kids at Beethoven were beginning, you could see the effect of the high rise living.  That was different from Shakespeare and from Mason [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. You could also see a change in the qualifications of the teachers that were coming in and was substitute teachers 'cause I was assigned, you know, as a teacher come in as training, teacher training, and I could see that they were not, they were accepting people into this program that were not really qualified to teach.  And it was very disturbing to see.  And, it was becoming more and more difficult to teach because I don't know if they were required more and more paperwork so that most of your time was spent filling in paperwork and sending multiple copies of everything everywhere and I don't know why. I just said the conclusion that downtown was just a pile of paper.  And very little--really your time was taken away from you, your teaching time, your real time.  So, I don't know, that was just the beginning of certain--looking at the differences and what was happening I could see that the system was spiraling down and it was just, it was a lot of frustration in the classroom for a teacher who really wanted to teach and had the wherewithal to do it, that means you approached it as a real challenge and, who were interested in kids in that they weren't just sitting there collecting a check.  It was very frustrating.
Story_ID: 639817
Speaker 1: But I spent another ten years in homebound which was a little different than me.  You know you didn't have that kind of, we had paperwork but not quite as much.  But if you had the freedom to work one-on-one with a student, and that was a lot.
Speaker 2: So that's what you did in homebound, you worked?--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you visited children in their home.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I didn't even know there was such a program.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's what Earl's [HM Earl Neal] mother was doing, and she invited, you know she sort of encouraged me to go back to school to get those classes, so I back and picked up enough credits to do that.
Speaker 2: So someone who is kinda restricted to staying at home because of illness or injury--
Speaker 1: A physical injury that would keep you out of school a minimum of six weeks.  Not a lot of surgery, a lot of cases, broken legs, spina bifida.  I had kids that had serious problems, too.  I had a little girl who had had six strokes and she had sickle cell [anemia].  There was a wide variation in ability to get, you know, some classwork in.
Story_ID: 639818
Speaker 1: Was there a story from any of these experiences that you can share with us about?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to a lot of students who lived in high rises.  I saw a lot of stuff. And that's where I guess you also saw the breakdown of the family in terms of who was home with these kids, and how they lived and then I understood more about the difficulties the classroom teacher had, because it was so much that wasn't going on at home that you could see firsthand.  And I drove a Corvette, but it was fine and nobody touched my car in Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] in the worst of buildings, they didn't take my antenna, they didn't do anything because they knew there was a respect for a teacher that came in to teach and the word, I guess, was passed along through the grapevine that this is somebody who has come here to help, you know, so don't touch her car.  So I never had any fear.  I walked down the steps, when the elevators weren't running.  Although, the last time I did, the elevators weren't running because there was a body in the elevator shaft, and my husband [HM Earl Neal], when I found out about that, he said maybe we better think about this a little bit.  But, it was a different day, even in Cabrini-Green.  You know drugs hadn't hit the system yet and so people weren't crazy, they were poor.  And there was the family breakdown, but there wasn't the complete breakdown that happened with drugs hit there.  You now I think that's what makes the defining difference with what you--with what teachers have to work with now. Totally different, totally different challenge.
Speaker 1: It is, I've heard that the projects were in better condition, there's better upkeep on projects when they were first opened up.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: Maintenance and other amenities--
Speaker 2: I mean, that's all reflected in what was happening in the community.  And that's what you get to come--I mean that's what comes to you as a teacher and you have five hours to work with this child.  And if there's nothing going on, you can't pass that very easily.  I mean there are one or two, there're going to be alright, you know, they're going to make it.  But, it's just hard for them to get past that.  I mean this is a physical challenge to get to the building, out of their building.  You know their safety's compromised, everything is compromised.  Nutrition, just name it.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Supervision.
Story_ID: 639819
Speaker 1: During your spare time, your husband's [HM Earl Neal] career has really taken off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's working hard.
Speaker 1: He started off with a modest income, but, you know, becomes an--
Speaker 2: Builds his firm, with his father as his base and then he builds it working hard.  Yeah, he's--
Speaker 1: He becomes corporation counsel for like I don't know how mayors in the city [Chicago, Illinois] now.
Speaker 2: We, he wasn't corporation counsel.  He was special counsel.
Speaker 1: Special counsel, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, counsel.  So he didn't work for the city.  He always worked for himself, but he was hired by the city, by contract.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the difference.  But, yeah, he was, he was working very hard.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and his income is growing. I mean he's got a lot--I mean, I guess what I'm getting at is, after a while, you didn't have to really worry about working for income necessarily.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Perhaps, I'm not, I don't know, I'm just throwing it out there.
Speaker 2: Well that's true, it's true.  But then I would have worked anyway.  I mean I've always worked and that's why when I vested my time with the [Chicago] Board [of Education, Chicago, Illinois] in twenty years, I thought, well now I'll do something else.  And, I kind of looked around for a while and I was active with some charitable organizations and went to meetings and planned parties for fundraisers.  They were all good causes, but I was still looking for something and that's how the gallery came about.
Story_ID: 639820
Speaker 1: Had you, I mean, well, how did the, well just tell us how the idea for the gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] came about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know it's very strange, it's very strange.  It's like, I wish I could tell you it was always my dream, or, you know, it was the artist coming out or what.  None of that.  I was chairing 'Black Creativity,' the juried art show [sic, 'The Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'] one year--
Speaker 1: This is the big show that's held at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the big show that's held in February at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] which is a science museum basically.  It has nothing to do with art.
Speaker 1: But it's on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: It's on the Southside and they have the celebration of black history once a year, and it's in February so part of it is a juried art show.  I saw the slides come in to this art show from artists all across the country and across the water, Canada, everywhere, and I said, "My goodness, this is a science museum, this is a art show at a science museum for one month.  What did these artists do the rest of the year," and that's what took me to the gallery.  Checking out what they did for the rest of the year.  And, I found for maybe [HM] Richard Hunt and maybe one or two other artists, there wasn't anybody doing anything of-I don't wanna say.  Well back up a little bit, the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] was certainly around for fifty years, but I was talking about a commercial gallery, and that's what I said I wanted to do.  Maybe that's where all the back burner came forward a little bit and I said, "I think I wanna open that art gallery."  Everybody, family, everybody, husband, everybody said, "You've got to be crazy."  I talked to art gallery owners.  I talked to Dan Cicero [ph.] and then I talked to, oh, gosh, I can't think of her name now who said, "You must be crazy."  Anyway, I did it.  I had saved a little nest egg from my teaching days and I invested it in it and it just got blown away real fast, but there was such a response to the gallery that it became clear to my family that, yes, it was a need here.  It was a need and it was the junction of not only a need, but a time, a need for artists to exhibit, but a time when there was a professional black middle class that wanted and searched for works by African American artists.  So it was a good junction of time there.
Story_ID: 639821
Speaker 1: Now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1986.  September 24th.
Speaker 1: Right, this is the second-to-last-year of [Mayor] Harold [Lee] Washington's first administration [in Chicago, Illinois], I guess, '86 [1986] who was in the middle of the Harold Washington years.  There was a lot of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --upbeat feeling in the black community.  People were, you know--
Speaker 2: Very hopeful--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that things were going to be different to change.
Speaker 1: Right, they're mentally soaring at that point.  Right.  And so it's in this atmosphere that you opened Isobel Neal Gallery.
Speaker 2: Right.  My husband [HM Earl Neal] thought nobody would come.  He was just astounded to know that were people (unclear) lined up outside in the rain, down the hall, down the steps, to the outside on the street.  I was on the second floor, you know.  I was stunned, too.  I mean I didn't know what to expect, I really didn't.
Speaker 1: And you got a space now.  Where was your space located?
Speaker 2: I was 200 West Superior [Street, Chicago, Illinois] on the second floor.
Speaker 1: This is an area where there are quite a few--
Speaker 2: Well, that's where I wanted to be.  That's where, that was the point, that I wanted to be where all the other galleries were.  That was the message.  I thought we had a universal product to exhibit.
Speaker 1: Before that time, there was black art exhibited in galleries, though not that much, but usually by white gallery owners would exhibit the black art, right?
Speaker 2: I don't know of many.  Then--
Speaker 1: Paul, man had a Haitian art gallery.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Waggoner.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Paul Waggoner, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he, I thought Paul did like um, I know he had a show of Senegalese tapestries that was wonderful.  And I thought he was more into Haitian art--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a lot of Haitian.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then I think Nicole Gallery [HM Nicole Smith].  She was black, but she opened--
Speaker 2: Right, but she opened also--
Speaker 1: Did she open before you?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She was on Halsted [Street, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she moved right down the street from me.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there weren't too many.  That's one we've talked about, but we can't think of the name.  Neither one of us can right now still, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he opened up on 53rd Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.  He had, sort of an eclectic collection.
Speaker 2: Joe Clark [Joseph Clark].
Speaker 1: Is that who it was?
Speaker 2: Joe Clark.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Story_ID: 639822
Speaker 1: Now who--what artists did you feature in your gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], and what type of art were you trying to--?
Speaker 2: Well, all that sort of evolved.  I opened up with William [S.] Carter, a local person, graduated from the--School of the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Had wonderful following and he was known in the community so, he brought in a lot of people.  And that show was many different artists.  It was, he was the feature, but then I had one or two works by a lot of different people, local and--I had done some buying of art through connections in New York so I had some Jacob Lawrence prints that were, by the way, I think $700, $500 maybe.  And, the series, what was that series, the 'John Brown series'.  Can you imagine?  I wish I had not sold him.
Speaker 1: What are they worth now?
Speaker 2: I can't even tell you.  Lots, lots more.  Let's see, locally, it gone on to have done very well was [HM] Jonathan Green.  I had work by him.  I had a couple of [HM] Madeline [Murphy] Rabb's pieces.  I had [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, inadvertently, next to her first husband [Charles Wilbert White].  Somebody mentioned that to me.  I got a little brain drain here.  Who was out on the West Coast.  Wonderful strong.
Speaker 1: Was this a sculptor?
Speaker 2: No, painter.  Yeah. I'll come back to it. Anyway, who else was in my first show?  Just a mix of different artist's work.  So I had a lot of help from people because, from New York, I probably had some Clark, [HM] Ed[ward] Clark, pieces, too.  And then I had a show soon after of all New York artists, [HM] Howardena Pindell and Benny Andrews. And then I begin hearing, well, why, you know, what about the artists here?  Or are you going to show New York artists.  So I said it's a interesting learning experience that I then mixed it up a little bit more so that I did want to focus on the artists that I felt were not being shown.  More local people, try to be supportive, and I found that I had no trouble finding people, they found me.  The grapevine worked and I had more slides than I ever thought from everywhere too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From everywhere, across the water as well, plus every state here.
Story_ID: 639823
Speaker 1: What was your most successful show [at the Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: You mean in sales?
Speaker 1: Yes, that would be interesting too.
Speaker 2: I had some wonderfully--people I think came out to see the shows and also I think it became for a while a place to see people of like concerns and interests.  And so it became sort of a gathering, my openings became sort of a gathering for people to mix and I began to wander if they were really looking at how much time they were spending looking at the art, but it was a good time, and they were all very successful, I think.  Monetarily, I think the artists who kind of listened and understood that they weren't New York prices, and they weren't, you know, gonna, to give time to their career, that they could spiral up from, you know, a decent price, but they weren't gonna get New York prices as an unknown name.  Those were the most successful shows because they sold out everything and Herbert House did that, and, of course, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett always sent me prints.  I always kept work also that was in a range so that if you, you could find something, a print or something that I had, and if you couldn't buy original.
Story_ID: 639824
Speaker 1: You--I want to ask you, what was the most successful show, you said in what way do I mean that?  I was thinking monetarily, but there are other ways I guess, to judge the success of a show, too, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what was there--
Speaker 2: Well, that was an example I gave you with Herbert [House].  He sold every show.  I think we did two or three shows and he sold every piece of work.  And my husband [HM Earl Neal] likes to tell the story on the last show he said, "You know, I'm going to, I'm going to Hawaii."  He had enough money to get to Hawaii.  He said, "I'm just going to live there."  And we said, "Oh really, and aren't you going to do any more work?"  "No, I'm going to Hawaii."  And he stayed there for a while and then he, you know I heard from him, he said, well, you know that's kinda of--.  He found out how expensive living would be, but he at least got to live out a dream he had for a while.  But, I would say there were others I could name too that had shows that sold out, but that's what I call success, not that they, you know--Benny Andrews had shows with Norman Lewis's work and we had Austin [ph.].  They were, the price points were different.  So I sold some but I didn't sell out completely, sell the shows completely.  But, no artist went without a sale in the show.  We made sure that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just as a policy.
Speaker 1: How do you make sure of that?  Do you buy them yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we just bought 'em for inventory.  That's right.  Coughed up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's wonderful for the artist.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they--you just couldn't do that, I mean, I couldn't.  To say, "Gee, sorry, thanks, goodbye."  Besides, that's the difference in a gallery anyway.  A gallery that does the job of promoting the artist, putting out the material, putting out the invitation, having the opening, all those are investments in dollars.  And that's what you can't then say, you know, "Well I'm sorry you didn't make a sale."  So we just had that as a policy to be supportive.
Story_ID: 639825
Speaker 1: I don't think it was a disbelief, I think there was an invisibility there.  We [African Americans] were invisible as consumers to them.  Never thought about us I don't think.  It was just never seen, so it was never imagined until they saw it concretely in the [Isobel Neal] Gallery [Chicago, Illinois] that there were people who had the wherewithal to spend money, almost the first time it happened too, that we had disposable funds as a group.  As I said, it was a professional class of people who had disposable income to spend for the first time.  So, that was the reason, too, plus they just never knew that there were so many that were interested in art.  So it was a time when I think they re-evaluated what they were doing and I think more people tried to find someone that would fit into their gallery culture, including people of color in that culture.  And they were.  They found, they found the people who did.
Speaker 2: There seem to be an awakening across the board in the late '80s [1980s] and now the '90s [1990s] in terms of the major arts institutions in the city [Chicago, Illinois] to the black consumers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: As there was an awakening, I guess, across the city to, where the arts community in Chicago, all the majors and the minors tried to convince the city that art was more important than the city thought it was.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, in terms of real dollars brought into the city and tourism.
Speaker 1: Right, never had thought of that either as a means of culture enhancement and bringing people to the city by having all the cultural events right, that's true.  There was something else, I can't remember now what it was, but I think you're right, I think it was more across the board as well. Through arts organizations as well.
Speaker 2: Right, and I know when--
Speaker 1: I think that's part of the reason I got invited to so many boards because I was this person who would bring this kind of interest to the group, the culture, the contact.  There were people and I knew people and people, there was a list and it was a viable potential list of consumers.
Story_ID: 639826
Speaker 1: Do you remember, I believe it was in 19-, I think it was '88 [1988] or '89 [1989], the big city-wide, well the big art exhibit ['The Chicago Show'] at the [Chicago] Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois].  Do you remember that?  It became kind of a fiasco there, remember that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, what was the title of that?  Yeah, when they didn't invite, it was a Chicago show, right, where they didn't have any black artists.  Is that what you?
Speaker 1: Right.  We had blind jury selected the art (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. My, my, that goes back to the image question, whether-and I always phrased it the work I showed was work by black artists.  It wasn't black art.  It was a difference, because there is no particular image.  Now some of my artists had imagery that was black-oriented, but a lot were not.
Speaker 1: For an example?
Speaker 2: Well, the John Rozelle [ph.], the Calvin [B.] Jones, who could do both, but there were people who did abstract expressionism.  The Ed[ward] Clarks, the Benny Andrews, I mean those are not typical black images so that there was a whole education arm that I think came out of the [Isobel Neal] Gallery and I produced, you know we had classes and, about, because people would always say, "I don't know enough about art."  You know, "What do I have to know?"  Well I had books, I had references and I, and I had (unclear) classes, and just didn't spend a lot of time talking to people about educating your eye if you don't feel comfortable buying, not because you think it's going to go up in value, but because you'd like to live with it.  Basic issues.  I mean, I've had people ask me where to hang a piece on the wall.  Hang it where it looks good to you.  So there was a whole arm of educating a group of people, but that also happened in the other world, the larger world too.  They went through an education process of what it is to have, you know, other people come in and what is, and I think that's what happened with the show, getting back to your question, that they, that to have a black artist meant they had to have a black visual representation of a painting, you know, of an image that said, "This is black, this is a black artist," and I think they got into all the philosophy of that and got kind of off-base.  I don't really remember the particulars, but I know inclusion was a problem, was a big problem.
Speaker 1: At the end of the day, there were no black artists, hardly any black artists, or Hispanics.
Speaker 2: Right, but you see that was because they didn't send out, they didn't find the artist that they were looking for.  They didn't maybe know them, I don't know, but the imagery or the people they invited to the show didn't have the imagery they wanted to show.  So, there's, we've been through a whole education on the other side of a small gallery trying to just stay alive.
Story_ID: 639827
Speaker 1: Well correct me if I'm wrong here, but it seems though there was sort of a burst of attention focused on the arts during the [Mayor] Harold [Lee] Washington administration [Chicago, Illinois] that had not happened before in the city, in a sense.  And then a certain amount of trepidation when Harold Washington died in '87 [1987], right after he died, really the same month that the 'Chicago Cultural Plan' was completed, one of his big projects.  I mean the plan was, you know, published and there was a reception for it and everything.  Then he dies that same November [1987].  And there seemed to be a lot of fear in the arts community, black and white, that the new mayor would see the White Sox and the Bears as being priority in a city like Chicago, all over, you know, the cultural accent.  It doesn't seem to have, well, can you discuss that?
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't happen, so while this is a heavily sports-oriented town, I think the arts have grown, right along, and because I think, like you said, alluded to earlier, that they understood for this moment, this period of time, they hadn't seen that the arts bring in lots of people to this town and it's a good, it's a good venue for the City.  I think they had already seen that, that's why it didn't go away with Harold Washington's loss.  And certainly under this mayor, I mean I don't remember [Mayor] Jane [Margaret] Byrne, did a little different things. She did, she started the 'Taste of Chicago', and her ideas were a little different.
Speaker 1: 'Chicago Fest' I think she called it then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, 'Chicago Fest', and, but I think steadily the arts were growing here, under, even under Jane and [Mayor Michael Anthony] Bilandic.  Of course, his wife [Heather Morgan] was very interested in the arts so that continued there.  So, I don't think we've lost ground because Lois Weisberg is very strong.
Speaker 1: That was the fear in '91 [1991] that we have a mayor that wasn't going to--
Speaker 2: Continue.
Speaker 1: --He'd be 'Da mayor' and not be the arts mayor, but the arts seem to have, you know, steadily, you know, as you said developed and evolved.
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think we have more dance companies, we have more theater companies, we have lots, lots, and we have some very specialized arts groups from [Chicago] Shakespeare [Theater] to the group in the [Chicago] Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] which does everything.  That's why it's a fun place to sit on the board there because they really do more than I could, it makes your head spin, like you could live at the cultural center every day, all day long.
Speaker 1: Some do.  It was a joke of course, but some people do, literally all day long.
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah.  For programming, it's really terrific.  Free programming.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: We don't collect a penny for any of that.
Speaker 1: We've had like under [Mayor Richard M.] Daley, Gallery 37 started which is a wonderful program for youth.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 639828
Speaker 1: Now you had--Isobel Neal Gallery [Chicago, Illinois] existed for ten years now, why did you stop?
Speaker 2: Well there was a junction again of other things going on.  One, businesswise, arts are, you know, the business is cyclical.  So, we were in a little down period.  I downsized to stay alive and really was neither fish nor fowl.  I wasn't big enough to do shows and I was trying to have a few pieces in for a show and I guess half-consultant, half, you know, gallery.  I wasn't happy with that.  It really wasn't what I had been doing, and George [R.] N'Namdi who had approached me about being a partner some years back, said to me that he was coming to Chicago [Illinois] and opening up, and I said, "George, you know, that's a good idea.  Why don't you do that?"
Speaker 1: Now he was a Nigerian, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: N'Namdi?
Speaker 2: That's just an adopted name.
Speaker 1: Adopted name, okay.
Speaker 2: He's an American.  And he had a gallery in, not Detroit [Michigan], but one of the suburbs, and so he was coming to Chicago and I said, "Fine, you come, you open up," because he represented some of the same artists I did.  Ed Clark, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, Richard Mayhew, I don't know, not everybody, but a lot of, he did Austin [ph.] and Norman Willis [ph.].  So I said, well, I think, my mother [Sadie Dean Hoskins] at that time was living with me and I think failing, she was in a nursing home and needed somebody to be with her at lunch time 'cause if she took two hours to eat lunch and that was the major meal of the day, and nobody, no age, nobody you could pay to sit and make sure she ate, so I was trying to run over there at noon, and leaving somebody at the [Isobel Neal] Gallery.  Then my son [Langdon Neal], who had two children, doubled his pleasure with a set of twins and then there were four grandchildren.  And I thought I was missing out on something there playing with the babies, so it's just a time economically George coming to open up and I said, Okay, I can let this go without it going away.  I think that was the major thing that I felt comfortable closing because I thought, He'll carry on.  He was younger, he had been in business longer, I thought, Perfect.  So I did what I could, you know made sure he had my mailing list and I stuck around and came to his openings and I worked on there for a while until I felt that he had taken root, and then because he had his son there, I wasn't needed.  But, it was just time, it was time.  I would like to have started ten years earlier.  That was the problem.  In my life cycle, too, because if I had started ten years earlier, I think it would have been much, much better.  As you are younger, you know, also, would have, as I think about the galleries that are successful, they were--had been in existence quite early, and so you learn, you build inventory and you hold it, and that's how you, you know, build a gallery that really has some substance to it.  It's hard to the do in the time period that I chose, and then my life cycle, I think it would have been better if we did it ten years earlier, but you find all these things out and I don't have one regret about any day that I had in the gallery.  It was never boring.  I never had two days that were alike.  I had a challenge to face everyday that I got there and opened the door and I wouldn't have given it up for anything in the world.
Story_ID: 639829
Speaker 1: Is there any particular thing that happened that stands out as your favorite day in the [Isobel Neal] Gallery [Chicago, Illinois], or any day or incident that stands out?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  When I opened up the day I opened up, a painting disappeared in the gallery next door to me just as people were coming in for first time, and  I was just crazy and I had my friends posted.  And I said, "You all go into different rooms and you stand around and watch people," because somebody had walked in and taken a painting off the wall, a rather large one, and down the steps or in the elevator or something.  And, of course, before I opened I had somebody come in the gallery and take my wallet out of my coat closet so they had been watching 'cause I just had gone to take a crate a few steps away.  So, I, you know, I had all kinds of experiences.  And then there was Geraldine's [HM Geraldine McCullough] show, who had a piece, a wonderful piece that when she brought it, about a few minutes before the opening, we found that it wouldn't come through the door so she had to take the top of it off and get it in.  So, you know, there was just a general run of--
Speaker 1: Was this Geraldine McCullough?
Speaker 2: Geraldine McCullough, a great big piece.  So we said, "Well maybe we'll put it outside," and she didn't like that so she said, "I'm taking the top off," so that's how that got in that day.  They just, it's the kind of business that I guess, is just non-boring because you're working with artists, creative people who also can create interesting problems to solve as well.  But just the business, just being in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else about the gallery?
Speaker 2: No, I think I said, I really miss it.  I like having to curate and do shows here and I had done that.  I had down a show down in Champaign [Illinois] at the university, Krannert Art Center [later, Krannert Art Museum at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois].  I'd done other shows.  I like participating as a curator, but I don't miss the headaches, no.  I have some other things that entertain me now and give me challenges, but I always will have something to do with the arts because that's in my blood, that's the part that, I guess, was waiting to come later.
Story_ID: 639830
Speaker 1: If I'm getting the gist of your attitude about this correct, most of your experiences with the artists were pleasant?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have troublesome artists?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, not trouble, I had, well I did have trouble, one client came in and wanted to take a piece home for, to see how it would fit in his home and then I couldn't get the piece back, so I had to get a lawyer out of Earl's [HM Earl Neal] office, named Terry Diamond [ph.], a little feisty lawyer and we got our papers, she had papers, and we went in to reclaim this piece of art.  That was an interesting experience.  I had--
Speaker 1: So you had to go to court first?
Speaker 2: No, we went--
Speaker 1: --To his home?
Speaker 2: We went to his home.  We had papers.  What kind of papers we had to get this piece. We didn't have to go to court.  Oh, I did have a court case once.  I had a gallery, I won't say where, come in who represented an artist who's show I was giving and they had presold all the work.  They were all, I think there was like one piece that wasn't sold.  And so, when I sold it, there was something, yeah, they claimed that I owed them.  So anyway, we went to court over it.  I can't remember the fine points of it, but it was ridiculous, so that was cleared away.  I had an artist that had brought his agent in and told me that the next show these were the prices that the artist wanted for his work, and I didn't feel that they were compatible with what we were ready to do, and I didn't think that they could command that kind of price, so he left.  Let's see what else?  I never really had, I mean I remember being horrified that I hadn't seen the spelling of Benny Andrews and when I looked at the card that I had invested some dollars in, it was B-E-N-N-I-E, and I thought, Oh my God, he's going to have a fit.  But you know, professional people are understanding that, yeah, people make mistakes, and so it was fine.  We got that fixed up.  I mean I called him and I said, "Benny, I don't know how this happened but I was not on top of it and somebody spelled your name wrong."  He didn't have a problem.  He was the finest gentlemen, is the finest gentlemen you ever wanna see.  Just a nice person, wonderful southern boy from Georgia.  Man, excuse me, but I mean he's got that easy southern comfort with everybody.  I just had lots of these gliches.  Everyone does.  And anybody in business knows, you know, how attached it is to the umbilical cord, and that you gotta roll with the punches because there is a punch everywhere around waiting for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You just have to stay on top of it.
Story_ID: 639831
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Artistic-wise?
Speaker 1: Oh, any way--
Speaker 2: --Let's just focus-um, well, I feel that, you know, unfortunately economics still rule the game and that we're in some tough times and I think in tough times people always protect their own.  And I don't think the opportunities are there now as much, and so, I would just like to see that change somehow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you--
Speaker 2: More support for working artists so they can continue and grow.  I'm not so sure that it's really that strong here.
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: It's much better in New York or,--
Speaker 2: I think New York had a longer history or, it's a more financial- connected town.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: I think the Midwest still is, you know, not there yet.  On both coasts, I think it's easier to work with than being in the Midwest.  That I don't think has changed an awful lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's for artists across the board, period.  And, of course, when times get tight, you know, I think black artists suffer the most.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite artist?
Speaker 2: No, you're not gonna trap me in that.  No, I think there are artists for all tastes and all, you know, pockets and budgets.  I think you keep growing, you keep looking, you try to keep up and you buy the things you like that fit with your life that you like to own.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not because somebody's gonna be a big name, and not because somebody is a big name.  You buy what you can because that's the personal relationship you have with the piece of art.  It's something, it should have some meaning to you.  Something that you feel.  Something that you get from it.  Some sense that you enjoy.
Story_ID: 639832
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career as a teacher and as the owner of a gallery, and as a volunteer basically on all these boards, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: See I think all those things I did before prepared me for the gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois].  Afterwards, I think they are a reflection of the gallery and that people who knew the gallery knew pretty much where you are in terms of what you produced.  What you were, and what you stand for, you know, you have some sort of reputation that you build.  So, where am I now?  I'm still connected with the art world, maybe not as connected as I was with the gallery, but I still am connected. I'm still--I still have people who talk to me about what they want and, "Can I get this piece," they saw somewhere.  I had a person at a party Christmas say, "I like that painting.  That is so and so."  It wasn't in my house.  They saw it in my son's [Langdon Neal] house and I've always liked his work.  "Can you get me a slide?"  And I said "Yes, I can."  So I mean, that's the kind of fun I have.
Story_ID: 639833
Speaker 1: As we speak, there's a show that you're responsible for that's going--
Speaker 2: Right, on Sunday afternoon.  I think it opens really today, but it's a Sunday afternoon reception being sponsored by The Links of North Shore, which is rather nice.  The gallery, the [Chicago] Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois], arranged that 'cause they must participate periodically with them, and it's at the Noyes Cultural [Art] Center [Evanston, Illinois] on Sunday, January 25th [2004], I believe, at 2:30.  So I hope you'll come.
Speaker 1: And the artists?
Speaker 2: The artists are local artists because we weren't going to get into a lot of shipping and they didn't have budgets to do that kind of thing.  Unfortunately, they didn't have a budget to do a catalogue either.  That's the other thing that I'm sorry that I didn't have enough money to do because it's so important to have catalogues for artists' careers.  But they were always very, and they still are very expensive to produce.  But there will be three women and three men, three sculptors, [HM] Geraldine McCullough, [HM] Marva [Lee Pitchford-]Jolly, and [HM] Preston Jackson, and three painters, Mary Reed Daniel, Calvin [B.] Jones, and John Rozelle.
Story_ID: 639834
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently now?
Speaker 2: Well, other than what I said about starting a gallery in terms of age, my chronological age, I think it would have been better to have had more history in terms of developing the careers in terms of my age being younger.  I think that would have been probably better if I could have changed that, started ten years earlier in my life cycle and have more chance to build an inventory for the surge that took place.
Story_ID: 639835
Speaker 1: Is there a best practices for artists, particularly young artists, that want to get started in terms of approaching a gallery?
Speaker 2: I would, they asked me to come to the Art Institute school [School of the Art Institute of Chicago] to talk to artists all the time and amazingly, it's never taught how to make a portfolio for yourself, how to take good slides, and how to approach an artist, I mean a gallery, and you get to do some homework.  You get to walk into a place that looks like, is receptive to your work, and if you don't feel that there is a comfort level there, that you fit in that culture, you probably don't.  And so you don't send slides to places unchecked out.  I mean you have to do your homework.  And, I think you save yourself a lot of heartache because every gallery has a culture.  Every gallery has a feel, an eye, you got to just feel, and that's what I used to tell 'em.  You got to walk in and see how you are received.  And look and spend time looking around.
Story_ID: 639836
Speaker 1: Were either one of your parents [Sadie Dean Hoskins and William Hoskins] alive when you started your gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: My mother was. Yeah, I have a nice picture of her in the gallery, yeah, with me.  And all my family came.  My sister came from, you know, New York, and her husband.  They all came on the opening night and then all of a sudden when I had all of these worries about that, there was a large woman being pushed in a wheelchair and she big blousy black dress that went down to the floor almost, and she got, the person pushing her went real close to the walls and I just, they just worried me the whole night of the opening.  And I was looking around where is everybody, my family and my husband [HM Earl Neal] had just gathered everybody up without saying anything to me and taken them down to, to the harbor to see his new boat, and I was furious.  But, you know, they came back and everything was went off alright.  Those were some of the opening night events, but it was a wonderful, wonderful evening, and lots of people came out and the media came out like, I have a picture of, I don't know, in an album I can show you.  It was just typed with big cameras and all three, I think three channels were in there at the same time, with cable and it was a madhouse.
Story_ID: 639837
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd like to be remembered as providing opportunities and giving something back.  I mean I know that it's kind of a corny overused phrase, but I really do feel that you are obliged to give something back somehow, somewhere.  If it's just tutoring, you know, someone, giving a hand to someone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] did that.  One thing the gallery did do was to inspire that.  I wanna open a gallery so I talked to a lot of people about it because it looked easy and fun and nobody really knew the work behind it, and the cost of it.  So I had to really, after a while, make sure they understood those parts, that they didn't see, but it's not something that you make money on.  I think that legacy was that it was a gift in that my family stood behind me and helped me make the gift to the community because I didn't pay myself a penny, and what I do regret is that I didn't pay myself a penny because it was no social security involved it.  Later I thought, oh, I should have just paid myself fifty cents a week or something, a day, but I didn't, I never took a penny out.  Well, I didn't have a penny to take out, but that's why I said, if I had been in the business maybe twenty years instead of ten, it would have been different when this peak arised, you know, cyclically, when '86 [1986] was the end of a cycle.  And the early '90s [1990s] were not good.  So, that's what I think the respect I have, that people had shown, is meaningful to me, too, but I just think that if I've given back something, that makes me happy.
Story_ID: 639838
Speaker 1: That's Isobel Margaret Hoskins [HM Isobel Neal] at about six months I would say, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-three [1933], I guess.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is the family of Langdon Neal and Jeanette Neal [ph.].  Jeanette Sublett Neal [ph.], and Tyler [ph.] on the left, Savannah [ph.], the youngest girl, Jeanette and McKenzie Neal [ph.], and behind McKenzie is Langdon Neal, and my son Langdon Neal.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  What year was this taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken last year, 2003, or '02 [2002], I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Start at the bottom.
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother, my great-grandmother, Maggie Foster [ph.], with her daughter Pauline Gassenheimer [ph.].  And the middle picture is, I'm not sure about.  The one at the top, or the one at the right is Maggie Foster, an unknown young man and my mother, Sadie Dean.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Margaret Foster and that picture probably, I don't have the date for that, but it would probably be at the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Next.
Speaker 1: That is Pauline Gassenheimer, and her husband, Ulysses S. Dean [ph.].  Dr. Dean, was what they called him.  And about, I would say, I don't know when that--she was born in 1882, so she's about somewhere in her twenties, so maybe that's around the turn of the century too.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Alright, next.
Speaker 1: That's Wilfred Laurier Hoskins, my father, and he's about, that's before, he married, that's like maybe 1930.  Do I see a date?  Looks like it says 1921.  Is that dated?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-one [1921].
Speaker 1: It says 1921, so I was wrong.  That is his father, Henry Hoskins [ph.], and I'm sorry I can't give you a date on that, but looking at his age, I'd say that was probably around 1900, because he looks about the same age as my father at that time.  Ready?
Speaker 2: Um hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is the wedding of our son and daughter-in-law, Jeanette Sublett, so that's [HM] Earl Neal, Isobel Neal, Langdon Neal, Jeanette Sublett, parents Phyllis and Sam Sublett.  And that was 1985, I believe, or '84' [1984].  I'm not sure.  '84' [1984] or '85' [1985].
Speaker 2: You know what, I can't give you their names.  They're gone now.  That's the lottery board and I can't remember one name.
Speaker 1: And you're on it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  What year was this taken?
Speaker 2: Don't ask me that either?
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  You know, Ms. Neal with lottery board members.
Speaker 2: Okay, you know, you have to look at my resume.  I would say that is about ten years ago so, I would say that is like '92 [1992], 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About.  Is that good enough?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can't really remember any names.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Sadie.  Sadie Dean [Hoskins].  I think that looks like--you getting a glare?
Speaker 2: Is that better?
Speaker 1: I think that's, as a young adult, that's Sadie Dean.  Sadie Pauline Dean, probably as a young adult, unmarried, I think.  I don't think she was married at that time.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Very good.
Speaker 1: This was before 1932.
Speaker 2: Now you're in this one right?
Speaker 1: I'm in the middle.  I'm the one with the hat and that's my brother on the far side, Robert, and that's a friend on the other side of me, the Fendersons [ph.] and then below that picture, so that's 1939.  Below that I understand--
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  I'm going to turn these others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  And now starting the upper left.
Speaker 1: That's my brother and I, and it says 1939 I think.  Then there is a picture of my uncle, my mother's brother when he was in the service, so that's 1942, standing with his mother, my grandmother, Pauline Dean [ph.].  And the others we don't talk about, those was just some buddies he was in the army with.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And one I thought was cute and I made a ink circle on.
Speaker 2: Is there something on the back?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, that's my Uncle Gene [ph.] and his last wife.
Speaker 2: That the one--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the one that had me out, yeah, he was a character, his fourth wife, the mother of my only cousins that I don't know of, where they are.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my mother and father, probably at my sister's wedding, so that is probably 1960-something.
Speaker 2: okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, these are my art buddies.  My art supports.  That's my good pal [HM] Ronne Hartfield, Sandra Fury [ph.], who was here and headed, both of them headed Urban Gateways at one time, and [HM] Amina [J.] Dickerson, from the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and now Kraft Foods.  And we'd just get together and have a fun day every year and do something wonderful, with a spa day or something, and just enjoy each other's company because we're all so busy we can't see each other that much.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Do you know the date of this photo?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was probably two years, so it was probably 2001.
Speaker 2: And that shows three generations of the Neal family. Earl Neal, let's see, that's [HM] Earl Langdon Neal, and that's Langdon Earl Neal and Langdon David Neal, his father.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I think that's in the office, too.
Story_ID: 639839
Speaker 1: That's Sadie [Dean] Hoskins and Wilfred Hoskins, my mother and father.  Probably I would say in the '50s [1950s] I wanna say, somewhere.  1950 I would say--ish.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Very good.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Isobel Neal in the gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  What year?
Speaker 1: I would say 1989.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's in the gallery, probably 1990, with my brother, Robert Hoskins, who came to visit me.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Earl [Neal] and I over in the Bahamas.  We'd gone over and were looking, visiting, I'm trying to think where we were, but anyhow I never, we were standing there just before we left to come back to Miami, and not paying attention to those trees blowing, which we should have been 'cause we shouldn't have left.  It was a very exciting day getting back into Miami.  It was like, oh yeah, and by the time we got to Miami [Florida], the sky was black, the water was inky and I was scared silly, but we made it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me in, that's Isobel Neal in 1977 say, in Santa Barbara, California, student, grad student, on sabbatical from the [Chicago] Board of Education, studying archaeology, having a great time.
Speaker 2: That archaeology (unclear)
Speaker 1: Was wonderful.  Okay, there's a family gathering, probably 19, I would say late '60s [1960s].  That's Ethel, I mean, I'm sorry, Emma Smith [ph.], and Langdon Smith and Wilfred Hoskins seated on the couch.  In front of Wilfred Hoskins is Evelyn Neal [ph.].  In front of her is Langdon Neal, [HM] Isobel Neal, Earl Neal, Sadie Hoskins and Earl James Neal in the chair to the right.
Speaker 2: Okay. Shakespeare School [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I don't remember their names at all.  It was 1960 and that's my little class at Shakespeare School.  I understand they've redone it so I have to go back and see.  I did have one of my little students find me.  She had retired.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  You don't know where she is?
Speaker 1: No I don't know if she's on there.
Speaker 2: She's the teacher.
Speaker 1: I'm the teacher, oh, you know me, that's my class.
Speaker 2: Okay.  She's the teacher there too.
Speaker 1: I'm the teacher there too.  That's my little class at Beethoven [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois].  You see January '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is, there a picture when Lang graduated from college.  I think we had a nice picture made, a family picture when  he wasn't married yet, so that's why Jeanette's not there, so it's probably '83 [1983] I would guess.  That's Earl Neal, Langdon Neal and Isobel Neal, seated.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's me with Langdon Neal, and that's probably 1957, no that's probably 1958 I would say.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  The studio photos from the '30s [1930s] to the '50s [1950s] are just unparalleled in the quality.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Does it say something on the back there, on the one that you-what does that say?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four, oh you were twenty-four years old and him ten months.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was nineteen, it was probably '58 [1958], yeah.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Okay, on this one?
Speaker 1: This one is our wedding photo.  I was married at home so that was in front of our fireplace at home in Saint Albans, New York, on September 24, 1955.  It was a nice humid day.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Rainy, and rainy.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: This is, let's see, 1951, yeah, I'm the one looking off to the side, not at the camera.  Oh, we're all kinda looking at something else, so my friend is looking at the camera.  She's, and that is Moneta Sleet's photography and he photographed several pictures from that cotillion, the debutante's cotillion, 1951.
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: That's a graduation picture from college I think, so that would be 1955.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Does that bother you, the sound.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  In this case, no, we won't be recording, we're doing descriptions to take captions for the photos, but thank you for asking.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, cause I just thought of all times for them to the vacuuming.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA VOICE]:  (unclear) Go ahead with this photo.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me at, in Ann Arbor [Michigan] at the University of Michigan, nineteen- let's see I went to, yeah, it was probably '55 [1955].  I started in mid-year, in the winter, so that was first time away from home.  Actually, the food was so bad and it was a Saturday afternoon in the wintertime.  I remember and I, one of the few things I hate is peanut butter.  I was crying like mother can you imagine, they grill peanut butter sandwiches.
Speaker 2: That's Langdon David and he's about two I would think, so that would be about 1959, with his berbers [ph.].
Speaker 1: Berbers?
Speaker 2: We bought many a berber.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were called Morgans [ph.] but he couldn't say Berber, so he called them.
