Story_ID: 29760
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Shawna D. Nesbitt, S-H-A-W-N-A, middle name is Denise, D-E-N-I-S-E, Nesbitt, N-E-S-B-I-T-T.
Speaker 1: --And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: November 10, 1963.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Aliquippa, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physician scientist at the University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: And that's also the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 13, 2008.
Story_ID: 29761
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you what I call "People Magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: I like a lot of things (laughter), but I guess my favorite food would be sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation would be Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And what time of the year is best for you, your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You know, I have a favorite prayer which is "Let the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, oh Lord, my strength and my redeemer."
Story_ID: 29762
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk about your ancestry and your family tree, as much as you know.  Tell me your mother's name, spell it for me.  Tell me where she was born and when she was born, if you know.
Speaker 2: Her name is Yvonne, maiden name is Sarvis, married name Smith, Y-V-O-N-N-E, and she was born in Wilson, North Carolina in 1939.
Speaker 1: And tell me about your mother.  Describe her to me?
Speaker 2: My mother is one of the kindest, most nurturing warm people I have ever met in life.  Her whole life has been centered around raising her children.  And although she worked for the entire time that we were growing up, her focus has always been making sure that we were secure, that we're happy, and that we were on the right road to being successful and competent people.  And to this day, her mission still is that of nurturing everybody around her.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: No, she talked a lot about coming from North Carolina to Pennsylvania.  She came up as a young child and didn't remember much about Wilson, North Carolina, but in coming, her family came as a group in units of two or three people.  And they huddled together once they got to Pennsylvania and really tried to become as successful as they could doing every possible job that they could do.  And they lived together at some points with two or three families in one house and then as they branched out, it became more than just an extended family unit.  It really became more of a--what most people think of as sisters and brothers, she really calls cousins more like sisters and brothers because they actually lived together.  And she's maintained that sense family-ness and responsibility for people through her entire life.  It's a very interesting way to look at the world because most of us don't look at the world that way anymore.  I have to say that I think I've not grown up with that same kind of relationship that she had, but she maintains that and wants to, you know, she thinks that people should feel that for each other, not just yourself and your immediate family, but if you felt that beyond that, that circle, that you would make the world a better place.
Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: High school and then she went to business school for secretarial work, for one year.
Speaker 1: And tell me about her parents?
Speaker 2: My grandmother grew up in Wilson, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: What is her name?
Speaker 2: Thelma Sarvis, T-H-E-L-M-A, S-A-R-V-I-S.  She grew up in Wilson, North Carolina and she moved to Pennsylvania in the 1940s, became saved and a Christian mother in the church very early in life, in her life.  And interestingly enough about her, she became the leader in our church of a group called the Good Samaritans, which is the perfect term for her.  She's the consummate good Samaritan, somebody who's looking for a situation to help somebody.  So her role in the church and the community and in the family was to take care of everybody who was having a problem, whether that be a financial issue, whether that be a need for food, she found a way to house everybody who didn't have a place to stay and her goal, I would say, of her whole life, was to serve anybody and everybody around her.  My grandfather who was Willie John Sarvis, W-I-L-L-I-E, S-A-R-V-I-S, was born in North Carol--I'm sorry, in Virginia.  And he moved to North Carolina sometime around the late '30s [1930s] or so, and they married.  He went to the war for four years, very small petite man, but the most loving and warm person that you'd ever wanna meet, would fuss, fuss, fuss.  But he'd do anything, and had a heart of gold, really hard worker.  And he was 135 pounds at best and never drove a car.  He walked everywhere he went.  He'd catch the bus.  He served as a tailor and he raised my mother which was their only child and took care of the other members of my grandmother's family who were not able to take care of themselves.  He provided additional money, and on a tailor's salary, that's not that easy to do with my grandmother being at home.  And he died at age eighty and did--he was just a wonderful grandfather.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he learned to be a tailor?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how he learned to be a tailor.  I know that in the military, he was a cook, and he was a fantastic cook.  He made the best fried chicken you'd ever eat (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about their parents?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about my grandfather's parents.  I know that he was born in Virginia, but his parents passed away early in his life.  My grandmother's father, her mother died, Marzella (ph.) Lewis, died in about 1931.  And my grandmother then was ten years old.  And so my mother never knew her either.  So, didn't know a lot about her.  My grand, great grandfather, my grandmother's father, Starkey (ph.) Lewis, he moved to Pennsylvania with my grandmother and lived with them for a number of years, but he passed away in 1960 which was three years before me.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories about any of the family members being in slavery?
Speaker 2: I don't know any from my mother's side.  From my father's [Townsend Smith Jr.] side, I have some, I have a little bit more stories.
Story_ID: 29763
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name, spell it for me, please and tell me where and when he was born?
Speaker 2: Townsend Smith, T-O-W-N-S-E-N-D, S-M-I-T-H, and he's a junior.  And he was born in Union, South Carolina in 1939 and grew up there, moved to Pennsylvania in nineteen, oh, about 1950 or so after he had served in the Navy for a number of years.  And his--what was it you asked me (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He, after serving in the Navy, he worked in the steel mill for a short while, and this was about the late 1950s, early 1960s when he and my mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] married.  Shortly, thereafter, he then started working as a policeman.  He was one of the first African American policemen on the force there in our town.  They had, this was around '65 [1965] and the race riots were happening in Pennsylvania as they were around the country.  And there had only been one African American on the police force, but the population of our steel town was about fifty percent African American.  And so he, you know, had the desire that he wanted to first move outside of the steel mills because it was a dirty job and, secondly, that he really felt the calling.  I think his personality suits that of a law enforcement officer.
Speaker 1: Did he talk much about his growing up?
Speaker 2: He talked about growing up in South Carolina, that he had ten siblings.  They grew up on a farm, a four-room house which was considered to be a large house at that time.  His oldest sibling is almost seventeen years older than he and his younger sibling, five or six years younger than he.  So there's a wide difference, age difference between them.  His father had a farm.  They had a mule and some animals, and they spent their time farming the land.  They went to school in between times of crop, harvesting the crops.  He was always a frugal person concerned with how could he make money and how could he go to the next level.  And so my grandmother--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Eddie Iceteen Good Smith, E-D-D-I-E, Iceteen, I-C-E-T-E-E-N, Good is her maiden name, G-O-O-D, and married name, Smith, who, incidentally, passed away in 1965, '65 [1965], two years after I was born at the age of sixty.  I should mention that she passed away from heart disease from high blood pressure.  But my mother, my grandmother and my father had a close bond which my father shared with me in that he was always interested in trying to make money.  And so she would take him to the market and he would raise his own small bed of crops and sell some things and put that money away, and that was his, and he wasn't gonna share that with the rest of his siblings (laughter).  But he also shared, his sisters and brothers always shared with me that he had a sense of independence that was unlike the rest of his siblings in that he wanted to have his own in every way, including using a cup, which, of course, when they were working the fields in South Carolina, it's hot outside and, you know, not everybody has their own cup.  But he was, he had decided he's not gonna use the cup behind everybody else.  So he's washing his own cup every cup every time.  He decides that it's good practice (laughter).
Speaker 1: And how much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: My father graduated from high school after he came back from the Navy, after having served there.  After coming to Pennsylvania though and becoming a policeman, he wanted to get a college education.  And so while sending us through school, he went back to college, got an associate's degree while working two jobs and then went on to get his bachelor's degree from the University of Pittsburgh[Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], while working three jobs, putting us through school.
Story_ID: 29764
Speaker 1: Now, tell me your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My father's father is Willie Townsend Smith, W-I-L-L-I-E, Townsend, T-O-W-N-S-E-N-D, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: And did you have a relationship with him?
Speaker 2: We got to see him occasionally.  He lived until 1974, and he was a very interesting man, heritage was that, and what I'm told is that his mother was American Indian [sic, Native American] and father was African American.  And he had the physical appearance of that as well, but had a difficult life there because in South Carolina, you know, the ability to live as a free black man was not very easy.  And he also twelve siblings who had appearances that, with some very, very fair and almost like Indian [sic, Native American] and some a little more like African Americans, which was complicated in South Carolina in the nineteen, the early 1900s, I guess.  And he was born in 1900.  He stayed on a farm for entire life.  He smoked cigarettes probably two packs a day.  He told great stories when we'd go out and visit him at the four room house and he loved to draw in the sand and tell us stories about snakes that, of course, made us uncomfortable, (laughter) but he got a kick out of that.
Speaker 1: What one story do you remember that he told you that you remember him telling?
Speaker 2: I remember sitting on the porch with him and he told us that he was out in the woods and he was hunting.  And he knew we were all afraid of snakes, so he's telling us this dramatic story of how he's hunting through the woods and he's building it up.  And all of a sudden, we're all, you know, on pins and needles and he takes out this stick and he draws this long line in the sand, and the snake was this big.  And, of course, you know, we're about to die.  And he says, and then I took out my shotgun, and I shot him in the head.  That was the greatest (laughter).  We thought, Pop, he was something special.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether he had any education?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: So your grandparents stayed in South Carolina and you'd visit him there?
Speaker 2: They stayed in South Carolina.  My grandmother passed before I was born.  My grandfather, I was about eight years old when he passed away.  We, we didn't get to go there as often as we would have liked to because, for many reasons, some of which related to just the passing, the travel from Pennsylvania.  Some of it was cost.  You know, when we would go, we'd huddle up in the back of a station wagon and load up with sandwiches because, and my dad [Townsend Smith Jr.] didn't like stopping on the road.  When they got past about Virginia, they never wanted to stop until we got all the way to South Carolina.  If we did stop, we stopped at that lone picnic table that looks like nobody should sit at it, been sitting in it.  That was us (laughter) sitting on that picnic table having a lunch that my mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] had made ten hours before we left because we didn't wanna stop at a restaurant.  And I didn't understand why we weren't stopping at McDonald's.  Now, I understand why we weren't stopping at McDonald's on the way there.  But it made for, I think, a difficult trip for my father.  So we didn't make the trip as often as we would have liked to.
Story_ID: 29765
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] and father [Townsend Smith Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: My mother was in high school when my father moved to Pennsylvania.  And he was a handsome, young, new dude (laughter), who moved to this steel town and was working and so obviously making more money than the high school students; had a nice car that was a convertible.  I don't know how they actually first met each other, but he lived in an apartment above another lady in town, an older lady in town and saw my mother playing outside with her girlfriends.  And they became friends and started to date.  And he would come to visit my mother's grandfather lived with them, and so when they courted, he would come to visit and my grandmother and my great grandfather would sit in the room with my mother while they're courting (laughter).  And so it didn't make for a very private environment.  But they dated through her last year of high school, and she talks about being able to take his car and drive his car to school which made her really special to be able to do that, which, you know, my grandparents didn't have a car at the time.  So that was a big highlight for her.
Speaker 1: Now, they were the same age, were they?
Speaker 2: No, my grand, my father is six years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in--
Speaker 2: Thirty-three [1933].
Speaker 1: Thirty-three [1933].  So when they married, where did they live?
Speaker 2: They married in Aliquippa [Pennsylvania] and they bought a home shortly thereafter and actually, my grandmother, my mother's parents bought a home.  And then they bought a home two doors away from their house, and they lived there for all of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the address?
Speaker 2: 205 McDonald Boulevard (laughter).  I cried when we, when we actually, when they moved from that house, I cried. It was a sad day for me, lots of memories there.
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  You know, somewhere around the late '60s [1960s], I remember the discussions around Martin Luther King [Jr.], and obviously when Martin was really coming to the end of most of his work, I was just really getting started in life.  And when he died in '69 [1969], and I was born in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], I'm sorry.  That's right.  So I was five when he died.  I just remember being with my grandmother [Thelma Sarvis].  She used to press hair with a hot comb in her basement.  And, of course, mine was, she was pressed my hair all the time, and so pressing hair, and I just remember smelling smoke from a pressing comb and them talking about Martin Luther King being killed.  And I, it didn't sink in to me who he was or what he meant, but I just remember them just being so distraught and upset about him being killed.  Not until many years later did I really realize the real power, what really had happened.
Story_ID: 29766
Speaker 1: As you were talking about a smell, what sights and sounds take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Well, burning hair (laughter) clearly takes me back to that time.  One of my grandmother's [Thelma Sarvis] specialties is pineapple cake, and she'd make that almost on a weekly basis.  And it was uniquely her own.  She was well known for making it, and people from all around would ask her to make her cakes all the time.  So that was, that's a smell, fresh homemade cake.  She used to make homemade bread every week.  And that smell takes me back all the time.
Speaker 1: What about a sight and a sound?
Speaker 2: My grandmother and my mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] were very, very involved in the Church of God in Christ.  And we grew up going to church sometimes two or three times a week, spent time in the sunshine band in Sunday school, church choir, all those things.  And I rather enjoyed it.  I really liked the church music.  I really liked the church music.  I liked the activity.  I liked the excitement and just the fact that people seemed extremely happy there all the time.  To this day, I love church music.  I love black, gospel music.  I listen to it in the car, and the days that I don't feel so good, that's the first thing I put on because it takes me to a place that I can be revived.
Speaker 1: And what about a sight?
Speaker 2: A sight, although I live in Dallas, I think the sights that give me comfort most and remind me of home are places that look like Pennsylvania with rolling hills, lots of greenery, houses that, they're not necessarily beautiful, but they're close together and there're lots of people walking around, sort of gray skies.  There's something about that, that just reminds me of that's where I came from, of the days when I was, you know, young and not able to, not really aware of all the things that were going on around me.
Story_ID: 29767
Speaker 1: Describe for me the neighborhood that you grew up in?  Tell me who lives in the community, who your neighbors are, who some of your friends are and even if you know, the occupations of your friends' parents?
Speaker 2: The town I grew up in, Aliquippa, is a steel town that had a large steel plant there, J&L Steel [Jones and Laughlin Steel Company], and most of the people there, black and white, worked in the steel mill in some capacity.  The steel industry set up most of their homes segregated so that the people who worked in the mill lived in one section.  The people who were supervisors lived in another section, and then there was, again, a race division as well in addition to the class division to some extent.  So, of course, we lived in the area that was African American, and most of the African American section, there was no division of, you know, class.  You're just living all together.  Most of the people around us worked in the steel mill.  My father [Townsend Smith Jr.] was one of the exceptions to that rule, solidly African American in population.  We were viewed a little bit differently because early on in the late '60s [1960s] while the race riots were going on after Martin Luther King [Jr.] died, we had terrible race riots in our public schools.  And my parents then, my mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] worked as an administrative assistant in the city offices and my father worked as a policeman.  So they were both getting a lot of the information about anything that happened at the school systems every quickly.  And at the time, my brother, who's two years older than I, was in elementary school.  I was in first grade.  We were at two different schools, and my mother and father kept reports of the race riots that were happening, really happening at the high school and middle school level.  But every time they'd get the information or came across it, they're going out to the elementary school.  And so several times they would come and pick us up from school because they were afraid that we were gonna get hurt.  By the time I was in second grade, my father said, this is just too much.  It was just too much because our children can't learn because they're living in fear every day.  Not only are they living in fear, but every day I can't work because I'm living (laughter) in fear that they're gonna be hurt, coupled with the fact that the schools weren't that great.  They just didn't have, the focus was not centered around education, particularly for African Americans and my parents decided that they wanted us to go to private schools.  And they decided that rather than moving out of a community that was having quite a bit of crime problems, drug problems, they decided that they would sacrifice and save that money to send us to private schools and let us still stay in that neighborhood.  So it's an interesting time, you know, to live there but not be necessarily completely engrained in the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 29768
Speaker 1: Tell me the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: New Sheffield School [Aliquippa, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: --And you said that you had an older brother.  How many siblings do you have?  Can you list them in birth order?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and one sister.  My older brother is Townsend Smith, T-O-W-N-S-E-N-D, the third.  My younger brother is Michael, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Smith, and my sister is Sherina, S-H-E-R-I-N-A, Smith.
Speaker 1: So you were taken out of public and sent to private school?
Speaker 2: We were taken out of public school.  It was a difficult decision for my parents because my father really strongly felt that, you know, as he watched our community dying, and people, you know, really just destroying themselves and not being able to be successful, staying there and just circling the drain basically, he wanted to see us move beyond that.  And having his own background, he very, very much wanted to see us be successful.  And he felt that education was gonna be the key to that.  So he had, although had grown up Baptist, was not at all afraid of parochial school systems.  It didn't make him think twice.  There was one Catholic school in town.  That was Saint Titus [School, West Aliquippa, Pennsylvania ] and it was a parochial school and had a very strong connection to the Catholic church.  My mother, having grown up Pentecostal there, was not quite as comfortable with us going to a parochial Catholic school, was concerned that we might learn things that might detract us from the Pentecostal faith.  I think the fear really stepped in and really changed that thought process.  In a compromise, they found another school that was about twenty-five minutes away that was private and Catholic.  And so it was a little less tightly associated with a church although you, it was a Catholic school but not quite the same as the other parochial school.  So that was their choice which was Mount Gallitzin Academy [Baden, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-O-U-N-T, G-A-L-L-I-T-Z-E-N [sic, Gallitzin].  And it was run by the Sisters of Saint Joseph.  And it, the school had been there for, oh, fifty years, oh, probably thirty years by that time.  It was an elementary school from kindergarten to eighth grade, small school, 300 students.  But it only had one black family before we came.  And when we went there, I remember we, she dressed us up to take us for this interview, and she told us, you know, all the things, be nice, be quiet, listen, don't run off and what would happen if we didn't do those things.  And we went.  We toured the school, very nice place, better than any school I had ever seen.  It had a swimming pool and I was in awe of just what it looked like.  They were very excited to have us come and immediately accepted us to the school.  When we got there though I didn't realize that we were gonna be one of, you know, ten black students in the school.  So you kind of feel a little out of your element because now I had grown up in a largely black community and a fifty percent black school.  And my vocabulary was that of an African American vocabulary with some slang and not the best of English.  And these students spoke different.  They spoke a much higher level, had a larger vocabulary, grammar was more perfect.  I felt a little bit inferior.  It took me a little bit to kind of get used to that.  But to their credit, the Sisters were very careful with me.  They made sure that I was comfortable with the classroom, and one special day, I remember very clearly, it's the only time I've ever been called the "N" word from third grade, we were dong reports.  And I had read my report, and there was a little boy who, I don't know, he was rambunctious and he didn't like the fact that mine, I think, was a little bit better than his.  And for some reason, he said, you're just an "N" word.  And I felt like I had been cut with a knife.  I had heard that word in my community, but I'd never been called that.  And my teacher who we had a very informal classroom, so I went to her and said, you know, "Sister, he called me this word.  Well, he shouldn't call me that."  And she stopped the class, I'll never forget it.  She stopped the class and she called him upfront.  And she asked him what did he call me.  And he said, "I called her the "N" word."  And she said, do you know what that word means.  And he couldn't articulate what the word meant.  And then she spent fifteen minutes explaining to the classroom what the word meant and that it was not acceptable to use in any circumstance and that if, if anyone ever used that word, calling someone or calling anyone, referring to anyone by that term, that there were consequences to it.  And I never, never had another child call me in my classroom from that time on.  I felt like, you know, this is somebody who understands.  It gave me the opportunity to come up and be almost on, what I thought at that time, okay, now, I'm on the same level as the rest of these children.  In some sense, I guess I thought I wasn't quite as good as they.  And it just went away at that point.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the nun's name?
Speaker 2: Let me think about it for a second.  I can see her face.  Sister Stella, yes, Sister Stella.
Story_ID: 29769
Speaker 1: Was there any other teachers or nuns there that might have encouraged you throughout your time there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was a special place because it turned, although I liked school early on, and I, you know, loved spelling as a first and second grader and was number one in my class for that.  I never had a problem, but I didn't really love school until I got to third grade and beyond because they changed my perspective on it, whereas that this isn't just coming to school for the purpose of reading and writing.  This is a life experience.  You're gonna love to do this.  You'll enjoy doing this.  This is gonna be fun for you in every respect.  And so they started to, you know, introduce us to books that were more enjoyable for us to read.  We started writing things in class.  We would, we had a class that was specifically designed for non-Catholic children that was called, "Appreciation of Life."  And in Appreciation of Life, we spent time writing about ourselves, learning about nature and learning about how God created the world with many different species and cultures of every form of life and how that integrated together.  And in a strange way, that helped me connect some science, some social science, and some reading, a bit of math, all together.  And it just sparked my interests.  They also developed a very strong sense of discipline that, you know, every day we had homework.  Every day you needed to do something and that responsibility, it really stuck with me until later, you know, later in life.  And I think that's one of the things that has helped me to be successful, is that I learned how to learn and how to really enjoy learning early on so that it's no longer a chore.  It's just a way of living.
Speaker 1: So you were a very good student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a good student.
Speaker 1: A's and B's?
Speaker 2: A's and B's all the way through.
Story_ID: 29770
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was quiet.  I was pretty reserved in most situations, fairly shy by most standards and outwardly so.  Inwardly so, I loved music, I loved dance, you know, in my own basement, I could dance all day, you know, I knew all the jingles to the commercials and the songs that were accompanying TV shows.  We watched a lot of TV.  But outwardly so--
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: This is in the '70s [1970s] so one of my favorite shows was the Mary Tyler Moore Show.  And for some reason I just thought she was the most wonderful person.  I thought, Oh, I'm gonna grow up to be Mary Tyler Moore.  She's great.  She's got her own job.  She moves like she wants to and that song when she, the song that, the jingle that came on with the song was, one of the lines was, "Who could turn the world on with her smile, who can take a nothing day and suddenly make it all seem worthwhile.  Well, it's you, girl, and you should know it", and I just would sing that song every day, when it was coming on Saturday evenings.  Well, my mother [Yvonne Sarvis Smith] later on told, you know, you're not gonna grow up to be a white woman in (laughter), in Minneapolis (laughter).  So I was a little disappointed about that, but I think that the characteristics, the happiness that she portrayed were very attractive to me, and a lot of those sort of simple things, fuel me today.
Speaker 1: Well, what were your dreams and aspirations at that time?
Speaker 2: You know, at that time, I wanted independence.  I wanted to have my own.  Clearly, those were things that that show prepared, promoted.  I wanted to be educated because I liked school, and I was far better at school than I was in any sports activity, even true today.  And so I saw myself somewhere in a field that used my brain.  It wasn't until about, I would say nine or ten when I decided that medicine would be what I would focus on.
Speaker 1: What happened that would make you make that decision at nine or ten?
Speaker 2: One of the things was, early on, you know, you grow up in a community where people don't have so much money.  People are preoccupied with just the basics of life.  Health is one of the things that suffers for that.  So I watched that happen in my own family.  I watched the people around me dying from things very early in life.  That troubled me early.  One particular finding was that every member of my family had high blood pressure, including my grandparents who already passed on.  My grandmother had high blood pressure and had, I'm told, really bad heart disease as a result of her high blood pressure.  I was interested in that as a health interests that I might be able to do something to help people.  I liked helping people.  I think I gained my nurturing spirit of helping naturally from my mother and my grandmother [Thelma Sarvis].  That's who they are, and I liked science.  I really did like science early on.  And so around ten or eleven years old or so, I told my mother that I wanted to be a doctor.  And she said, you probably want to be a nurse.  And I said, no, mom, I wanna be a doctor.  She said, no, girls are nurses and boys are doctors.  My brother had said he wanted to be a physician.  So she said, no, your brother will be the doctor and you can be the nurse.  And I said, I don't really wanna be a nurse though.  I really wanna be a doctor.  And so we struggled with that a little bit.  Interesting, my first cousin on my father's side was then working on her master's degree in Nutrition, and she was a very liberated woman.  And she came to visit, and asked me, what do you want to be?  And I said, "I wanna be a physician," and my mother said, "no, I think she should be a nurse or maybe a teacher."  And she said, "I am so upset with you Aunt Peggy.  If she were a boy, what would you say to her?"  And she said, "I told her she should be, she could be a doctor."  And she said, "and so you think she's not capable because she's a female?"  And my mother stepped back at that moment.  I think that was a turning point for even her to say, "Ha!  Have I formed an opinion that is prejudiced against my child here."  From that point on, I got her 100 percent support for becoming a physician.
Story_ID: 29771
Speaker 1: What extracurricular activities did you participate in through the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: My mom used to say, is there ever gonna be a time when you say no, because she'd say, you have yes on the tip of your tongue for anything anybody asks you to do.  So I was a part of, we had a yearbook that we did.  Of course, I was a part of the yearbook committee.  We had fundraisers that we did.  I was a part of the fundraisers.  We had a cheerleading squad in seventh and eighth grade.  I was a cheerleader.  I played the piano.  Seventh and eighth grade.  We had a spelling bee which is part of the National Spelling Bee [The Scripps National Spelling Bee] competition, and we had a team.  And I wanted to be in that spelling bee desperately.  And we practiced after school.  So, I got on the team and practiced for two years, actually for three years as part of that team.  I thought I was gonna go to the spelling bee as the top person.  And this was in eighth grade, and there was a girl, Angel, who had gone for two years before.  And although I had spelled more words correct than she had, they decided that they would send her instead of me.  That hurt my feelings incredibly not to be able to go, but it didn't break my spirit because I knew that I had, I was the best anyway.  And so--
Speaker 1: Do you think it was because she had more experience or do you think--why do you think they let her go instead of you?
Speaker 2: Honestly, I think there was some issue of perhaps racial consideration.  You know, there weren't any other black kids in the spelling bee.  She had been to the spelling bee a few times before.  And I think they thought, well, she's our best chance to win; don't know that there was a specific desire not to see me win, but I think there were some issues that people making that decision had, that came into play there.
Story_ID: 29772
Speaker 1: You spoke about church and that your mother was in the Church of God and Christ, and is that where you also attend?  Did your father attend as well?  Did he go from being Baptist to Pentecostal?
Speaker 2: He, later in life, for a while he attended a Baptist church in town there, and later on, by the time I was in high school, he converted to a Church of God in Christ, not the one we attend, but to another church locally there.
Speaker 1: So tell me about your church experience?
Speaker 2: The church was a very strong part of our lives growing up.  You know, we spent a lot of time there.  We were in Sunday school.  We were in church, and the Church of God in Christ services lasted, oh, four or five hours on a Sunday afternoon.  So you, just your whole day that you spent there.  But it was a place where we could go, and we had some friends there.  Having gone to, not gone to the public school in town left me without that many friends, close friends, in the community.  And to some extent they viewed me as an outsider because now my way of speaking was not the same.  And I got of teasing about that.  Well, you're a white girl now, you think you're a white girl.  It took me a little while to figure out that I needed to be able to speak two languages, the one at home and the one at school.  But at church, I had friends that didn't judge me quite that way.  So they were just my friends.  So it, it was a happy place for me.  There were lots of kids there.  We had lots of activities.  We had a very strong education, church education program.  Our Sunday school gave me, you know, a complete foundation of biblical stories and developing our morals and understanding of that.  I am really thankful to the church for that part of life.  They combined, you know, for instance, our vocation, vacation bible school program.  We had not just learning bible stories, but we had pottery intermingled in that.  We went on a picnic every year.  The picnic was at one of the local amusement parks, and, you know, they provided more than just the church education.  It became also entertainment that was safe for us to do.
Speaker 1: Your parents were concerned about maybe there being a conflict with you going to a Catholic school and your religion at home.  Do you find any discrepancies that might have been a problem?
Speaker 2: No, that's kind of interesting.  My mother was mostly concerned about that.  And I think that's because she really had never ventured outside of, had never ventured outside of the Church of God in Christ, not knowing a whole lot about the Catholic religion.  As we went to school there, we didn't have to take Catholicism.  We took another "Appreciation of Life" which was about five or six kids who were Jewish and Protestant and, you know, we spent time talking about God and the creation and how the world works together.  Going through school, as it turned out, by the time I reached high school, also a Catholic school, I knew more of the biblical stories than the Catholic kids.  So my first year at high school, I got the Religion award (laughter) because by that time, we had to take the Catholic religion classes.  I never found it to be a problem.  I will say that I think it did give me a better appreciation for the fact that there are so many similarities and fewer differences between Christianity, different sectors of Christianity faith, but I think the differences are more negligible than we like to believe that they are.  And I'm comfortable now with almost any church that I go to because I think your faith is within you.  I don't think it's driven by all these other things.  These other things are mostly what you just like the traditions more or less.
Story_ID: 29773
Speaker 1: What about the Church of God in Christ conventions that they have every year?   Is that a family (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I have not gone.  My mother went.  That was the highlight of her life (laughter) to go, all the big hats, all the beautiful clothes, you know, her and her church girlfriends would go.  And they just were thrilled to pieces to go and we were just happy for her to go in Memphis once or twice.  But that too, most of the things that, sort of things like that, we sacrificed because my parents had to work--my mother worked two jobs.  We had a job from age ten, cleaning up an office, made $3.00 a week.  That was my allowance, instead of my parents giving it to me.  My father worked three jobs.  And that was to survive because tuition took up a significant amount of their free money.
Speaker 1: All of your siblings went to the parochial school?
Speaker 2: All of my siblings, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much the tuition was?
Speaker 2: When we started, it was $1,500 a student for a year, and--
Speaker 1: For each student?
Speaker 2: For each student, and it doesn't sound like a lot now, but if you were making $20,000 for a family of six, $1,500 is a lot of money to try and make it.  Now, I look back and say, "Oh, my God, how did they (laughter), how could they survive?  That's so large."
Speaker 1: And how long did you, you said you started working, you know, cleaning up office buildings to have your allowance at 10, and you continued to do that throughout high school?
Speaker 2: My mother's first cousin had a second job in the evening as a janitor for an office building for the AFL-CIO.  And she needed some help, and so my mother volunteered my brother and I to be her assistants.  And so we'd go with her in the evening for three hours and empty (unclear) with the garbage cans and spittoons and nasty things (laughter) and help clean up.  And at the end of the week, she'd give us $3.00 and we thought that was, you know, a lot of money at that point.
Speaker 1: So you go to a Catholic high school as well.  What was the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Quigley, Q-U-I-G-L-E-Y High School [Quigley Catholic High School, Baden, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And tell me about the transition from elementary middle school to high school?
Speaker 2: So when I transitioned to Quigley, Quiqley was a larger Catholic high school that served most of the Beaver County [Pennsylvania] area, whereas Mount Gallitzin was a smaller group.  There were a lot of other Catholic schools that fed into Quigley, in addition to some private, public school kids whose parents decided that they wanted to go to a public, private high school.  So we had more African American families in the high school than in the grade school.  Most of my classmates from Mount Gallitzin went to Quigley so they really had become good friends.  We had--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Phyllis Neth, (ph.) Patty Shram (ph.), those are friends from eighth grade, seventh grade.  They went through the whole five years at Mount Gallitzin with me, Elaine Conty (ph.), some of the name.  Those were probably my best friends at that age.  By the time I went to high school though, there were probably ten percent African American families at the high school, some of them having come from the public school even in our town.  Again, I spoke differently than they did.  My group of friends was more white than black at that point.  It presented another transition time for me to figure out how to navigate this racial divide.  This is 1977, and you know, "Roots" is coming on at that time.  There was a whole lot of issues about blacks and whites.  And still blacks didn't really like you to sound like a white girl.  It wasn't a popular thing.  And so had to really try and bridge some gaps because they, all of my white friends didn't really understand this new group of black kids who spoke differently and didn't have the same sort of cultural ways of behaving, not necessarily bad, but just very different, you know, making jokes about each other's mother.  That was taboo (laughter).
Speaker 1: Playing the dozens?
Speaker 2: They thought that was, you know, something's wrong with you to do that.  And, of course, I had seen that at home.  So I had to be an advocate on both sides of that (laughter), that bridge.  It was fun.
Speaker 1: We're gonna stop here and change tape.
Story_ID: 29774
Speaker 1: So we were talking about Quigley High School [Quigley Catholic High School].  How did you, well, first tell me where the high school was located in comparison to your home and how you got to school each day?
Speaker 2: The high school was located in Baden, Pennsylvania, B-A-D-E-N, which is across the Ohio River from my hometown, Aliquippa, Pennsylvania and because of the way the bridges are located, it's about twenty-five minutes from our home.  We had to take the school bus, and it was a difficult time trying to get the school buses to actually provide transportation for us.  While we were in grade school, the school district said that they had no responsibility to transport us to a non-public school.  One of the kids in our school was the child of the D.A. for the county, and he launched a campaign with all of the kids and had--went to court basically.  And we won the case.  In fact, my mother testified, you know, about the need for going outside of the public schools to get a fair education and also because of the safety issues.  And by, it was by a jury and they decided that they would provide the school bus for us to go.  And so we travelled by school bus to get to school every day.
Speaker 1: And tell me, who were your influences in high school?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers?  Were you still being taught by nuns?
Speaker 2: So in high school, probably forty percent of the teachers were nuns.  The other, about sixty percent of them were lay teachers.  And they were just from all different walks of life.  Probably the teachers that had the greatest impact, that I formed a bond with were my chemistry teacher, Mr. Ostrowski, Kevin Ostrowski was a smart, young, eager to teach, excited at students who really liked science, an excellent teacher who taught me so well in my last year of high school that my first semester of college chemistry was an absolute repeat of what I had learned from him in high school.  So I truly appreciated him for that "A" (laughter).  And Mrs. Yanyanin who was my Social Studies teacher for a couple of years in high school and driver's education and a couple of other social science courses.  But her style of teaching intermingled her personality with teaching and was just a wonderful way of educating.  I just felt so comfortable with her all the time.  I could talk about almost anything.  She was not at all interested in science, but I think just her style of being an educator was helpful to me to remain as interested in school as I had been already.
Speaker 1: And what extra curricula activities in high school did you participate in?
Speaker 2: I was a class officer for I think three out of the four years in high school.  I was a Majorette for three out of the four years in high school, on the yearbook committee, on pep squad.  I have to think, what else did I do?  That's about it.
Story_ID: 29775
Speaker 1: And you were able to bridge that divide between friends, your black friends and your white friends and be able to socialize?
Speaker 2: That, that took a little doing because, you know, the tables turned a little bit.  It was now my black friends who were giving me a hard time in high school, the girls were giving me a real hard time.  And I had--because my brother was two years ahead of me, I already knew some of his friends, and, of course, they view me as their little sister.  And so the girls that were giving me a hard time in my grade and a year ahead of me, my friends two years ahead of me came out and said, no, that won't work (laughter).  So that protection was good.  And it just took a little while.  I'm not sure that, I don't think I ever did anything that provoked them, but I think it was that distance in understanding cultural behaviors of other people and come to understand that.  I think that really is some of the problems that we see racially, is that we don't understand each other.  And it doesn't matter if you're black or white.  The way you express yourself, how you wear your hair, all of those things are culturally divisive, and if we are not accepting of each other, we'll very easy to make fun and give each other a difficult time about things that don't mean anything at all.
Speaker 1: Did you have a prom that you attended?
Speaker 2: I did go to the school prom, eleventh grade and twelfth grade with Jeffrey Burt was my junior prom date and my senior prom date was Ronald Harper who were both two years ahead of me in school.
Speaker 1: And were some of your girlfriends?
Speaker 2: Theresa Josey (ph.) was my neighbor across the street.  Theresa moved to my street when we were probably eight, but she went to the public school and had a very different group of friends most of the time.  So we played together sometimes, but she had a group of friends that I didn't know and I wasn't really allowed to play with much.  By the time she reached high school, her parents decided that, based on watching my family, that they wanted their kids to go to Quigley [Quigley Catholic High School, Baden, Pennsylvania].  So that the whole family came, and Theresa then was very different from the girls there.  And she really was one of the people in terms of making that transition and bridging that gap is that Theresa was a friend on one side of me, and I had my friends from Mount Gallitzin [Academy, Baden, Pennsylvania] on the other side of me.  And Theresa spoke a lot of black slang so we spent a lot of time trying to work on that (laughter) together.  And it was a fun time.  She, she just, you know, I brought her to my side on many things.  And she helped me on her side, bridging that gap on the other hand, became a majorette with me and we were best of friends.
Speaker 1: Are you still friends today?
Speaker 2: We are still friends today.
Story_ID: 29776
Speaker 1: So you had already made a decision that you would become a doctor.  Who's helping you decide what school, what college you would go to?
Speaker 2: You know, in about eighth grade or so, my brother had already expressed an interest in medicine.  We had a dentist in town who took an interest in us, and don't really know why.  He was a white man.  And he asked, what would we want to do with your life. Well, we wanted to be a doctor.  We had no connection to any physicians anywhere.  There was nobody in our family, extended or otherwise who had gone that high in education.  In fact, my father would have been the first person to get a college degree.  He then said, you know, come spend a couple of days with us in our office and his companion was a female dentist, and said, you know, you could spend some time with Mary Anne.  So, we did, and she actually took me with her to a couple of female dentists association parties just to kind of get the feel of who's there.  It was, you know, of course, in eighth grade, you don't know very much about anything.  At that point, just the idea of getting to go was exciting for me.  I knew I didn't wanna be a dentist, but just the whole concept of professional school, and for the first time I realized that there was college, then there's professional school and then there's residency and what the process was because no one had ever explained that.  I then went to my own personal, family physician who birthed us and had been in our lives all this time, and asked if I could spend time with him by the time I was in about eleventh grade.  And he was reluctant initially but persuaded to say, okay, you can come.  And then he sat me down while I was in his and discouraged me from becoming a physician.  And he said, you know, you don't wanna do this.  You're a nice girl.  You should go an do something where you can enjoy your life.  This is not gonna be for you.  You won't like it.  You'll be much happier if you do something else, raise some children, stay at home, very, very dismissive.  That was a little bit disheartening.  It also made me a little angry though.  I really felt like, you know, I never looked at you this way, but suddenly you're saying to me I can't because I'm a girl or is it because I'm black.  But I never went back to see him anymore.  And from that point on, I decided that it wasn't going to be necessarily somebody else's decision for me, that I would gather what I could gather from the people who were positive for me and leave the negative behind.
Speaker 1: So was there counselor, someone to direct you to what school you would apply to?
Speaker 2: In my eleventh grade of high school, so I knew I wanted medicine at the end of road.  But what path to get there, I wasn't quite sure.  And I had done very well in sciences and math and my counselor then recommended a couple of schools.  My father, who was still in the Navy Reserves Unit, had a friend who was also at Ohio State [The Ohio State Univeristy, Columbus, Ohio] which is one state over and was involved there with engineering programs.  And, you know, he talked to him a lot about this daughter who's interested in medicine.  My brother had already gone to Slippery Rock [Slippery Rock University, Slippery Rock, Pennsylvania], which is the state university.  I had always said, I'm not going to Slippery Rock just because I wanted to be an individual (laughter).  I just didn't want to follow him in every step.  And I liked, I thought I would like engineering.  My father had a strong interest in engineering and was never able to do it because of his circumstance.  And this particular captain told him that, you know, you should have her come and take a look at our programs.  So I went to the summer program, and I did well there.  It was fine.  I don't know that I liked it that much, but I did okay with, and then I got a scholarship to go to Ohio State for biomedical engineering, and the rationale was, and my counselor at high school thought that was a wonderful thing.  You can go there, you can get your Biomedical Engineering degree.  If you don't get into medical school, because the road is difficult, then you will have a career that you can do well in.  And it made sense, but I could not get myself comfortable with working with devices in the laboratory.  That just somehow didn't sit well for me.  At the same time, Gannon University, which is in Erie, Pennsylvania had a program that they had started probably ten years before that was aimed at grooming more physicians to come back to Western Pennsylvania.  And so they had this partnership with Hahnemann [Hahnemann School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a medical school in Philadelphia.  And the program was that they would admit students that they felt could matriculate early to medical school right out of school.  And so I found that program and decided, I'm gonna apply for this program.  I met one other student who had gone, and he didn't go the whole distance, but he spoke highly of Gannon.  My counselor, when I went to her, said, oh, it's a good school.  And it happened to be Catholic, again, just by chance.  I got accepted there, went to visit there until August, my first year of college, I was scheduled, and my parents were packing me for Ohio State.  And about the fifteenth of August, I told them I'm Gannon.  (Laughter) My father was (laughter) not happy about that.  It took a while to get him to come around to it.  My mother would have been happier had I gone where my brother was, for safety reasons because she likes that huddle together.  But Gannon seemed right to me because it seemed that it was a direct route, and I was convinced that I was not gonna be stopped.  Medical school was where I wanted to be, and engineering was not.  And even if I didn't become a physician, engineering wasn't really what I wanted to do.  And so I gave up the scholarship, and I went to Gannon, and I was the first black student to complete the program in matriculate to medical school in three years.  So in 1984, I went to Hahnemann.
Story_ID: 29777
Speaker 1: But I wanna say that you graduated from high school in 1981.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in three years, you're ready to go into medical school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is a seven-year program, instead of eight years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So now, tell me more about this program, about Gannon [University, Erie, Pennsylvania].  Who do you meet?  How is it different?  Is this the first time you're away from home?
Speaker 2: This is the first time I'm away from home.  So I'm seventeen because I started school just a little bit on the early side.  So I'm seventeen years old, and I'm going away from home.  Gannon is about three hours away from my hometown, way up on the lake.  I have not been to Erie before, other than just to visit briefly before I went.  And the day I went I just remembered this sense of just total excitement.  I just could not wait.  We packed up the truck and I took a great little picture that I still have of sitting in the back of the truck with my arms crossed, ready to go, hair pressed and curled, of course.  I got there, and it's a small school, 4,000 students, about, at that time.  Although, it is Catholic, it had mostly lay teachers there.  The program had admitted eighty students, although there were ten spots basically that they would accept to go to medical by the end of the three years so that the weed-out factor was pretty strong.  The curriculum was that, you know, was no, you can't take this elective and, and I know had two elective throughout the entire three years.  So from day one, I was committed that I'm gonna do this.  Part of it was because I just thought that it was the most direct, easiest way for me to go.  In some sense, my father's displeasure with me not taking the scholarship made me a little more determined that I'm gonna be successful in this one to make sure that I haven't let you down on the Ohio, from not taking the scholarship because there was a difference in finance here, had to pay a lot more to go to Gannon.  So I launched right in, and my high school science education had prepared me very well for the science courses in the first year.  So I sailed through that first semester with no trouble.  And that gave me a sense of confidence that was really good.  It wasn't really until about the third year when I took comparative anatomy which was the, probably most difficult course of the entire three-year time period where people are lost in the course curriculum that the first exam, I didn't do so well, and I had a couple of male friends who were just, they were excellent students.  They were good friends of mine, and we studied together and we did things, but they kept acing these exams.  And I couldn't understand how they were acing and I'm doing just barely, sort of middle-of-the-road.  But that wasn't acceptable for me because I hadn't done middle-of-the-road before.  And later I found out that they had access to exams that I never had, after-the-fact, I found that out.  But by the second exam, I was determined that I am going to--if I can make a good grade in this class, then I'm sure I'm sure I'm gonna get into medical school.  I don't know why I felt that, but I studied night and day, day and night and I got a ninety-eight percent on that exam.  And my teacher said, you outpaced the guys.  How did you do that?  That was the best thing he could have ever said to me at that point.  But I came back to an apartment with my roommates, I had three roommates at that point, and I threw my backpack down with probably fifty pounds of books, (laughter) and said, "I made it, and I know I made it."  And I did, after that.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the other students.  How many female, how many male, how many blacks, how many whites?
Speaker 2: A very small number of blacks, probably fifty-fifty girl, female to male ratio.  In my class, there were maybe about ten black students and probably six or so that lived on campus.  The very first day, during high school, I had participated in a program called Inroads, which was a program designed to give black students an exposure to industry.  At that time, I thought I was going to be a biomedical engineer so that went well.  But I met a student named Candy, who was from Pittsburgh, and she told me she was going to Gannon, but I hadn't seen her any more.  And the first day I went to register and in the hallways, she's standing there alone, looking lost, and we saw each other, and I said, Ah (gasp), Candace, and we screamed and we ran to each other and became the closest of friends.  And we're still best buddies now.  But she was my closest alliance to other black females that came from Buffalo and from Columbus, Ohio, and we formed a foursome and stuck together like glue.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: There's Candy, Edwina, Dee and but Dee came a little later from Maryland, and Deanna who came from Columbus.
Speaker 1: Were the also your roommates?
Speaker 2: My first roommate was from Aruba, and I met her in the hallway.  This was my assigned roommate.  She was trying to make a phone call and couldn't get through and started to cry.  And I stopped to help her make her phone call, and then we found out that she was gonna be my roommate.  Then we became fast friends and incorporating her into the family because she couldn't go home.  So she'd go home with me to spend holidays and kind of became part of my extended family.  So we'd actually become great friends and still communicate back and forth.
Story_ID: 29778
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about graduation and when you found out that, yes, you made it, you knew for sure that you were going to medical school?
Speaker 2: My brother was two years older, and so when I was a sophomore, he was interviewing for medical schools.  And he had been interviewed at ten different schools on the East Coast primarily.  And Hahnemann [Hahnemann School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was one of them, and Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], yeah, Temple and Hahnemann were two schools.  And then so my father was taking him there to interview.  And I said, you gotta take me with you.  I just have to go.  So I went with them to interview over a summer, winter break.  And, you know, just the excitement was building of just going.  It didn't matter what North Philadelphia looked like.  It didn't matter that it was in the middle of a really bad neighborhood, it was medical school, and this is what I had waited for.  So I got a chance to get a window and meet some of the same people that he was meeting while he was interviewing.  And at his interview at Hahnemann, I met the director of admissions there, and introduced myself and told him I was in a Gannon program.  Of course, he was very interested because they hadn't had a black student come through that program before.  And he introduced me to some of the other people there in their minority program.  And they had a summer program focused on the students who were matriculating to medical school the following year.  I ordinarily would not have been able to get in because I was a year younger, but he knew that I was in that program.  And he had me send him my transcripts and then called me back and said, "I'd like for you to come to our summer program this year.  And even if you don't get in, you will still be on a higher list of priority for the next year when you apply in the regular pool."  So that was fine with me.  I was excited.  And in, so then the summer between my third year of college, I went to Hahnemann to do the summer program in June.  And about the middle of way was the time that they actually making the decision about who would be admitted early.  And he called me from our classes that day, and said, I've got something to tell you.  He sat me down in his office, what is it?  He says, "You made it."  And I thought I just had won the lottery.  I was so happy.  I called, I went to the pay phone to call my parents immediately and they were totally ecstatic.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who was the president of Gannon when you were there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember his name [Joseph Scottino].
Speaker 1: That's fine.  So you left Gannon in 1984 and very happy.
Speaker 2: Very happy (laughter).
Story_ID: 29779
Speaker 1: So tell me what happened next?  You're going to medical school.
Speaker 2: I'm going to medical school, leaving my friends behind to finish their last year.  And they had teased me for the whole, for three years about being a bookworm.  So they were ecstatic and proud that I was gonna get to go.  And so I went to medical school was twenty, nineteen, no twenty, just turning twenty at that point, one of the youngest in the class, the second youngest in the class and excited to be in a major city.  Philadelphia was a big, bright wonderful city and I was excited just at all of the activity level there.  My mother, my mother and father both were terrified about that.  They thought that it was a dangerous place for me to go to.  It didn't frighten me in the least bit.  I lived in the center of city which is Hahnemann [School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is located and took the subways and mixed right in immediately.  And (laughter) I actually grew to like Philadelphia a lot.  And so it's very, it was very attractive to me.
Speaker 1: So tell me about medical school.  Who did you work with and who were some of the other students, females, tell me about your experience?
Speaker 2: Hahnemann had a very strong minority support program.  They had probably within Philadelphia, there were four medical schools.  They probably had the largest population of African Americans there.  About ten percent of their class at that time was African American, and a lady by the name of Fredericka Wau (ph.) was the director of the minority program and maintained tutors, tutoring program, mentoring programs, between the students who were in the upper years and the lower years, fostered connections between upper classmen and lower classmen to even live together, which was another form of support.  So I connected via that mechanism to Lusette Trianna (ph.) who was a Cuban American student who was two years ahead of me and needed a roommate.  And she and I became roommates and that was very helpful because she could relate some experiences to me that were where I was trying to get to and what to expect and who not to, who to avoid and, you know, how to get through some of these difficult courses.  It was a great experience because the setup, I felt I had a stronger connection, a stronger support level than I had previously in either college, high school or even grade school within the students group.  I had a connection with teachers, but the connection between the students was extremely strong.  So it was an attractive feature to me to have other black students who were equally as interested in school and in science as I was, and, you know, we could share some cultural things and also some educational things at the same time.  It was great, it was really great.
Speaker 1: So tell me, you graduate from medical school in '88 [1988], is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Was there any other experience in medical school that you wanna share?
Speaker 2: One that I'll share with you.  In my third year of clerkships, this is the time when you start to rotate through the hospital as a student and you're on a service a couple of levels above you, residents, fourth-year medical students and then there's the Attending [physician].  And I rotated out of Kroser Chester Hospital which is just South of Philadelphia.  It's a smaller community hospital, doing internal medicine.  And then I had been warned about this particular attendant, but, of course, you don't get choices.  You just get assigned.  And we were taking care of an elderly gentleman who had a heart problem, and he didn't wanna eat.  And so the attendant who always walked around with a pipe in his mouth, this is--times have changed, said to him, "you know, what would you like to eat?"  And the gentleman said," I'd like to have pot roast."  And he said, "I can't get pot roast from the hospital," and he says, "if you bring me a pot roast, I'll eat."  So the Attending said, "well, Shawna will bring you a pot roast on Tuesday."  And, of course, I'm the only African American; I'm the only female with all the other white and Jewish males standing around me who were my friends.  They thought that was funny, and I laughed too, but the joke went on for more than a week.  And every day, it was more of the same, which made me very uncomfortable because I felt like it was not becoming a joke anymore.  So I approached him and asked him if--in a private and respectful way, is it a joke?  If it's a joke, I just would like to say that it's becoming uncomfortable for me.  And if it's a joke, then we need to really talk about it.  And then he turned to me and said, very frankly, "This isn't a joke.  This is what you are charged to do here.  You're supposed to take care of patients and I'm charging you to prepare a pot roast and bring it for this patient."  And, of course, all of those ancestors who were slaves and (laughter) and all of those things just welled up inside of me, and it was like I have not come this far for you to make me into somebody's servant.  And I said to him, "I'm not here to serve food.  There are people hired to do that, and they can do it well.  I'm here to be a physician.  I'm here to learn, and I'm not gonna prepare food for anybody in this hospital." And he walked away from me in a huff really angry, but fortunately, Dr. Sally Bowman, who's an African American woman happened to be Assistant to the Dean.  So I went straight to the phone to call her and tell her, you know, what happened.  And she then said, "you know, don't worry about it.  You've done the right thing.  I'll handle it from here."
Speaker 1: Let's stop here to change the tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29780
Speaker 1: So you were saying that Ms. Bowman [Dr. Sally Bowman] said she would handle it.--
Speaker 2: So she reassured me that I was correct in my response and that I was appropriate in how I handled it with him and that I should do nothing.  And at that point, she would handle it from there.  And, in fact, she did.  She actually reprimanded him.  The school reprimanded him and he was no longer allowed to have students after that point under his tutelage.  The only difficult part is that, you know, he's still the person who's doing, who's writing your grade.  So, you know, the grade mediocre but that was probably better than I would have gotten had I not sought out help from someone outside.  It was really the only time in medical school that I really, really needed somebody above me to really help me in a situation.  I really had no control over what would happen then.  Others had told me of similar sorts of things with this particular person so I knew that there was a possibility there, that it would happen, but felt very comfortable that I had people like Dr. Bowman to really be helpful that way.  It was one of the really strong things about Hahnemann [Hahnemann School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  The network was great, really great.
Speaker 1: So you go on and you do your residency and your internship at which hospital?
Speaker 2: So I went to Alleghany General [Hospital] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to do Internal Medicine.  I had considered becoming an emergency medicine physician earlier and spent some time doing some rotations at Jefferson [Jefferson Regional Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]and a couple of other medical schools.  And by the time I registered for the match which is the process by which medical students match to a residency program, I was a bit torn between emergency medicine and internal medicine, leaning more towards internal medicine.  And the two positions that I had ranked highest in emergency medicine, I didn't get, but I got my first choice in internal medicine which as at Alleghany General.  I had, of course, Pittsburgh was home and it was a nice thing to be able to come closer to home.  My parents were ecstatic that I was gonna be closer to them.  And they thought that would be the beginning of me staying there forever, but (laughter) it was a nice, it was good for me in many ways.  I think the environment of the hospital which is a large, community-based.  At that time, they were just forming alliances with the Medical College of Pennsylvania so they had some academic presence there, but more towards community medicine, was very attractive to me.  It was a strong institution.  I bonded very quickly with all the people there because it was like being at home all over again.
Speaker 1: And who are some of the physicians that you worked under during your internship and residency?
Speaker 2: One of the key people I worked with was Dr. Ferraro [Dr. James C. Ferraro] who was a nephrologist who also had a hypertension sub-specialty.  And then my second year of residency or the beginning of my third year, the beginning of my third year of residency, I rotated with him on an elective rotation.  And I really liked hypertension and I just was very interested.  And, of course, we had a lot of consultations for hypertension in the hospital and so you are, in those situations, it's usually just you and your attending which is a nice situation for getting that mentoring going.  And we spent a lot of time talking just about, you know, my interests and he asked me one day, what are you gonna do when you finish, and I said, you know, I owe more money right now than my parents' home and their cars and all of their clothes put together (laughter).  So my choice is to go and try to make some money to pay some of these bills back.  We didn't come from a lot of money, and he said something to me that was very profound, that I appreciate his knowledge.  He said, you know, you should never choose your life according to your finance.  You should choose according to your passion because your finance will always follow your passion and whatever you're good at, your finance will be just fine.  And I thought about that for a little while.  It took me a bit to kind of register what he wanted me to understand.  But he said, you know, you really like hypertension.  Why aren't you going to do that?  You should be going to do something you really like and there are some places where you can go and you can focus uniquely on hypertension.
Story_ID: 29781
Speaker 1: And he [Dr. James C. Ferraro] had come from the University of Michigan just a few years before where he had worked in both nephrology and hypertension and suggested that I go there to look at their program and a few other places.  So I set out to look.  Well, where are these programs in hypertension?  So I went to UTNB [The University of Texas Medical Branch] which is in Galveston, Texas and I interviewed there, and I called and spoke the people at King-Drew [King-Drew Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] in California and looked into the programs in Atlanta.  And then I went to visit Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I interviewed there and the day before I went, this was in 1990, late 1990, early '91 [1991].  I had received a letter back inviting me for an interview from Dr. Stevo Julius which was a different name.  And I was watching the 'Today Show' which is my normal pattern every day.  And they said, we have a special guest from the University of Michigan, Dr. Stevo Julius who had who's had a recent study in the Journal of the American Medical Association and he's gonna share with us his findings.  And I perked my ears and thought is that Stevo Julius?  This can't be the person I'm about to go and meet in about two or three days.  And sure enough, it was, and he presented his studies from the Tecumseh Blood Pressure Study.  Well, I thought, oh, my goodness.  So I went to fly to Michigan to, for the interview, and I picked up a 'Newsweek Magazine' and on the cover of the 'Newsweek Magazine', is a little note "meet Dr. Stevo Julius in his home."  Oh, my gosh.  This guy's really famous.  Am I gonna be able to manage this, you know?  This is a, this is really well beyond what I expected.  And so when I got there, my expectations, of course, were extremely high.  I was a little nervous about meeting him because the hype is pretty big, but he was the kindest, most open gentleman that I had ever met.  And I got a sense of comfort level with someone who knew his field well, was very comfortable with the science and seemed to be someone who would be a great teacher.  And after weighing out the pluses of Michigan, of course, with the hype, against the other locations, I decided that Michigan would be the spot for me.  And I went there to do my fellowship and stayed for an extended period of time as a lecturer which is sort of a glorified fellow and then stayed beyond that on the faculty for a total of ten years in Ann Arbor.  I came to really love Ann Arbor.
Speaker 2: So you, in '91 [1991], so you left Philadelphia in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 1: Left Pittsburgh in '91 [1991].  I left Philadelphia in '88 [1988] after medical school.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Pittsburgh.  And you get your license in Michigan?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you talk about, if would, talk about the process that makes a physician certified.  You get certified in '92 [1992], is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, there are a couple of different certifications you get.  One is licensure which is based on, at that time, the National Board of Medical Examiners exams, and they're given throughout medical school.  And the third part, you take when you finish residency.  So that allows you to sit for State boards or to get your state license.  And I got my license in Pennsylvania and then in Michigan.  For Internal Medicine, sub-specialty there's a licensure exam.  It's really not licensure, it's really certification, Board Certification exam.  So I took that exam in '92 [1992] while I was in Michigan and Board Certified in Internal Medicine at that point.
Story_ID: 29782
Speaker 1: And you say you become a lecturer (laughter) and tell me, what were the focus of your lectures?
Speaker 2: Well, lecturer in the sense that that is a job title.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So on the spectrum of physician science titles, it is, from bottom to top, it's you are a fellow and then you can become a lecturer and then an instructor and then assistant professor or associate professor and then full professor.
Speaker 1: So what happens in '92 [1992] through '96 [1996]?
Speaker 2: '92 [1992] through '96 [1996] was my fellowship and lecturer positions and during that time, you know, Dr. Julius [Dr. Stevo Julius], gave me a lot of room and space to get a feel for academic medicine because I had not entertained becoming an academician prior to that.  I really thought that I would be a practicing physician in a community and have an office.  And so this, the whole concept of, you know, being out of medical school, being on faculty research was something I needed to think about.  What is it that I would do?  How will I do that?  Am I prepared to do that, many aspects of it I had not been really well versed in.  Hahnemann's focus was more towards preparing you to be a clinician.  And so Dr. Julius gave me the space and time to gain that experience, to work with multiple investigators there on some of their research projects, some of which were epidemiology projects that were focusing on blood pressure and risk factors, one of which was the Tecumseh Blood Pressure project.  It was a project performed in Tecumseh, Michigan which is twenty-five miles South of Ann Arbor, small town with no diversity but a group of people who basically don't move and so similar to Framingham [Heart Study, Framingham, Massachusetts]. in that respect, that you could gather a lot of information.  And so they had a field office that they were running a number of different investigations to look at how they presented before people became hypertensive.  And so I worked out there in the research office, and I worked in the clinical research center in the hospital doing some research, and met a great colleague and friend, Kenneth Jamerson [Kenneth A. Jamerson], who's still at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And he and I formed a bond like brother and sister and just enjoyed working together and learned a lot from each other and spent a lot of time doing some of those research projects at the same time.  It was a very positive and nurturing environment to learn from, allowed me to make some decisions about whether I really wanted to do this without pressure.  And by the time, about '96 [1996] or so, I decided, yes, this is what I want, and now we have to decide how to go about that.
Speaker 1: You talk about being an investigator or co-investigators.  Tell me exactly what that entails.
Speaker 2: And so in science, in our clinical trials' work, on study investigations, there's a lead investigation who we call the principal investigator, and there are co-investigators and usually there's the first co-PI who would be like the second person in charge, and there are a number of other co-investigators.  Sometimes there are projects that are done at one location and where it's just a group of two or three or four doctors that work together with one lead physician.  Other times, there are multiple sites around the country that have co-investigators that work on these different studies.  So I was able to serve as co-investigator on several studies while I was at Michigan as a junior faculty person.
Story_ID: 29783
Speaker 1: In 1994, do you want to talk about the American Heart Association teaching seminar, cardiovascular epidemiology?
Speaker 2: The American Heart--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) epidemiology cardiovascular epidemiology course.  The American Heart Association has a seminar that they do, that's a ten day seminar that's held in Lake Tahoe yearly, and you have to be nominated to be a participant.  And it focuses on many aspects that are important for developing a career in cardiovascular epidemiology.  And so there are statisticians there.  There are any number of investigators from all over the country, and they basically teach and these different mini-courses and then you learn to write a grant in that ten day timeframe.  And at the end of the course, you present that and do some fun performance around whatever it is that you'd like to do.  So it's a very nice way to get a great exposure to the many aspects of epidemiology and cardiovascular science.
Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next?  What happens next?
Speaker 2: So in '94 [1994] I met my husband, no, I'm sorry, '92 [1992] I met my husband--he'll kill me for that--'92 [1992] and '94 [1994] we decided to get married and married in '95 [1995] and decided we would settle in Michigan.  He moved from Washington, D.C. to be there with me and, which is, you know, a great endorsement for him to (laughter) give up his position at Mobil Oil [Exxon Mobil since 1999].  He was an engineer there.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Thomas Nesbitt, T-H-O-M-A-S, and moved to Michigan.  And we got married, and we decided to settle and built a home there.
Speaker 1: How did you meet?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  He had a friend who was interested in science as a dentist at UNC, Chapel Hill [The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  And there was a conference held, given by the-- and sponsored by NIH [National Institutes of Health], but it was the AAMC [Association of American Medical Colleges], and it was focused on building minorities career development in academic medicine.  And it was held in Washington.  At the time, he had moved from Dallas to Virginia and was working at the headquarters for Mobil Oil.  And his friend invited him to this reception, and I happened to be at the reception.  And we met and had dinner and became fast friends and dated long distance.  And in about a year and a half, he decided that he would move to Michigan and we got engaged and got married in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have a nine-year old little girl.  She was born in 1998.  She is actually our second child.  We had an unfortunate loss of first child who was stillborn in 1997, '96 [1996] which was life changing for me.  It was a major event and just refocusing what's important in life.  It really changed a lot.  Her name was Jessica.  Our second daughter is Joy, and she is truly a joy in every way.
Story_ID: 29784
Speaker 1: So what year do you begin to work for Merreck [pause]?  Do you -- let me see, in '95 [1995] to 2001, you are a principal investigator for the Merreck company?
Speaker 2: Oh, Merck [Merck & Co., Inc].
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  It says Merreck here.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: So in '95 [1995], while I was at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], we were participants in a large clinical trial called "The LIFE Study" "Losartan Interventions for Endpoints in Hypertension" is the formal name.  We were one of the sites at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  In fact, Dr. Julius [Dr. Stevo Julius], my mentor, was one of the principal investigators, and so I was able to work with him very closely on the clinical trial to understand how a clinical trial comes together, what's the process of the design; what's the process of actually carrying out the clinical trial?  And then I was able to also be the site investigator at the Michigan location which gave me some very critical and important information and experience.
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of this information and experiences?
Speaker 2: So that, that was one of the smaller trials.  I learned how clinical trials come together.  I mean after the design is set by an investigator and then the funding comes together, it's just where will do it; how will you do it; how will you recruit; getting patients and keeping them in once they are in are all very important parts of being able to be successful in a clinical trial.  Our "LIFE Study" was, we had a small site at Michigan, but it prepared me well then to be co-investigator in the next study which came just after that.  That was "ASKD" Study, the "African American Study of Kidney Disease" and Hypertension.  And we were one of eleven sites around the country, and I was a co-investigator with Dr. Jamerson [Kenneth A. Jamerson] who was our local PI.  But having done "Life" prepared me a little better for ASKD, and in ASKD, my role was to be in charge of blood pressure management which we recruited eighty-five patients from the Detroit area, developed a team of nurses and research assistants to help us carry out the trial.  We had to really design a study well because Ann Arbor is not an area that is heavily populated with African Americans.  It's actually probably on ten percent African American in Ann Arbor, proper.  Outside of Ann Arbor though, Ypsilanti and Detroit, of course, Detroit being eighty-five percent.  But the distance between Detroit and Ann Arbor is forty miles on paper, but probably a hundred miles in mentality and accessibility.  So you needed to really design a plan that would allow us to access the population and change some minds.  There were some real issues around acceptance of the University of Michigan as a care provider for African Americans at the time.  One of the, one of the lead people in the administration was Larry Warren at the time who was the CEO of the hospital.  And he developed a program focusing and put money behind a program to develop greater diversity in the patient population, not only in patient care, but also in the research projects.  So Dr. Jamerson and I were deeply involved in that and developed programs around the Ann Arbor community and other local cities, Ypsilanti [Michigan] to try and invite more of the African American community to be a participant in our clinical trials.  We met with some different perspectives that we had not expected, and as we--
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, both of us being African American, had the impression that having come from not wealthy backgrounds, that are similar roots would be very well accepted when we came to any of these churches, that it would be a breath of fresh air, that they would say, we accept you because you're one of our own and that we'd like to participate because we trust you.  And that wasn't the case.  That was absolutely not the case.  In fact, we were met with resistance, and were viewed as being part of the establishment rather than necessarily bringing something to the community that they had not had access to before.  It took some convincing.  But it opened my eyes too.  And I think I was naive to think that just because you're black and you come that people are gonna accept you.  There's no reason that they should and rightfully so.  I think in years past they had been duped a few time.  And so they gave us a difficult time, and the next year or two we were able to develop relationships with them.  We did education programs at the churches.  We did blood pressure screenings at the churches.  We invited the nurses, the church nurses who are generally not nurses by profession, but we gave them some education programs to empower them and gave them their own cups and they came to trust us and really became one of our biggest supporters over time.  But that taught us a lot about how to approach African Americans in a community, was that there's a different way that you need to come with whatever you have.  It needs to something that's substantive, and that you need to come on their terms rather than to come with what you, just what you want at that time.
Story_ID: 29785
Speaker 1: And, from the study, was there--what information did you gather from that study?
Speaker 2: The ASKD study [the African American Study of Kidney Disease] was the first clinical study that was funded by the National Institutes of Health that focused uniquely on African Americans with hypertension.  And that's a very, I'm very proud of that because, you know, in the face of the fact that African Americans have the highest risk in the world of developing hypertension, to have a study that focuses uniquely on African Americans is wonderful to have.  But it gave us some very important information.  I think the information spans from the purely scientific, clinical part of it, is understanding that the drugs that have been previously thought not to effective for African Americans, in fact, were one of the best agents for African Americans, the ace inhibitor class, surpassing some of the other drugs that were thought to be better drugs for blacks.  It dispelled some of the previous thoughts about why patients don't participate in trials, that you can't get blacks to be a part of a clinical trial.  We proved them wrong.  We showed that we can get them involved and we could keep them involved for five years over that time span, even in an urban area where people are thought to be moving in and out all the time.  Furthermore, that when you--again, it's about the approach.  I think we have a lot of myths about what the barriers are to participation and to medical care for African Americans.  We think that it's always about the financial part of it.  But in our study, we provided, we covered all those barriers.  We provided transportation.  We took the medicines to their houses.  We delivered by FedEx.  We went to the community to actually meet them so they didn't have to go very far.  And interestingly enough, with all of that provision of care, what meant the most to them was being able to sit down with a doctor for ten minutes, to have a conversation.  And that connection, that human connection was by far more effective than anything else we did in the clinical study.  It's a very different concept than I think what we think people want, and people want to be able to talk to somebody.
Speaker 1: So what happens next?  What project do you work on next?
Speaker 2: So as I finished the ASKD study and there was a program on campus called the "On Job, On Campus" program that was designed for clinical, clinicians really who wanted to enhance their preparation for a research career in clinical trials basically.  And so the School of Public Health had this clinical research designs statistical analysis curriculum that was a eighteen month program that was on campus four days a month.  It was a full graduate program and mostly, physicians, some PhD's and some from industry who wanted to just get a secondary, another degree basically.  So (laughter) my husband my mother could not believe that I was actually gonna go back to school again, but decided that I should do it and I enrolled in that program in '97 [1997] and completed that program, being pregnant and working at the same time.  So it was two, almost two years.
Speaker 1: So you finished that program in '99 [1999]?
Speaker 2: Finished the program in '99 [1999], yes.
Speaker 1: And you had your daughter, and tell me what happened, well, what's next on the agenda?
Speaker 2: So after I finished the program, the "On Job", the "Clinical Research Design Masters Degree" and actually, it ended I think like early 2000 or so, I then began to look at performing other clinical trials on my own.  That then became my focus of how to develop my own career a little bit more independently.  And Dr. Julius [Dr. Stevo Julius] then was beginning to design another trial called the Trophy Trial, the Trial Of Preventing Hypertension.  That trial hinged on a lot of the work that he had done for many years in Tecumseh and some of the work that I had done with him out there, that looked at all these risks factors and how they come together.  So this was the culmination of years and years of work, and he and I began to work pretty aggressively on the design with some of the other investigators that he had worked with previously, presented that to an industry, a company from industry to support the study.  He had already made some changes to the protocol.  When I came into the process, we were on our last run of trying to make changes to how the study would be presented.
Speaker 1: Let's stop here to change the tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 29786
Speaker 1: So talk to me about--we were talking about the TROPHY study.  If you would, tell me more about how you put together the trials?
Speaker 2: So, the TROPHY [Trial of Preventing Hypertension] study, as I said, Dr. Julius [Dr. Stevo Julius] had done many, many years of investigation on borderline hypertension and early hypertension in Tecumseh [Michigan].  And I was fortunate enough to be able to work with him on much of that work.  The concepts around it were that there were things happening before the evidence of hypertension.  And it wasn't just that all of a sudden people develop hypertension out of the blue, that this is a lifelong process that had started, and the Tecumseh data suggested that it may have even started as early as in childhood.  And so the TROPHY study was a design that was born out of that, coupled with the fact that there were new drugs on the market that were very well tolerated, had low numbers of side effects, and had an effect that now we begin to understand that there was a pathophysiology of change in the blood vessels that was happening early on and that this new style of medication, the antigens and the receptor blockers were capable of perhaps blocking that change from continuing and perhaps even regressing that change in the blood vessels.  So the concept behind TROPHY was, can we treat people who are just beginning to develop hypertension and perhaps cause the blood vessels to heal to some extent and not progress as quickly or even at all as they would have had they not been treated and not relegate people to life-long blood pressure medication.  The concept is very attractive for, you know, a lot of people for a lot of reasons.  One is that we have a difficult time in medicine getting people to take medicine for the rest of their lives.  They're not happy about that.  It's expensive, and, you know, it's fraught with difficulty.  And so the idea that you could use something short term is much more attractive.  The other idea is that we're talking about changing pathophysiology and most of the medicines that we treat blood pressures don't change the pathophysiology.  They basically just lower blood pressure by many different mechanisms.  And so that was intriguing to me to investigate something that looked at that.  We proposed the study to AstraZeneca [plc] and they decided to fund the study and made major changes to it.  It took more than two years actually, over their course of making many changes.  And Dr. Julius had done a lot of that before I even started with him.  And then by the time I was really deeply involved with really trying to design the mechanics of the study, how will we do the study and what sites will we do the study?  How many patients do we need?  When, what's the timeframe of the study?  How long do we need to treat?  Once we get patients involved, how many times do we need to have them come back?  It's a very, very intricate process of planning almost every detail of what happens in a clinical trial.  And I think people don't realize how much time it takes to sit down and think about those things and to anticipate how many people will drop out over the course of a four-year time period and try to plan how you're gonna keep them in.  And if they do drop out, will you still be answer to answer the question that you originally proposed.  We started the trial's enrollment in 1999.  It took two years to enroll 800 patients.  We had seventy-one sites.  My role in the study was as the national coordinator.  So I coordinated all those sites with the help what's called a clinical research organization out of Philadelphia.  And they're hired to be our arms and legs and basically go to these sites.  But my role as a scientific clinical coordinator is to make sure that the protocol stays on track, make sure that all of the clinical issues regarding treatment and clinical problems that happen to patients are properly taken care of, the questions are answered to our investigators.  We have an education program that educates our investigators at seventy sites as to exactly what we would like for them to do, and it helps them to understand the concepts behind the clinical trial.  So we had yearly meetings, and I was responsible for developing those yearly meetings, the agenda for them.  We had sub-studies that were a segment of the population, 150 or so that we collected more data from.  And so in, first, there is the design of the sub-study.  Then there is getting the approval for the sub-study from the regulatory organizations.  We have to go through every IRB, Institutional Revenue Board, for approval, writing for consents.  And then once they're all on board, there's training each and every one of these sites to carry out what we'd like for them to do.  It's a big job, it's a really big job.  So I carried out that role for the entire duration of the study.  About the middle of the study is when I moved from the University of Michigan to Dallas to UT Southwestern [University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas], but continued that role when I arrived here.
Story_ID: 29787
Speaker 1: Two things, one--well, since you're halfway through, tell me what makes you decide to move to Dallas?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So by 2001, I had finished my master's in clinical research design.  My mentor [Dr. Stevo Julius] was then reaching a point where he was, he had stepped down as the chief of our division and began to scale back his time.  He was getting a little older.  My colleagues there were doing a lot of the same kind of work that I was interested in doing, and I was the youngest person.  It's sometimes a little difficult to be the younger person with everybody ahead of you doing almost the same thing as what you do.  You don't get the first time, when they're calling, they're not calling for you.  They're calling for the one ahead of you.  So that was one part of my motivation for thinking is it time for me to stretch a little bit for myself, to become a little more independent?  A number of other friends and colleagues around the country who had been mentors in some sense had talked to me and recommended that to me, and said, you know, you should consider--I know you love Michigan, but you should consider that perhaps you should step out a little bit further from your home zone and do things on your own because I think you need your own space.  And I was recruited actually to come here in '98 [1998] very heavily by my current chief.  I was pregnant and working on my master's at the time and working, and I couldn't see how I could move across the country at that point in time.  So I refused to do that.  Then this position became available again.  And my chief then called back and said, you know, we still would love to have you.  There's a position now open again.  Would you think about it?  Why don't you come and take a look?  And I came, my husband and I came, and we actually looked here and we looked at a position in North Carolina and really thought about what was the best move.  He was comfortable, my husband was comfortable with Dallas because he had lived here for a couple of years, not from here, but had lived here for a couple of years.  So he knew Dallas very well.  So that was an easy move for him.  And he was traveling at the time, so it was simple as far as him being able to access the airport and go wherever he needed to go.  I came and it was attractive to me from the perspective that it seemed open for new opportunities.  There were other things going on at the university.  They had an incredible reputation, four Nobel laureates here in the Department of Internal Medicine.  And very few medical schools can say they have one.  So that was attractive to me that I felt comfortable that I'm coming from Michigan that I had known and grown to really love and respect, that I was coming to a place that was equivalent in terms of its level of education and reputation.  And I decided that it was a good place for me to branch out to.  They had then, the "Dallas Heart Study" which was, is funded by the Reynolds Foundation, and was a study designed to look at blood pressure and cardiovascular risk factors across a multi-ethnic population that was largely African American.  So that was one of the projects that I came and started to work on when I first got here.  One of my real interests though was to propose a study that would hinge on the TROPHY study that was my first love, and look more at some of that mechanistic parts of this developing hypertension.  There was a body of evidence in science that suggested that there was increasing, what's called oxidative stress so that the blood vessels are developing damage and that damage is evident by looking at different markers.  And so I thought that TROPHY was in an optimal population to try and look at some of those questions since we had already gathered everything else around that.  And shortly after I arrived here, I wrote the grant and proposed to NIH [National Institutes of Health] for my first RO-1 [grant] and was successful in getting that grant as an ancillary study to the TROPHY study to assess the oxidative stress markers of the TROPHY population.
Story_ID: 29788
Speaker 1: So when the TROPHY study ended was it a success in your eyes?
Speaker 2: The TROPHY study was clearly a success.  We published in the 'New England Journal' which was one of my biggest highlights that we published there.  You always think of where you'd like to publish, and the 'New England Journal' is always that one that's at, reaching for the stars.  So that was wonderful for me.  That publication, being the first in this group of high blood pressure subjects, we had never used any medications in any clinical trial in people who had blood pressures that were at this level.  And we were able to demonstrate that it's safe to do it and it's well tolerated.  And we were also able to show that our hypothesis was true, was even more attractive and gratifying.
Speaker 1: We talked before about lecturers and you corrected me and told me that it was a title.  But you do do a lot of lectures all over and at certain conferences, I see every year.  Is there a certain conference that you speak to?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Over the years that I've been in hypertension academia, I have been associated, been a member of multiple groups, one of which is the International Society of Hypertension in Blacks, is now twenty-one years old.  It started out as a small group of African American physicians who wanted to form a society that would focus on hypertension primarily in black populations, not just in the U.S. but around the world.  And that group that started in the late '80s [1980s] has now grown to a group of 500.  In the last two years, I've served as the vice president of that organization, and we're very proud that the group is going strong and we've been able to not only highlight the important research that goes on in African Americans but we're also able to educate clinicians to better understand how to better take care of both black and white, how to take care of patients.  We've published guidelines around managing hypertension in blacks.  And so that's one of the organizations that is a great love of mine, and I lecture at that meeting yearly.  I've also been a part of the National Medical Association and lecture there, nearly yearly.  Fortunately, they've asked me to come back.  I've been fortunate enough to lecture at a number of other societies, not only in the U.S. but also around the world, now, particularly talking about TROPHY and the results that we found in pre-hypertensives.
Speaker 1: Tell me what's next for you?
Speaker 2: What's next? (whisper)  Well, hinting more on the TROPHY concept is that I would really like to flush this out a little bit better because I think that according to the secular trends that we see, not only in adults, trends we see in adolescents and in children, what we see in ethnic populations, is that hypertension isn't going away.  It's actually becoming more prevalent.  Part of that has to do with the fact that people are gaining weight so much faster than we ever have in the past.  I would like to see better ways to prevent disease rather than always treating at the end of disease.  And so to that extent, one of the next projects that I'm looking at is to try and recreate a TROPHY-like setting in adolescents to look at, can we prevent it in younger people and perhaps if we started younger, maybe we wouldn't see so many people developing so much disease at the end of their lives, where they end up on dialysis and with heart disease and strokes.  And so that's my immediate next step, but surrounding that is to get a better understanding of what drives, developing hypertension, rather than just treating it, how can we stop that process earlier.
Speaker 1: And you serve also on a number of advisory panels.
Speaker 2: I do.  I've been a part of the women's, the campaign launched by the NHLBI [National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute], the Red Dress campaign.  I've been on the advisory panel for that.  I've also been on the advisory panel for obesity in adolescents and children.  That's also a part of an advisory panel by NHLBI.  With ISHIB  [International Society of Hypertension in Blacks] we also have a campaign that's launched called "Children are Our Messengers" whereby we look at ways to improve health education to the lay person by coming from the children, rather than coming from the adults.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to tell me about your work that we have not talked about?
Speaker 2: One of the other things I do here is that when I first arrived Parkland Hospital which is the county hospital of Dallas, has the largest population of indigent care in this area and serves probably half African American and Hispanic population.  Of course, hypertension being one of the prominent problems that they suffer from, one of my charges when I arrived here was to design a clinic that would be in support of the primary care physicians who take care of most of those people.  And I've been fortunate enough to design a clinic that focuses in on hypertension and we take care of the most difficult patients in managing their blood pressures and assisting our primary care physicians in doing that, very proud that our statistics are very high in getting people under control who present to us, are on multiple medications and have a difficult time in managing their blood pressure.  That's a task that is a labor of love that I find to be satisfying, gratifying for what I came to medicine to do, which is first to provide excellent clinical care and then second is to educate and, hopefully, improve the overall health of populations.
Story_ID: 29789
Speaker 1: Is there something that you would like to do that you have not done yet in your life?
Speaker 2: You know, I really enjoy what I do, and I can be more successful at what I do, that is to really have an impact that leaves the world behind me with a better sense of health, a better sense of themselves or even if I've just inspired a few younger people that they can do this too, I would feel that my life has been successful.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what are your hopes and desires for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I would hope that the African American community comes to understand this disease, this epidemic plague that we have suffered from many a years, and that we come to incorporate better health practices on an everyday basis into our culture because it isn't until it becomes a part of your culture that you can make great change in how people live because we can talk till we're blue in the face, but if everybody goes home and eats the same foods that they've been eating for years and years, the damage is already done.  And so I think that part of what makes people change is helping them to understand why they need to change and helping them to understand how to make that change, understanding what they like, what they don't like and allowing them that privilege of enjoying some of things that they really do like. So I'd like to bridge the gap that exists between health care providers and between lay persons, specifically, and African Americans.
Speaker 1: Because this information, your inspirational story, this professional story will be available for many, many generations, what message would you send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: The future generations.  I think that you can be an inspiration to many, many people in many, many ways, and you do that first by looking within yourself for your best qualities.  What is it that you do very well?  What are your natural tendencies?  Use those to then highlight what it is that you desire to do and that will be your, that will always be your best gift to the people around you and the people behind you.
Story_ID: 29790
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?  I know that you wanted to tell me about slavery on your father's side of the family, so if you would tell me about that and tell me what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I recently looked up some information on my father's family just to try and get an understanding of where is the connection back as far as we can go if we could get a connection to a specific location in African, if you will.  Of course, that's not possible, but I was able to track back to my father's great, great grandmother, Grandmother Addie, who was a slave and had several children, coming out of slavery without a husband.  And her children then went on to have many other children.  And I'm a descendant of that heritage.  She had many children who were uneducated.  They lived very difficult lives as I've gone back to South Carolina to experience and to see some of the places that they were.  I've been to the graveyard and found that their experiences were very difficult.  And the privileges that I have been blessed to have, have come out of the struggles that those people have made for me.  I feel blessed to be a part of that heritage, and I want to propel forward as high as I can from the steps that they've led me to.
Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you so very much for taking the time to share your story for the future generations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
