Story_ID: 97799
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is George Richard N'Namdi.  N'Namdi is spelled N, apostrophe, capital N, A-M-D-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind your name?  I know it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm asking--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the story behind my name.  I'm a child of the sixties [1960s].  And then when the cultural revolution kind of happened in this country, we decided--my wife and I, Carmen, decided to name ourselves.  And we thought the family name should reflect our heritage, so we chose N'Namdi as our name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what does N'Namdi mean, and what culture does it come from?
Speaker 2: N'Namdi is Ibo, of Nigeria.  And it means "Father's name lives on."  I thought it was symbolic, in that I was named after my father, and also symbolic in a sense that my forefathers before him, their spirit lives on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 12, 1946, Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an art dealer.  I have, I have three galleries, and I'm the president of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the company is known as?
Speaker 2: G.R. N'Namdi Gallery.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And tell us, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 18, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the G.R. N'Namdi Gallery, Detroit, Michigan, 66 East Forest Avenue.
Story_ID: 97800
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions we always.  They're just a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, Sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Fish, salmon. Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I wear black a lot.  My favorite color, I don't have one per se, but I think I'm towards the greens and purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, if I have to do that.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and summer.  I should say late spring, summer, and early fall... the sunshine time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, but I like vacations.  But I tend to like to go on urban vacations, you know, to other cultures.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question of this series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying, and what is it?
Speaker 2: I think... let me see.  Well, I guess one would be when someone says, "How's life treating you?" my phrase is "Life treats me the same every day.  My ability to handle it may vary from day to day."  And I guess in added to that, "The universe takes care of the details."  I think I would probably use "The universe takes care of the details" probably most frequently.  But both of them are one of the phrases that I use.
Story_ID: 97801
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll start off with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ima, I-M-A, Jo, J-O, Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Winson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: W-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, first of all, before I ask you about your mother, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace their history?
Speaker 2: Just to my grandparents on that side, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up with my grandmother.  My grandmother was from--I know she lived in Texas, because that's where my mother was born.  But I think the family might have been from Louisiana, I'm not sure.  It was a lot of movement between Louisiana and Texas during those years.  So, so, we have that connection.  But we always kind of think of my grandmother being in-- from Texas.  But she moved to Ohio when we were, you know, very young children.  My grandfather lived in Texas.  I didn't know my grandfather very well, but I knew him.  And he had also, along with my mother, he also had two other daughters with a different, who had a different mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your grandmother... is there any story about why she moved to Ohio from Texas?
Speaker 2: Because her two daughters moved to Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, my father [George Richard Johnson] is from Ohio.  And so, when they met, my mother moved to Ohio.  And then afterwards, her sister moved to Ohio--Columbus, Ohio to be exact.  And so, of course, my grandmother then followed, because I guess because her two daughters were there.
Speaker 1: Now, what part of Texas was she from?
Speaker 2: Wichita Falls.  It's a small town, maybe sixty miles from Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: Now, Wichita Falls, is that the one that's famous for the hottest temperatures in the summertime?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I don't think--it's northern.  If it's Texas it's hot all over.  So, I can't... (Laughter).  It's just a hot state.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 97802
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your grandmother's side of the family about life in Texas?  Can they trace themselves back to slavery or Africa?
Speaker 2: I can't say.  When we were young... I have... it's eight... I have seven brothers and sisters--two brothers and five sisters.  And when we were young, the first four--my older brother and myself--we would go to our grandmother, my fraternal grandmother.  My sisters, my two older sisters, would go and visit the maternal side of the family.  So, we, the boys didn't grow up knowing as much about that side.  You know, we didn't have that kind of experience with them.  So, we didn't have necessarily stories.  I do know my grandmother was, I think, the youngest or second youngest of nine children.  Her, her, her siblings had gone to, were college graduates.  Her parents died when she was a young child, so she was partly raised by her older sister.  She had another sister who did work--moved to Liberia, you know.  So, I know that much.  Names and things like that, I don't know as much about.
Speaker 1: Was the sister that moved to Liberia a missionary or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think she was a teacher in Liberia, you know.  So, but I know that--
Speaker 1: This would have been around the turn of the century or something?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Because my grandmother--yeah, my grandmother was born around then.  So, you know, they could have been, you know, could have been a missionary.  They could have been part of the [Marcus] Garvey movement or whatever, you know.  You can't... you know, those types of details didn't... you didn't know.  But I know she did... my grandmother told about her moving to Liberia.
Speaker 1: Well, very few Garvey-ites made it to Liberia (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm saying, you know, part of the whole...  They didn't make it, but at the same time--you know how they didn't make it out of New York, but maybe people got there other ways.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, from other towns--you know, like sometimes everybody focuses on what people are doing in New York City, but other cities are also making similar movements or,that way.  But it could have been--but I know she was like a missionary.  That's what I kind of know; that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Do you know if any of them were involved in the Garvey movement?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: So, what did your grandmother do?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, I think she played in the house.  She was a housekeeper, you know.  I'm not sure--yeah, I think she was probably a housekeeper.  I don't think of my grandmother as working.  My grandmother had a lot of grandchildren.  She had two daughters, and from two daughters she had twenty-one grandchildren.  So, I always see her as helping out with the children, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So when you knew her she was always taking care of children?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  So I don't remember her like that, you know, going to work.  I mean, I'm sure she did, you know, when we were very young.  But I don't recall that.
Story_ID: 97803
Speaker 1: Now, now did your mother [Imo Jo Winson Johnson] talk about her growing up?  You know, she grew up in Texas, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Wichita Falls?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did grow up in Wichita Falls.  My... let's see.  I think that's where she met... my father [George Richard Johnson] was stationed somewhere in Texas, that's where they met.  She... well, talking about... some little bit about her in high school, she was the Homecoming Queen for high school... but not a lot.  We didn't, she didn't talk about like early childhood very much.  I did have the occasion--when my oldest daughter was in Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], we drove through her town, and I met some of her childhood friends and, you know, I did that.  But I was, as I say, my daughter was a college student then, so I was pretty grown.  But we didn't have that.  We were more of a patrilineal kind of family in terms of following your line.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother get a chance to... now she was the Homecoming Queen in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --high school?
Speaker 2: High school, right, high school.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  My mother moved to Columbus [Ohio] at a young age with my father.  And--
Speaker 1: And he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, you say?
Speaker 2: Army.
Speaker 1: Not Air, Army.
Speaker 2: Army.  He was in the Army in Texas,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, my mother moved to Columbus.  And from there-- in Columbus she did, she obtained a job with the government.  At the time, it was one of those coveted jobs that people had, you know.  But working for the government was even better than working for the post office at that time, you know.  So, my mother worked for the government and we, although there was a lot of us, we had someone who--we had like a housekeeper.  (Laughter).  And, but it's very... it's interesting that I say that.  We had a housekeeper and a babysitter, you know, for us.  But we weren't like wealthy people; we just had two parents who had two good jobs, you know.
Speaker 1: Where did your mother work?  What part of the government?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  It was, it was, it was probably like a supply unit of some sort.  I know she was in maybe secretarial or something like that, you know.  But I'm not... it was not in-- what sometimes is your traditional job that you think about--you know, with the federal government.  But it was--I think it was more of a supply unit, you know, of the federal government.  What they did, I really don't know.  She didn't work there very long.
Speaker 1: You don't remember the name of the department?
Speaker 2: We just called it the depot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The government depot, that's all, you know.  (Laughter).  And we didn't have a--you know, after she left the job, we didn't have any more experience.  So, I didn't grow up learning what that--you know, as you got older, you know, you'll find out what the formal name of something was, but we didn't get that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97804
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George Richard Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is July 27... okay, I have to calculate this... 1918.  I think he was born in West Virginia, Rand, West Virginia; Rand or Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, same thing.  What do you know about the ancestors on his side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was born in 1872.  He attended Wilberforce [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], and he graduated in 1898.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Langdon Elwood Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he tell stories about Wilberforce in those days?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather died when my father was a boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I said 1872, so my grandfather would be about 128 years old.
Speaker 1: If he was still alive.
Speaker 2: If he was still alive, he'd be 130-something years old.  So--
Speaker 1: So, he was born in 1873?
Speaker 2: Eighteen Seventy Two [1872], okay.
Speaker 1: When he came out of Wilberforce, it was about 1890, I guess.
Speaker 2: Eighteen Ninety Eight [1898].
Speaker 1: Ninety-Eight [1898].
Speaker 2: That's when he came out of Wilberforce.  His father was Rush Johnson.  Now, he graduated in Ministry.  You know, Wilberforce at the time was a, more of a, was a church school, you know, of course (unclear).  And he, he was born in Ohio, Syracuse, Ohio in 1872.  My grandmother was born in--my paternal grandmother which I'm speaking of--was born in southern Ohio, the Athens [Ohio] area, you know, that area.
Speaker 1: That's near Ohio University, and Hocking Hills and all that.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was born in that area.  And I'm not totally sure, but let's say in about 1890 or something like that--1890s to 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, somewhere--you know, 1890s, early 1900s, you know, okay.  My grandfather in 1905 owned a shoe repair business in West Virginia.  He had employees at this business in 1905.
Speaker 1: And so the family went--let's see if I can trace this back.  I'm trying to pay attention. The grandfather... it's the great-grandfather that graduated from Wilberforce, or--
Speaker 2: Grandfather.
Speaker 1: Grandfather, okay.  But he ended up in--
Speaker 2: West Virginia.
Speaker 1: --and was a shoe repair, okay.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I put one more in there--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --than I need.   So, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.  My great-grandfather--
Speaker 1: Alright. He was trained as a minister, though. You said he was trained as a minister at Wilberforce?
Speaker 2: Right.  He worked in the church, but he didn't have a church.  He was more... he didn't have a church per se.  You know, at least, you know... but I think he was more of a business... I think he went to West Virginia on a business opportunity, you know, in terms of the shoe repair business.  I grew up thinking the family was from West Virginia.  But as we researched, no, he just moved his family to West Virginia, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you think it was business motivated?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But we were more from Ohio.
Speaker 1: Now, he wasn't assigned to a church in West Virginia or anything, was he?
Speaker 2: I don't... I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Because, you know, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] is Episcopal and they assign people--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.  He might have been.  Maybe that could have been the initial motivation, that he was.  But what I know of, it was more that he dealt more in the area of business than the church, although he was active in the church.  But the document, the history, doesn't say that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 97805
Speaker 1: So, are there any stories from that side of the family?  That sounds... seems like there would be some, you know, that kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, we grew up--like I said, both grandparents were born in Ohio, okay.  The house that I grew up in in Columbus [Ohio], we were the fifth generation to live in that house.  My father [George Richard Johnson] and his cousins as young children, they didn't--they didn't live in the house but they visited, you know, the house quite a bit.  And it's always interesting to hear when we talk about--when I see some of my cousins--I'm their second cousin.  And they may be like eighty-five years old, and they'll start talking about the house.  "Oh, we spent the summers here," you know.  Well, they're not really my cousins.  They're really my aunts and uncles.  But my aunts--my father's aunts... my father's aunts and uncles were his age.  In other words, my paternal grandmother had eleven brothers and sisters, and she was the oldest of the eleven.  My... her mother, my great-grandmother, was married twice.  Her first husband had--she had five children.  And the second one, she had six.  And so, my grandmother and her younger siblings were having children... my grandmother and my great-grandmother had children at similar times.  You know, so my father grew up with his aunts and uncles as if they were his cousins, okay.  That's... so these people, they may be 80 years old, but they're my aunts and uncles.  But they felt like they were my father's cousins, because they were the same age, you know.  And they would speak of being in this house where our Aunt Stella, who was my great-grandmother's sister--she was a teacher in Ohio, in Columbus--lived.  So, the house was from Aunt Stella.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, five generations, I mean, how far back--do you know how far back, what date it goes back to?
Speaker 2: Well, we have a photograph of my--it's a cousin, my father's first cousin.  Who probably-- I think she's probably like in her mid-eighties now.  She's a, she's a kid.  She may be about eight to ten years old.  My great-grandmother and my grandmother are on the porch of this house.  So, the stories there--it was more educational, you know, in a sense, like talk about Aunt Stella.  Then we had on the maternal side--I'm talking about my paternal--my father's side of the family--we spent most of the time on my grandmother's side.  My grandfather had four brothers, and there was only one living when I was a kid, you know.  So, we would visit that one uncle, and he lived in southern Ohio.  And his other brothers may have one kid, but they didn't have a lot.  They didn't have children that were our age, so my father may have interacted with his cousin.  But it wasn't a lot of interaction, other than going to our uncle's in southern Ohio.  That's, that's the extent.  But we spent a lot of time with our paternal--on my grandmother's side, which was from Ohio and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  As I said, I think my, I think my great-grandmother was born in Ohio also.  We have never--other than my... on my father's side we had... we weren't... we would never trace the family beyond Ohio or West Virginia.
Story_ID: 97806
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did your father [George Richard Johnson] talk about growing up?  Now, did he grow up in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: He grew up in West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we would visit West Virginia often as children.  He grew up in West Virginia.  He went to West Virginia State [University in Institute, West Virginia].  His older brother--he has two older brothers.  He's the, he's the third of... my great... my grandfather [Langdon Elwood Johnson] had four brothers, it was four of them.  And then he had four sons, okay.  My father was the third of those four.  The oldest was, he was an adventurer.  He was the one who kind of traveled the country, you know, working... hopping trains, working this... you know.  Then his next oldest who's named after my father [sic, great-grandfather], my first uncle who was Aaron Rush Johnson--he was named after his grandfather, well, at least partially named.  Rush was my great-grandfather's name.  And, but then Langdon, that's Langdon [Johnson] II--that's my father's immediate older brother--he went to West Virginia State and then he went to Tuskegee.  He was one of the Tuskegee Airmen.  And he was killed, he was shot down in the War [World War II].  And it's documentation on that, too.  In some of the books on Tuskegee Airmen, they talk about him.  Like, I read once where they talk about him going out one day, then the next day he... you know...  Then he comes back and the next day he goes out, but he never comes back after that, you know.  So, then that's in the Tuskegee Airmen's book.  So--
Speaker 1: Did he serve in Italy? And was he lost in--
Speaker 2: France.
Speaker 1: In France?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, he was in France.  You know, I think that's where he was killed, in France.  And so then my father went to West Virginia State also, but he only went two years.  He got interrupted by the War... for him.  And--
Speaker 1: So where did he serve?
Speaker 2: He, I think he was more State-side.  Yeah, he was State-side, yeah.  He didn't speak about the War that much.
Speaker 1: So, your parents [George Richard Johnson and Ima Jo Winson Johnson] met when your father was stationed in Texas during the War?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, they, they, they met there, yeah.  They then, like I said, they moved to Columbus [Ohio], you know, to the house.
Story_ID: 97807
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us.  What are your parents [George Richard Johnson and Ima Jo Winson Johnson] like?  And who do you think you take after?  You know, or are there parts of--
Speaker 2: It's a combination.  My father was a, he was like a philosopher.  He was very, he was a very church/family person.  He went to church; he was a very regular churchgoer.  But we were never required to go to church as a family.  And he stayed in church, but we never was required to go.  He would ask, "Are you going to church?"  And it was like, "Okay, yeah, we're going."  We would go. The funny thing: we always went.  But he never forced us.  If we said "We're not going," "Okay," it was not a problem, you know.  He was very philosophical that way.  So it ends up--we end up in church all the time, because it was fun for us to be in church, because he was a very big churchgoer.
Speaker 1: Were you members of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church?
Speaker 2: No, we weren't.  Just-- We were Baptists.  And my mother--my parents went to different churches.  And we attended our father's church, but we joined our mother's church.  I mean, it's interesting.  You know, it was like the kids never been to their mother's, you know, but we liked the father's church.  (Laughter).  We'd go to--we joined our mother's church, but you know, we attended our father's church.  We was in the-- Everything we did--the choir, all those things, was done at the father's church.  But joining the church, we joined our mother's church.  But we didn't do anything at that church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97808
Speaker 1: We were talking about who you take after, your--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  My father [George Richard Johnson], like I said-- I was saying that he was, he was very philosophical; he looked at things philosophically.  He went, he was like a very avid churchgoer.  Like, when he started his family, he was like a party kind of guy.  But when he started his family, he stopped smoking-- drinking.  He didn't smoke, you know.  I mean he was, but he was a regular guy.  He wasn't like one of these preachy-- you know, like, you know.  But when he started a family, the only thing he did was chew tobacco, and he did that when he played baseball.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think--just listening to you describe this side of the family.  Now, you haven't told many stories from that side.  And I know there's got to be some, going back five generations like that in one house.  Do you think it's because they have that generational link that he--I mean he was able to decide, well it's time for me to do this now, and it's time for... cause he's seen, you know, it's a tradition.
Speaker 2: It may be.  Yeah, there's some consistency there, right.  He was very--he was like a very serious person, but like I said, very philosophical about it.  It could be that the generational link--you know, the whole family, you know, boundaries and things that he took--you know, he took his life seriously, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole thing that it's time for you to play at this point; time for you to study--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --time for you to--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear), you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Now you're able to focus--
Speaker 2: Right.  I remember for a minute, he smoked a cigar or something like that.  But he was like... and when I see young photos of him, he--you know, he'd have a cigarette or something in his hand.  But we never... I've never seen him with a cigarette.  Never. Like I say, I can vaguely remember a cigar, but I also remember him saying he's not going to do this--smoke cigars.  And he did tobacco.  You know, that was like a thing they'd do when you played baseball.  I mean he wouldn't do tobacco if he wasn't playing baseball or something.  I guess in those days, if you played baseball you had to chew tobacco.  (Laughter).  I mean if you recall, they always had that little thing in their mouth, and had to be able to spit the right way.  So, we would used to go see him baseball.  But he was very philosophical.  And I think that... I think I got that probably from him, that I kind of approach things from a philosophical kind of perspective.
Speaker 1: Did he read a lot?
Speaker 2: He read some, yeah, he did.  The ironic part is that one of the books that I got from the house was a book on--I'm art dealer.  But one of the books--when he died, I was going through some of his things.  It was this book on--it was this book on, [James A.] Porter's book on Negro Art ["Modern Negro Art"] in the 1950s [sic, 1943].  You know, it was like, "Wow, where did this... I don't remember this being here."  And here I end up... you know.  So, but he read, he read a lot of religious material, but he was also--like I say, he did it from a philosophical, you know.  Because ultimately the church he went to, he had a philosophical difference with the minister, and then he went and joined the church that my mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson] attended.
Speaker 1: So, he came full circle, came back anyway?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And he was, like I say, he was a, you know, a big family man.  He worked very hard, he worked on the railroad.  He didn't travel, I think he was more like a lineman.  You know, the railroad was all in all the communities.  And then maybe later on, he began to work at the post office, and there was a number of years that he worked both of them.  And my hat's off to him.  I mean, he used to work from 7 in the morning until 3 on the railroad.  He would come home and shower and get cleaned up.  And from 5:30 or something like that until 1, he worked at the post office.  And I'm like "How in the hell did you do that," you know? You think--  I mean that's some, you know, that's some work there.  Because when do you get any sleep?  I mean, you're getting four hours of sleep.  I mean, that's the most you did.  And he did that for a few years, you know.
Story_ID: 97809
Speaker 1: One thing, like another part, philosophically, is that, as I mentioned earlier, that my mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson] worked for the government.  But then she wanted to do something else.  She was doing hair part-time.  And I guess they agreed, and she quit her job with the government to start her business of doing hair.
Speaker 2: She opened a beauty parlor (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yes, you know.  Now, I... and with my father [George Richard Johnson], though, I'm looking at that like... the man who--here they have eight kids, he's got two pretty good jobs, and you tell your wife--or you agree with your wife--or you encourage your wife--whatever happens it happens--that it's okay if you leave this job.
Speaker 2: A good job.
Speaker 1: A good job.  And you understand... I mean, because the government... you went to college to go work for the government.  I mean, you know, remember it used to be we had more lawyers and degrees at the post office.  I remember people with law degrees worked at the post office, because they would never... you know.  So, bachelor's degrees, that was like a common thing, to be working at the post office or for the government with a degree.  So, to leave those types of jobs... it's, that's a lifetime job.  You know, the government didn't lay off in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, people didn't leave those kinds of jobs.
Speaker 1: Right, they didn't.  So, I... and when you look in retrospect, you're like, wow, he's a hell of a guy, that, you know, that supports that kind of thing, you see.  So, but I think that's also part of his... like... you know, it's like "I'm responsible for the family" you know.
Speaker 2: So, there was this entrepreneurial sort of legacy in the family, where people go into business, had their own businesses?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, my mother she opened... she first worked in the shop and then a couple years later she opened her own shop, Ima's Beauty Shop.  And then by the sixties [1960s], she had, she had two of them at one time.  So, me having three galleries, I guess that's a history, you know.  (Laughter).  I'm second generation, only having two locations, you know.  So, but she did that.  So she... after the government, we lost--for all intents and purposes we grew up with her being an entrepreneur working in the, working at the, in the beauty salon.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 97810
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  And I don't know if you have one, but do you have an earliest childhood memory?  A memory that's... your first memory from childhood?
Speaker 2: Those... I'm not very good at those early childhood memories.  They kind of pop up, and I just don't know.  I guess some of the earliest things I know was going to those baseball games with my father [George Richard Johnson].  You know, it was one of those games.  I think we were maybe five years old at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, he was playing, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was playing, right.
Speaker 1: Were these like amateur games around town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they were organized games.  You know, that's the big time--the Negro Baseball League.  So it's almost like, you know, every city had those people who were playing.  You know, it was just, baseball was the big thing then.
Speaker 1: Now, was he playing in the Negro League?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't doing that.  But I'm saying it was a much bigger deal.  And, you know, cities had a lot of different leagues that, you know, men, young men, of course, were playing in, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, baseball was really-
Speaker 2: Yeah, you didn't play basketball then.  You know, baseball was like basketball of today, you know.  So, so, but he did play in some organized league, and we would go to these fairgrounds or something and watch him play, you know, those games, you know.  So, I remember that.  I know I was about five at that time.
Story_ID: 97811
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you describe the house you lived in?  What did it look like, and what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It was a wood-framed house.  We had four bedrooms.  One was a, two were like connected rooms.  We had a third floor.  The third floor was, it was like an apartment.  Because we had a cousin, and he and his wife lived on the third floor.  And we had a basement, you know.  When you came in, you came into a little foyer.  We had a living room, dining room, kitchen, eating room.  So, at the time--today it would be a nice small frame house.  But at the time, we considered it one of the bigger houses, you know. You know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because on each side, there were like two family homes--you know, the "doubles."  We call them the doubles, like a brownstone type--you know, attached... two families.  We called them doubles in Columbus.  But, so, we had just a single frame home, you know.  Childhood... large yard.  (Laughter).  (unclear) We were playing baseball and all kinds of games back there.  Go back and look at it, you're like, "Wow," you know.
Speaker 1: Doesn't look as big now--
Speaker 2: Didn't--it's just like that's a difference place.  But it was interesting.  But going somewhat back a little bit, in terms of my father [George Richard Johnson].  We had other land in Ohio and West Virginia, and I do recall as children.  But they were really like little parcels.  They weren't like acres.  But my mind made them acres.  It was always "land;" I called it land.  I never would say "lot."  And I remember on-- we lived on the east side of Columbus.  And on the west side of Columbus we had some land.  And my father would have a garden on the west side.  So, when I grew up, I always grew up, "We're going to our land on the west side."  Now, I think that is important because that... as a kid that gives you a sense of ownership, you know, to be able to say, "We're going to our land."  You know, it's really just like, you know, nowadays we'd be like "You know, I got this-you know I got this neighborhood lot, and I got a garden."  That's what it was, right?  But for us, it was our land, you know, and we would do that.  So, and my father, the family, we had these... the same thing in West Virginia.  So, I would say, "Oh, we got this, our land.  That's our land."  But it would just be lots all over town.  But it was just... but for me, it's like I'm walking on my land, you know.
Story_ID: 97812
Speaker 1: But I want to go back on something you asked, more about my father [George Richard Johnson].  My father was a very humanitarian person.  And I remember that he did so much for like the elderly.  I mean, things that people do now, you know, they got programs and everything.  But I remember he would go--he had a group of people he would go and bathe, you know, who was bedridden.  We had, in Columbus [Ohio] they had mental institutions, okay.  And I remember on Sundays we would go and take food up into the mental institution.  And he would say, "Now, y'all, don't look at... don't laugh and don't stare at people."  And we would just go up there.  Now, you know, for us, it was like we didn't know why we were going there.  I mean, he could have... we could have had a relative up in there for all we know.  But we knew he was doing something public... doing some service, you know, like I'm taking... let's take some food up to... we call it the Hilltop.  Let's take it to the Hilltop, you know.  But it was a mental institution.  That's when people were housed in mental institutions.  But I remember we would always--that was part of our little ritual that we would do.  But he was very, he was very humanitarian like that, you know.
Speaker 2: Do you know where he got this service ethic from?
Speaker 1: No, I'm not sure.  I'm really... I don't know.  It's just interesting.  I just think he's... I mean, it could have been his father [Langdon Elwood Johnson].  I mean, because he died when he was a young kid, you know.  But it sounds like, you know, he was a service oriented person.
Story_ID: 97813
Speaker 1: What happened--I didn't know a lot about my fath-- grandfather, of course, he died when my father was a kid.  But my brother is named after our uncle [Langdon Johnson, II] who was killed in the--who I mentioned was killed in the... the Tuskegee Airman who was killed in the War [World War II].  And he put his name up on the internet.  And he's thinking that he's going to get our uncle, who was a Tuskegee Airman.  And lo and behold, along with the article, something comes up about our grandfather.  And they published the book in the early 1900s about famous people in West Virginia.  And he's in this book, and I guess they put the whole book on the internet.  But we never knew a lot of things--
Speaker 2: Just for reference, what's his name again, your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: Langdon.
Speaker 2: Langdon?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Langdon, L-A...
Speaker 1: L-A-N-G-D-O-N.
Speaker 2: Alright.  And was it Elwood?
Speaker 1: You can put an "E."
Speaker 2: Elwood, was his middle name --
Speaker 1: Elwood Johnson, right.
Speaker 2: And do you know the name of the book?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.  I just, it's out in the archives.  If you put his name on, if you Google it--
Speaker 2: I'm going to find it.  I'm going to look for it, just out of curiosity--
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah, just Google.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You put that name in there and you Google it, and his photograph and everything comes up, you know.  You're like "Wow," you know.  And because, like, my brother is the third and then his son is the fourth.  And his son is like one of those computer geeks, so we just thought, oh, that's how they got into it, you know, just playing around putting their own name in there, and lo and behold he...  But our uncle's in there.  He's mentioned there as a Tuskegee Airman also.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, so--
Speaker 2: When you were a kid, you didn't know anything about that, right?
Speaker 1: Not quite.  We knew he did... we knew he had... he worked in shoe repair, okay.  We knew the ministry thing.  We kind of knew something, but to see it all written out is like, "Wow" you know.  Like, Syracuse Ohio... those things are always like, "Are you sure?"  (Laughter).  You know what I mean, because like... you know.  And then also... which meant... and he's born in Syracuse, Ohio and his father lived in Syracuse, Ohio.  And this is 1872, and slavery was over in what, 1863?
Speaker 2: Eighteen Sixty-Five [1865].
Speaker 1: Eighteen Sixty-Five [1865].  So, that's like, you know--
Speaker 2: There's a lot of history of free blacks in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's what--
Speaker 2: And Columbus [Ohio] was really-
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --a center for a lot of black activity--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --after the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Because you came up through southern Ohio, and that way... those connections.
Speaker 2: There were at least one or two Negro conventions of free Negroes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from 1840s, I think up until, I think the last one was in the 1860s.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Well, we were--we were more...  So, anyway, that's some of the things in terms of my... he may have gotten that from... that service oriented... from my father, and my father [George Richard Johnson] may have gotten that from his father--maybe his mother, I'm not sure.  I do remember my grandmother, but she died when I was a boy.  And I think that was my first death... experience with death, with her dying.  And she lived in West Virginia, and-
Story_ID: 97814
Speaker 1: And like I said--  Well, and the other influence that you mentioned on my life, my mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson].  I think my mother was more--she was like the risk-taker, the entrepreneur.  And I think I got--that's another part of me.  Of course, being in the business, you know, she was always in the business, trying to make her business grow and, you know, adding chairs or booths or whatever, you know.  People who worked for her, you know, because she would have about-- in her shop [Ima's Beauty Shop] she had about four, three or four people who would be working, you know, for her.  And it ended up, a lot of those people working for her ended up having their own place, you know.  So, that was always... that was always proud to, I was always proud of her to see that a lot of people she kind of mentored in the business, they ended up with their own place.  And when my mother died, they even acknowledged that. You know, like, "Yeah, she, she believed in us.  She started us off," and things like that.
Speaker 2: Because she nurtured other people?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, you know it's... well, you know, when you're in a people business you've got to--you know, you don't stay in business if you're not nice.  I mean, people don't like--you can't have attitudes and all like that.  People just don't do it; people can't work for you.  You know, they...  You know, but she had a pretty stable crew, with her for a long time.  And we'd call them aunts and--you know, just very close family kind of thing.  So, I think I got the entrepreneurial from her.
Speaker 2: So, it was there an atmosphere... the shops was like an extended family kind of thing?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah it was.  And that's probably where I started my little--not started, no.  My little business venture started--you know, that was one of my business ventures--working in the shop and doing those things like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know.
Story_ID: 97815
Speaker 1: Now, this is a question we always ask, and I've got to ask this. What were--  you've answered some of it already.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, when you were a little kid (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up, I grew up in a world where I didn't compare a lot to other people.  I thought mine was the world.  Now, people say "Well, you know, you miss out on a lot of stuff."  I say, "Well, I really don't."  Because like I was saying about the land and those kinds of things--about "land" and "lots."  So, my neighborhood was--probably in hindsight it was like a working--we were probably more of like the working class, you know, neighborhood.  But you... until I became a psychologist and academically trained, I would never have identified myself like that.  I would never think of myself like--people say "Oh, you're from the ghetto."  That still would not come up in my vocabulary.  Although someone who's doing research would say, "This was Columbus [Ohio]."  But it's like... for me, it was like, "No, you don't..."   They wouldn't know the true dynamics of that, those different neighborhoods.  So, the neighborhoods--I see, I see a lot of the wood-framed homes--very, a lot of families in my neigh--in my neighborhood.  The sound... I think I grew up with the sound of... I'm like a very big fan of the blues, before I knew it was the blues.  I mean in high school, I would listen to Bobby "Blue" Bland and [HM] B.B. King and all that.  People were like, "How do you listen to that kind of stuff?"
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was supposed to be older people's music (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.  You know, so I would do that, you know.  So that was kind of my sound.  It always was kind of (unclear).  My mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson]... that Kansas City, Texas, kind of, you know, sound.
Speaker 1: Did you listen to a lot of the older jazz?
Speaker 2: Not as much in jazz.  I was really, I mean I loved jazz.  But I was more of a... jazz came more towards college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Well, let me kind of get you back to the sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  But, but, but, but I grew up in the era when--like Columbus had a street-- our neighborhood had a-- our main street was called Mount Vernon.  And Mount Vernon, that to me was the street, you know, for the neighborhood.  And so, that's where all the clubs were.  So, Ben E. King was performing there.  And it used to have, Columbus had an air base [Lockbourne Air Force Base, now Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base], the African air base there.  You know, so that was the street all the airmen would come to, to party.  So, I remember that street.  And that was a very lively street.  You know, there's clubs and all this.  It had a real night life.  I didn't participate, I was too young for that.  But you'd be up there during the day, you know.  That's where your clothing stores were, you know, this--  a lot of things were happening.  That's the energy of Columbus.
Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing about Roland Kirk when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was friends with his sister and stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us a little about... because he's somebody you don't really--
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I know him--
Speaker 1: A little bit.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I know him more from--again, you're transporting me to college age, you know.  And so, that's when he was... but (unclear) Roland Kirk, you know, I know he grew up like everybody else who grew up in Columbus.  He was probably a little bit more, you know, close to the fast lane than say, than I was, you know.  You know, I was driving, but just not in the fast lane, you know.  (Laughter).  But I don't know where I may have seen him.  We've had conversations together, you know.  But mainly at the time, I knew his sister, and we were all kind of in association then, you know, with each other.  We were kind of on the same social set, but I didn't know him like, "Oh, this is Roland Kirk from Columbus" that way.
Speaker 1: I know he used to perform at a place called the Gold Key in Dayton [Ohio].  And I used to stand in front of the place waiting on the bus with my mother.  And I didn't know who Roland Kirk, who he was then.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, yeah, but yeah, it's... that's kind of how I would know a lot of the people like that, you know--just being around, you know.  And you don't realize that your parents are young people at the time.  You know, when you're young, you know, it's like...  You know, there was a time when my mother was in her twenties, you know.  So, it's like, wow, you know.  (Laughter).  So, you don't know you're dealing with a person in their twenties, because they always were old to you, you know.  So, when you got to be a teenager, you don't realize they were once teenagers or something, you know, or in their twenties.
Speaker 1: It's strange to look at back on that --
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does--
Speaker 1: --a twenty year old girl when you're a little boy.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: You're a little boy, and that's my mother, that's a grown woman.
Speaker 2: Right, right, seriously grown.
Story_ID: 97816
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, you know.  So, but that's some of the things in Columbus [Ohio].  I remember the food.  I mean we would go get what you call fish sandwiches.  We weren't like--we didn't grow up like heavy, heavy, heavy, heavy soul food eaters, you know, like that real heavy stuff, you know.  We didn't grow up like that.  I mean we... still macaroni and cheese and greens and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: But the chittlins and the other stuff-
Speaker 1: No, no chittlins.  You know, we didn't grow up with that.  I had chittlins in college.  That's the first time I had chittlins, you know, in college.
Speaker 2: Some of those other hog parts, the brains--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  No tongues, no brains, none of that.  We were like... I remember we had... as my friend, he says like... you know...  He said, "No, you're from the neighborhood.  See, you grew up with that wooden spoon."  You know how people who had a silver spoon.  He said, "Now, most of us didn't have a spoon at all.  But you at least had that wooden spoon."  (Laughter).  And, but when we grew up we had a freezer, had a gigantic... that freezer still works today.  My brother, my brother or sister has it.  But we had this large freezer that we would say like-- have a cow.  Remember they would cut it up and we'd freeze all.  So, we always had a lot of food and just...  So that's how they... they dealt more like that.  So, we would get cows.  I mean we got tired of eating steak.  You know, "I just want a little, you know, I just want a little hamburger.  I want, you know... just a hot dog," you know.  But we had that side of...  You know, we would have a lot of, you know, meats and things like that.  Like I said, we dealt from this freezer more so than--  Those were the days when corner stores were your primary place to shop.  Kroger's was a corner store then in our neighborhood.
Story_ID: 97817
Speaker 1: Okay. now, now you... describe your siblings again.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Their names, and where you fall in the--
Speaker 2: I'm the third, and my oldest is Sandra.  She's a, she's about four years my senior.  She lives in Columbus, Ohio.  My brother is Langdon.  He's seventeen months older than I am.  That's the one that's named after our uncle and grandfather.  And then there's me.  Then my late sister, Patricia, or Pat, she died about five years ago.  And then Jackie, Jackie lives in California.  Langdon, I should say he lives in--my older brother--he lives in Washington, D.C.  He's been there since his college days.
Story_ID: 97932
Speaker 1: My brother who lives, Langdon, he lives in [Washington] D.C.  My sister Pat, who passed away about five or six years ago, she lives in Columbus [Ohio].  I have a sister, Jackie.  And Jackie lives in San Bernardino, California.  My brother, Larry, he's in Columbus, and my sister, Kathy, is also.  And the youngest is Rita, in Columbus.  Both... all are in Columbus.  So, it's like three of us who really moved out of Columbus, Ohio.
Story_ID: 97933
Speaker 1: Now, what were you like when you were growing up?  What did people say you were like?  And what do you think that--what do you think you were really like? And what did people think you were like?
Speaker 2: Well, most people say I was a nice guy.  You know, he was a nice guy, nice kid.  I was shy, quiet, until you knew me.  Then, I was talkative.  But if you didn't, you would think I was quiet.  I was somewhat very non-confrontational until you pushed me, and then I was very confrontational.  But you know, I can number--I can count the number of fights that I had, other than family and kids, you know, fights... sibling confrontations.  But, so I think I would be called more of a nice, I was a nice guy.  I was considered a nice guy when I was growing up--you know, quiet, you know.  But I was very mischievous at the same time.  I got away with a lot of mischievous things.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, like we would take tomatoes and knock on your door.  And when you open your door and see who's out there, we would throw tomatoes at you. (Laughter).  You know, just mischievous stuff.  We weren't like, we weren't a criminal element at all, you know.  But we were very mischievous.  You know, because see, just within the family, it was like four, four or five of us could hang together, and you've got a little gang, and it's all siblings.  You know, it looks like a gang, and it was only four or five of us.
Speaker 1: Now, when you did the tomato thing, was it to--was it to your peers or to older people?
Speaker 2: Whoever answered that door... whoever answered that door, you know.  It was just little, you know, prank stuff like that.  That's what I mean, like that, you know, when we did those types of things.
Story_ID: 97934
Speaker 1: I, I was very industrious, I was a worker.  I was a businessperson very young.  You know, I--
Speaker 2: So what kind of things would you get involved with?
Speaker 1: Well, we had-- remember, there was eight of us in the family.  I mean, that's the children.  So, ten in the house altogether.  And my parents [Ima Jo Winson Johnson and George Richard Johnson], they gave us everything we needed, and we never wanted for anything because we got all our needs met.  We had food, we had clothes, but we didn't get what we wanted.  It's a difference, you know.  (Laughter).  It was a difference.  You wouldn't, you know, you couldn't go and say "You know what, I'd like to have those pointed toed shoes as opposed to those big shoes that will last forever," you know.  (Laughter).  Like, you'd get those big shoes to last forever, you know.  So, so, as a young kid I think when I was in the second or third grade...  Remember, I said that in those years, you went to the store every day.  So, what I did, I developed what I called a store route.  And I had about four people that I went to the store for every day, you know.  And, you know, I made nice money.  By the time I was ten years old, I had--I was probably making about eight to ten dollars a week.  You know, I had one person put me on salary.  I'll always remember him, Mr. Chambers.  He was a construction worker.  He lived... there was a house that was cut up, and he lived in the basement of the house.  He had an icebox, and so I went to the store for him every day.  He gave me two dollars a week in salary.  He said, "I'm not going to give you any..."  He said, "I'm going to give you a salary."  Then on Friday when he got paid, I would always go up on Mount Vernon to get him a fish sandwich.  And he would always say, "Get yourself one too."  And he would tip me fifty cents.  So, it would be like $2.50 a week.  And then I had, then I had a couple of other people--the Theodores, that's what their name was.  Then I had Mr. Langdon and other people.  These are people I went to every... so I had this route.  So, I had this business that I would go...  So, I always was very in tune to this little business venture.  So, if I wasn't going to the store for somebody, I was picking up bottles and taking them in for two cent deposits, and that's what they were in those days.
Speaker 2: Now that could get pretty good.  I remember those days--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --collecting bottles.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. No, you did.
Speaker 2: They'd leave them for kids, actually--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: They would, they would--
Speaker 1: Right, that would--
Speaker 2: --that way they'd keep kids busy.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So that's what I...  You know, so, I was very industrious like that, you know.  Then I grew up to be... to the paper route age.  And I was, I would try to get the largest route as I could.  And I was very service oriented, you know, because I worked...  I understood then like, you know, you're not working on the paper route for that two or three cents per paper that you get.  You really were working for the tips.  So, I figured it out.  I said, "No.  Forget this, forget that.  I want somebody to give me a dollar tip."  And at the end of the week, a fifty cents tip, you know, that's what I... you know...  So, I started working for the tips.  So I'd make sure you got the paper. I may put it in their door, then knock on your door and let you know it's there, you know.  I'd keep going--
Speaker 2: Now, did you kind of pick up on that through just observation, or did your father [George Richard Johnson] or mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson] just school you about that?  Because there are so many people who, as you well know, never get this, they never understand this--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they think they're working for the salary.
Speaker 1: Observation, it's observation.
Story_ID: 97935
Speaker 1: I would--my mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson] had the hair salon [Ima's Beauty Shop].  And one thing I would do is, I would go there and go to the store for everybody.  And that's where I kind of honed my skill.  And initially, I would go there to be asking her could I do something.  Like, "Can I go to this activity?"  And I knew if I asked her in front of all these people, it was always hard for her to say "no," okay. So, what I'd do, I'd do all my chores at home.  Then I would go down there and I'd say "Can I go over here and play?"  And she'd say, "Well, have you done your housework?"  I said, "Yes, I have done that."  "Have you done this?"  I'd say, "Yes, I've done all that."  "No."  Then I would go to the store for everybody, you know, just making a list and go to the store.  You know, everybody... you know, the people who worked there, the people there.  You know, you go get them sandwiches and stuff like that, you know, pops and all that.  So, then when they come back, everybody will say, "Well, here's something for you."  I'd say, "Oh, no.  No, thank you."  So, I always let them ask me three times.  (Laughter).  On the third time, I always would take it.  So, that was like part of my M.O. [modus operandi] And then of course, then my mother was saying I can't do something, and they're like, "Are you kidding, as nice as that boy is?"  And then she'd always like, "Okay, you be home at such and such a time" you know.  So, so, I think maybe that kind of--you know, just picking it up on the tips.  But I did that.  I remember when I was young, I had a snow shoveling route.  I would always make mine a business, you know.  So, like, I may have had about seven people that I'd always say, "I'm going to shovel your snow.  So, when you wake up, it's done.  You just pay me, I don't want to have to ask you."  So, I had like little verbal contracts with people.  So, when it snowed, I would get up early and just shovel all these houses.  Like, my brother and our best childhood friend, and our longest childhood friend--they would go out together.  And I was always making as much or more as them working as a team, than me working by myself.  Because I would always have all these people, you know.  While they're knocking somebody's door, I've already got--I got six people to deal with right off the bat, you know.  And so, I was always... I always liked little hustling like that, you know.  I remember when I loaned my mother--I was twelve years old--that was 1958.  I loaned her two hundred dollars.  So, a twelve year old who had two hundred--you know, to have two hundred dollars in 1958, that's a lot of money.
Speaker 2: That represents, for some people, you know, that's a months' work. You know, I mean, for a lot of laborers, that'd be a month's salary.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, that's grown folks... that's grown people... yeah, that was... right... that was grown--
Speaker 2: Working at a GM [General Motors] plant, you could bring home about a hundred dollars a week in those days.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  No, I had a, no, I was very, very industrious in that way.
Story_ID: 97936
Speaker 1: Because at... remember, earlier I said that we got everything we needed.  But when I was ten years old, I decided I didn't want to dress the same way.  I wanted to have--I didn't like wearing blue jeans.  You know, I didn't like wearing these big shoes, you know, and the shirts we wore.  At the time, they, if you were--we didn't have welfare.  That's before they had welfare, formalized like they do now.  But you got stuff.  I mean, you know, you got food.  You went and got food.  You got clothes--you know, the people that were on what would be welfare.  We called it "charity news."  Don't ask me why.  I never went beyond getting a formal name for it.  But it was charity news, and you got your stuff.  But the clothes were the same.  If you got a plaid shirt from charity news, when you went to the store, you got a plaid shirt.  But the charity news shirt, it just had a funky color on it.  You know, like, you know, you couldn't get a bright... you know.  You go to the store and you'd get a bright yellow or red, you know, green.  Charity news, you always had that little dirty green--you know, just something about it.  But you still had the same stuff.  So, when I was ten--
Speaker 2: Flannel shirts.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, you know what I'm talking about.  So, I was just like... so at ten I said, I don't want to wear this stuff.  So I started, I said, I'm going to buy my own things.  So, I started buying my own clothes at ten years old or eleven years.  And I stopped wearing jeans when I was eleven.  And so this was in 1957, and I didn't wear another pair of jeans until my children bought me a pair in 1981.  Because they said, "You need to wear some jeans, these are hip."  You know, they bought me a pair of, excuse me, Calvin Klein jeans in 1981.  But I stopped... I said... oh, I vowed when I was eleven I would never wear jeans again.
Speaker 2: Now, Levi's weren't in when you were coming up?
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  Well, I was different than most children.  Because most children in those days, you weren't marketed to.  You know, clothing was not a, it was not a child market for it.  You didn't see advertising for--you know, getting to be the fashion person.  It was like, where can you get that basic flannel shirt?  So, I stopped wearing the shoes, so I started wearing...  At the time, they had these pointed toed shoes that was really... it had the shirt... and then some of them flipped up at the top and...
Speaker 2: Stacy Adams.
Speaker 1: Stacy Adams.  So, I went and go and buy those kinds of shoes.  I'd save up my money and I'd buy those.  I'm like twelve years old, and that's what I'm wearing.  And I started wearing khakis; I would only wear khakis.  So, you know, I said I'm not... you know, (unclear) the wool and all that, you know.  But I was like, khakis can be nice, you know.  So, that's what I kind of did with my moneys at that time, you know, to do that.  And then as we got older in high school, I used to buy a lot of clothes.  My brother was a couple of years ahead of me in school, and he would wear my clothes.  And then people would say, they would claim I was wearing his, because I'm the younger person, right?  (Laughter).  And so, but anyway... but that's how it was, you know, in terms of doing things.  But we, you know, I just felt this way.  Like, my other siblings didn't do that.  And the girls, the girls didn't feel a certain need to do it.  You know, they were kind of always...
Story_ID: 97937
Speaker 1: Now, there's a, there's a certain amount of peer pressure, it seems to me, in the black community on black males to--when they get in the junior high school age, to dress a certain way.  And it's usually Italian clothes, at least it was when we were growing up--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Italian clothes and stuff that, you know, I mean, the Florsheim shoes and the Stacy Adams shoes (unclear)
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  That's where the... yeah--
Speaker 1: Silk pants, later on flannel pants, dress pants, mohair sweaters, and all that stuff--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Stuff you see the Temptations in, with the high collar shirts, and all that.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Detroit's [Michigan] the home of that.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: It seems to be the focal point for a lot of it--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah.  Well, I was really kind of the ex--.  In high school, they did it more, you know.  I remember my father bought me a, I thought--to this day I think it was the baddest suit.  And I think he paid seventy-five dollars for this suit, and it was a lot of money.  I was in eighth grade or something, eighth or ninth grade.  And I always wanted to wear this suit to school, you know.  So I would--I wasn't allowed to wear it to school, so I would put it out the window and then change into this suit, you know.  But it was like a plaid suit with double breasted...  I was like, I fell in love with double-breasted suits after that day, you know.  So, I don't know.  We, we, we, that's how we, you know, we kind of rolled like that in terms of clothing and stuff like that.  But there was a certain group.  It's not like today.  Today all... the whole group rules with clothing and, you know, what's new and real fashionable.  But when I was coming up, it was just a certain group that kind of made--you know, was very fashion conscious, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have a name? I know some of the groups actually--
Speaker 2: Had a little--
Speaker 1: --formed little clubs and stuff around--I mean, how they dressed and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: Well, we, we, no, I didn't really have a--it wasn't a group name like that, you know, when I got to high school.  I had my personal name that people called me.  But, and that was called... I was called "Seven Rock."
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Seven Rock.  I was called Seven Rock because I had a diamond ring with--I had a ring with seven diamonds in it.  And I was in the tenth grade.  So, that was one of the names, you know Seven Rock.  That's what they--you know...  If I go back to the high school reunion, some of them would call, "Hey, Seven Rock, you know, how you doing?"
Speaker 1: You were in the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: No, I was in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Right.  Then then I had, I used to like jewelry, so I had another ring with--I still have my ring.  My daughter has my ring with the seven diamonds to this day.  That's my tenth grade ring.  My eleventh grade ring had like five, you know, five diamonds in it.  So I still have that one, and I wear it out occasionally when I do a black tie thing.  But it's, you know, it's just for fun now.  But it's a big deal, only in history.  If you saw them now, you wouldn't even think about it, you know.  But if you said, you know, somebody bought this in 1963, you know, a sixteen-year old or something that bought it back then, you know, then it becomes a big deal, you know.  I was-- By the time I got to high school, I was very--I was pretty... made a lot of money.
Story_ID: 97938
Speaker 1: Now, now, let me just go back to grade school for a minute.  What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Felton Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Felton Elementary.
Speaker 2: In Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were you, would you consider yourself a conscientious student, a good student?
Speaker 2: No.  Wait a minute.  I was an okay student, but I was not a conscientious student.  I was a person who studied the rules and figured out how to get around them.  That's the type of person I was.  It's like, okay, what's the rules?  So, I was... like we had the tracking system then in school.  In elementary school I was always on the second track, alright--the first track being, you know, kids who were doing, performing well academically.  And the other ones were like, they could hold their own.  You know, you could go either way.  You know, you possibly could go to college, or you could be at the post office, or you may... you know, that's the middle track.  And then the last track was, you may have difficulty in life.  That's how they, that's how they taught you.  That's what this little tracking system...  And I kind of stayed on that type of track for--you know, I maintained that kind of track.  When I got to junior high school I was very good in math, so I scored very well in mathematics.  On the math tests, I was always two or three grades ahead.  My personal grades never reflected, to me, never reflected my ability.  I then went to Franklin Junior High School.  Now, by this time, I wanted to be somewhat of a--I started taking school a little bit more seriously now in junior high school.  Elementary school, you know, like I say, I was a little bit mischievous.  Like, I wasn't the... you wouldn't... I wouldn't be the crossing guard person.  I would be the one who kind of gave them hell.  But I wouldn't be... it's like that was always too corny for me, to be standing up there with a badge and all of that.  I just couldn't do that kind of thing, you know.  So that's how I was, like, in, in, in, in elementary school.  And so in junior high--and Franklin was considered like, oh, this is a good school, hard school, so I'm going to Franklin.  Then from Franklin, they re-districted the school districts.  I got transferred to Champion [Junior High School].  That... I really rebelled on that one.
Speaker 1: Now, Champion, that's a--
Speaker 2: Another junior high school.
Speaker 1: --junior high school.
Speaker 2: You know, we had, we didn't have a middle school.  Franklin was a junior high also, okay.  But my first year in junior high was Franklin.  The second and third was Champion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Champion was not considered a good school at that time like Franklin.  Champion was around the projects.  Now, I will tell you this.  If you go... those projects are projects that you wanted to live in as a kid.  You know, like, for me it's like it's still the projects... but they were projects... because you were like, "Oh, these are nice townhouses."  You didn't call them townhouses.  "They were nice townhouses and, oh, the kids just play right outside."  To this day you'd never think... you don't think too badly of these projects, for one, okay.
Speaker 1: They're not like the big high rises in Chicago [Illinois] or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, they were all low.  They were always townhouses, and stuff like that.  So, yeah, so that's... but it's still--you know, I didn't know at the time.  So, I kind of rebelled when I went to Champion.  I didn't like going to school, so I didn't.  So, I missed quite a few days.
Story_ID: 97939
Speaker 1: So, I mean, did you meet anywhere along the way, in grade school or junior high school, any teachers or-- that were, that made a special impression on you or tried to help you, specifically?
Speaker 2: Junior high school, my math teacher, we became very close, very close.  He really was like the person who like really believed in me.  So much so, when he had my brothers and sisters years after me, if they acted up, he would call me.  He wouldn't call my parents.  He would say, "George, I need to talk to you about your brother.  You know, could you...?"  You know, we had that kind of relationship.  See, remember, I was a good student in one sense, but I was mischievous in another way.  You know, so if you tapped into me, you knew that I was this way.  Someone else may just think I'm mischievous, okay.  But he looked at me from another perspective.  We took, we had a lifelong... he's still a person in my...  Mert Wood [ph.] was his name, Woods.  And so, we were very close.  And that was like maybe in the eighth grade that we became very close. And we kind of stayed there, I mean, until...  He helped me.  He ultimately was responsible for me getting into college, and that-- my next life change.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, he was at, which one was he--
Speaker 2: He was at Champion [Junior High School].
Speaker 1: Champion, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at Champion.  That was-- like I said, I was a good student.  You know, I took algebra like in eighth or ninth grade, you know, doing well.  But I would always be with the kids that were really acting up. I remember my algebra teacher, he says, "George," he saw everybody cheating off my paper.  Because it was always easy for me.    When it got to the math, it was easy.  And I'm sitting in the back with the... you know, I remember he caught everybody cheating off my paper.  And he says, he said, "I'd like for you to stay after class."  And he says, I remember him talking to me like, "What do you want to do?  I mean, you're good at this stuff.  What do you want to do?"  I told him, I said, "Well, when I grow up, I want to own doubles."  That meant I want to own real estate.  "That's all I want to do, I want to own real estate, you know."  And I said, "What do you think, that I want to be a teacher?"  And he says...  I said, "I could make more at the post office than being a teacher."  You know, and at the time you could, you know.  So, and unfortunately for me, he didn't have no rebuttal for that.  I think I just hurt his feelings.  But that was a shame that a kid could hurt your feelings like that, you know.  I mean, because, you know, that's what kids are.  Kids are smart alecks, you know what I mean.  But he should have rebutted, you know, to me and said, "Oh, you want to..." you know, you take me where I was, and say, "Oh, you want to own doubles?  You want to own real estate?  Well, if you go to college, you can really own real estate."  You know, that kind of thing.  So, I knew--I always remembered that because it was like I see that as like a little flaw in my education, you know what I mean.  You always... people always look back like that and say those things.  But anyway, going back to one of my first people--that was Mert Wood, the math teacher.  He really, he really believed in me.  We stayed pretty close, you know, throughout... you know, throughout life... throughout life.  And he...
Story_ID: 97940
Speaker 1: Then when I went to high school, high school is--
Speaker 2: Now where did... did you go to Columbus East [High School in Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: Columbus East, yeah.  Columbus East, I went to Columbus East there.  And there they had, again, they had the tracking system.  And the tracking system, I remember being, I was on the third track, okay.  They had nine there though, by the way.  So, it wasn't, it was different.  (Laughter).  So, being on the third track was different.  So--
Speaker 2: They had nine different tracks?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  You know, you could be in one, two, three... you know.  And I was on the third track.  And there, I learned the system.  East High School had a point system.  So to pass a course, you needed to get eight points.  Grades came out every six weeks which... and two mid-terms--a mid-term and a final. Two exams; a mid-term and a final.  So, there was eight.  So, you had to get a D on each one of those to pass the course.  Or, it has to average out to a D.  I would get two A's, which meant you have eight points, which also meant by law you could not flunk me.  So, I didn't have to go to school anymore. (Laughter).  You know, I didn't have to go to that--  I'd be at school, but I didn't have to go to that class, because you couldn't flunk me.  Because in the end, you have to average out those eight points.  What if my... did I get the eight points?  So, I was a manipulator of that system like that.  Now, you know, you miss a lot of skills when you exhibit those kind of behaviors, you know.  And you'd pick up bad habits like, you know, "Oh, God I forgot..." you know, I may get three B's in the first part, and then in this other class I've got these F's in.  So now, I've got to get three B's again, so I've got to work real hard, you know.  So those were bad, you know, bad habits, and you miss some skills.  But anyway, I was...  But also at the same time, I still maintained my grouping, you know, that third group.
Speaker 2: Is this... was it that you didn't like... I don't know if it was that you didn't like school.  Or did you just enjoy manipulating the process?  Which one--
Speaker 1: I think I was maybe...  You know what?  Because I really, I think I enjoyed manipulating the process.  Yeah, that's a very interesting question.  Because no one ever put that question to me.  You know, because I was a person who went to school all the time.  In the summers, I would go to summer school.  Because at that time, I would... if I went to summer school... if you took a course in summer school, it was like taking it for the year.  So, by time I got to the eleventh grade, most of my courses were twelfth grade courses.  So to this day, the class before me, half the people think I graduated with that class.  So, by the time I get to my twelfth grade, we needed sixteen credits to graduate.  So, at the end of my eleventh grade, I had fifteen and a half credits, you see.  So, I'm going into twelfth grade not needing anything.
Speaker 2: Half a credit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, half a credit, you see what I'm saying.  So, it was the manipulating of the system, I think that I enjoyed more so.  Because I did enjoy school.
Story_ID: 97827
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was Columbus East [High School in Columbus, Ohio] like?  Now, you got through pretty...  But what was the... I know we were discussing earlier the big basketball tradition at--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Columbus East, in Ohio. How they dominate--.
Speaker 2: Columbus East was a--well, for me it was--I enjoyed the school.  I, I don't think they... you know, again, a student like myself, I don't, I don't feel like I was assisted or I was--or I personally didn't take advantage of the things that were offered.  But I mean even to this day, I talk to some of my childhood high school people.  And what they got, and what I got was two different things, in terms of the course selections and things like that.  So, it was a good school.  It was a very good school.  But I don't think it--if you're in that one or two track, you know what I mean.  Say, the third track--forget the last three tracks, okay.  But the third track, I think you had to show the initiative that you wanted to--I mean they still worked with you.  I mean it's not... but you probably had to show initiative, as if you wanted to be part of the first or second track, you know.  Then they probably gave you more.  But I didn't get a lot of special--harness-- you know, harnessing the energy that I was kind of having, you know.  I was not too much into athletics.  I was a person who worked, you know, after school.  You know, I was the money person in high school, you know.  You know, you came to me when you needed a loan.  You know, that's the person I was.
Speaker 1: Did you charge interest, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  (Laughter).  Yes, I charged interest.  And I just had a good friend of mine from high school.  We hadn't seen each other in twenty-five years.  We always had this little running joke that... I loaned her three dollars when I was in the eleventh grade.  I said she's going to pay me my three dollars.  So, three years ago--okay, we're talking about high school, we're talking about '64' [1964].  And three years ago, what's that?
Speaker 1: That's forty--
Speaker 2: Two Thousand Two [2002].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, we're talking about like almost forty years later.  I see... I'm in San Francisco.  I'm at a party, and there she is, Marsha Herring, good buddy.  And we were so happy to see each other.  And then I told her, I said, "Marsha, I have this little story that I always tell people, that I loaned you three dollars when I was in the eleventh grade, and I still remember that."  And she looked, she said "George, I remember that, I do."  She said, "That's right, you always had so much money.  Where did you get money from?" Because people didn't, you know, kids didn't have money in high school, you know.  And we, we had breakfast and stuff. So, she paid me my three dollars.  I framed... I'm going to frame them up. (unclear) It's just nice to keep, you know, old childhood friends, you know.  So, that was part of what I did, you know.  I was more of an entrepreneur then in high school, and things like that.  Then I started taking business courses.  That's what kind of started changing me, when I took the business curriculum in high school.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do that your senior year, when you--
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: You really didn't have to take that much, but--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I took my first course like in my junior year.  But then my senior year, that's when I--yeah, I took... I only went to school a half day in my senior year.  But I took accounting, which I loved.  And that's what--the accounting and business courses--that's what started making me think that--that's what started changing me in terms of academics, because then I started performing.
Speaker 1: Now, were you...did you... were you involved with social activities in high school, like the Student Council?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Clubs and that kind of stuff--?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't involved in that, either.
Speaker 1: I didn't think so.
Speaker 2: Athletics and all that--I thought athletics was child exploitation.  I said, you know, they--I said, "Y'all could be out here making money."  (Laughter).  We were making $1.50 an hour or something in those days.  It was like, I mean (unclear), I used to tell them "Y'all could be making $5 or $6 a day while you're doing all those sports?  I said "Because if you're not going to college on a scholarship, sports is like, it's not making it.  So, if you think you're going to go to college, that's fine.  So, if that's your way of working...  But if you're not getting that, it doesn't matter--I mean you can get out here and work."  So, I was more--I wasn't involved in activities like that.  But I was associated with--socially, I was part of the group who would be, you know, at least on--you know, socially I was part of the group who would do that.  But I was not, you know, I was not like I was going to run for any office or anything like that. No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was, you know, that was not me.
Story_ID: 97828
Speaker 1: Now, can you remember the music and stuff that was out when you were in high school, and were you really into--?
Speaker 2: The Temptations came out.  The Temptations came out.  But I was more of an Impressions fan, Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions.  Then the Temptations... I always said that if I had to choose back then, I would have chose the Impressions.  And--
Speaker 1: That's a group that had a lot of message in their music.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I was very... I was... I was a person who, liked, kinda thought about stuff, you know, the issues.  You know, I wasn't necessarily political, like--because we didn't know what that meant, to be political.  But you had those thoughts, you know.
Speaker 1: Did your family discuss the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't, no.  Uh, uh, no, we didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Did your father [George Richard Johnson] and mother [Ima Jo Winson Johnson] have an opinion about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or Malcolm X?
Speaker 2: No.  Dr. King was... Dr. King really came during my time, more so than their time.
Speaker 1: Well he started in '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm saying, that was in the South.  Now, you're talking about people who really didn't interact with the South.  My family didn't... you know, we didn't do that.  But that's... but I mean really he came to prominence in the sixties.  You know, when you start really--I mean I know that things happened before then.  But, you know, in the sixties [1960s].  And see, by the time I got to college, we were not fans of Dr. King.  When I was in college, you know, my group was not a fan of Dr. King.  We were, we were a part of the Black Power Movement with--you know, at the time with Stokely Carmichael, [H.] Rap Brown, and those, you know--
Speaker 1: You graduated in what, '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-Five [1965].
Speaker 1: Five [1965]. Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Democratic Convention in '64' [1964], I mean the Freedom Summer in Mississippi and when people were talking about all that stuff on?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.  See, that's what...  After high school, I picked up on a lot of those things like that.  I remember in high school I was interviewed about racism, and things like that for I don't know who it was, but it ended up in a Cleveland [Ohio] paper two years later.  You know, but I remember telling them like... about... they were talking about "Do you think racism exists?"  I'm like, "Yes, I think if," I remember saying, "if a white person and a black person was going for the same job, the white person usually gets it," you know.  I remember saying that like in '64' [1964] or something like that--you know, being conscious like that, you know.  Now remember, the thing about my whole environment, see, it--it did not... we became the norm, okay.  I was the norm in my environment, so I didn't interact like with the outside.  You know, it was like I was the person who had money, so I never thought about people not having money.  You know, even when you started to look at the different groups, income groups, within the African American community, I never thought any of those kids had more money than I did.  You know, because I really was the person with the money.  You know, they may--their parents may have had money, but I had money, you know.
Story_ID: 97829
Speaker 1: In 1964, to give you an example, I had--I made $75 a week in high school, $75 a week.  So, I--
Speaker 2: So that's, that approaches--
Speaker 1: That's adult money.
Speaker 2: That's a grown man's salary.
Speaker 1: Right. It was.  And I tell people how I did it.  I worked... I was a cashier at A&P, and I had a little janitorial business.  (Laughter).  And I had a little barber shop and beauty shops and a daycare center that I cleaned up on a regular basis.
Speaker 2: You did all the work yourself?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, I did the work myself.  You know, because you could do it anytime, you know.  But so, I did that.  You know, so I made money.  Because A&P, I remember was $2.20 an hour.  And that was like whoa, $2.20 an hour.  That was--teachers used to work at A&P in the evening, you know.  Like, you teach and then you have a second job.  Because A&P was the large grocery store then.  That was before Kroger's.
Speaker 2: The minimum wage then was $1.25.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it could have been $1.50.  I was probably union even at A&P, so I'm getting an adult wage.  When we were at A&P, the teachers... we're working... we're peers.  But I'm there, you know, a student, you know.  And I was their cashier.  And so, you know, I made a lot of money.  So, I never compared myself like I had less than anybody else.  It may be different, but it's... you know, it was just-less, you know, it was never less.
Story_ID: 97830
Speaker 1: Now, when you were on the verge of graduation [from Columbus East High School in 1965], what were you... did you think you'd just continue in business?  Did you have any--
Speaker 2: Oh, my--
Speaker 1: --aspirations for college or anything?
Speaker 2: My senior year, I changed.  My senior year, I decided I was going to college.  So, I changed the way I dressed.  I said I'm going to dress "Joe College."  (Laughter).  Remember, cause "Joe College" with the sweaters.  But I made it like a style, you know what I mean.  There's always a style to it.  It's not like I'm getting nerdy.  It was like... so I said I'm "Joe College."  I performed very well in my accounting class the year before, so I took advanced accounting.  And I was extremely good in that.  So much so, when the student teachers came to teach that course, I would have to help them with the course.  I was very good.  I mean I took... you know, I took a state test, you know, those aptitude tests, and I scored very high in accounting.  So, I wanted to be an accountant then.  Then, I knew I had to go college.  So my senior year, I decided I was going to college.  And my parents [George Richard Johnson and Ima Jo Winson Johnson]--although my father came from a history of college, they never stressed it.  You know, it was like they just assumed that you were going to do okay.  You know, we never had it... like, we never had talks like, "If you don't get yourself together, you're going to have a terrible life."  We never had that.  You know, we didn't roll like that, you know.  So, so they didn't...  Remember, my father made-- gave you a lot of choices.  You choose.  Remember I said earlier-- I said that "you choose.  If you want to go to church, you can go to church.  If you don't, you don't."  You know, so we end up going to church.  So, by the time we get to high school, you know, it was always the same way.  But I would go to high school.  You know, it was like I said, I was manipulating the system, but I still would be there.  I remember I may not attend the class, but I was walking the halls.  So, it's not like I'm going to leave. I'm still around, you know, the campus.  So, that's...  But in the twelfth grade, I got serious about it.  And I took, I remember taking business law, machines, and accounting, and all those things.  I did very well my senior year.  I mean it didn't move my grade point very much, but--because you had three years of these other grades.  (Laughter).  But I did very well my senior year.  I was a 3 point something student, where I was a 1 point or 2 point person... or a 1 point...  I mean it didn't matter to me, as long as I--you know--
Speaker 1: You got those points to get out?
Speaker 2: Right, as long as I got out of the course.  But my senior year was, you know, it was like off the chart.  Almost so-- I remember the principal says-- I said, "Where am I in my class?"  So, I didn't rank too high in the class, you know.  I was close to the bottom... to the top.  But he started off at the top, and he said, "There must be a mistake here."  Because I was a very good student by the time I was there, you know.  But I never really was like a bad student.
Story_ID: 97831
Speaker 1: I remember I used to have a...  The wrestling coach--I was a very strong kid, physically very strong.  I wasn't this size.  I was a small frame.  I mean big frame, but a small, thin person, but extremely strong.  And so, the wrestling coach, when he was practicing, I could always beat all of his wrestlers.  And he would be so mad that I wouldn't do this wrestling with him, you know.  I remember he would-- you know, and so, I was the kind of kid where we would have playful confrontations, you know.  But if you saw it, you'd think I'm being disrespectful.  But he knew what we were doing.  And I remember one time we were just tussling in the hall, I mean just having this major tussle.  And someone else, a principal or somebody else, said "Should we throw him out?"  He said, "No, no, it's okay."  (Laughter).  But it's like, we're not... but he's kind of mad at me because I won't do this.  So, but he kind of liked me at the same time, because I was kind of, you know, kind of edgy for him.  You know, it was like, I interact like... I would... if you would... you know, the young teachers, I would go like, "You're a young teacher."  In other words, we would have...  You know, the older ones, I'd be like, "Yes sir, yes ma'am."  But the younger ones, we would have more confrontational kind of interaction, but not disrespectful, like, you know.  So with that coach, I mean, like I said, you know, we liked each other.  But he just wanted me... because I could always out-wrestle all of his people because I was, just naturally I was very strong, you know, as a kid.  I don't know where it came from.  I mean in the days when they used to have Bobo Brazil [Houston Harris], you know, those... you remember the wrestling kind of activity sports?  So, we used to wrestle, and people would bet on us when we were young kids.  But I could out-wrestle--I could do two boys at the same time, you know, and even pin them.  I was just that kind of kid.  But it's like, like I said, but I was not... I wasn't a violent kid or anything like that.  You know, I wasn't like a fighter or anything like that.  So, but in high school I think it was more like this... like the system that we had.
Story_ID: 97832
Speaker 1: But my senior year [at Columbus East High School in Columbus, Ohio], I decided to go to college.  I didn't have a plan how to get to college.  Also in my senior year, I decided to do sports, and I did cross country.  I remember going to the coach, and I told him I wanted to run cross country.  I tried out for the cross country team.  And he says, "You can't do it, because you flunked last year."  I said, "I didn't flunk last year."  See, remember, he thought... when I was in the eleventh grade everybody thought I was in the twelfth grade.  I said, "No, I was in the eleventh grade."  You know, so that's (unclear) but anyway I end up running cross country.  I got a letter for it, running cross country--you know, changing my M.O. [modus operandi], you know.  And then like I said, preparing for college.  And I had planned to go to Tennessee A and I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial University in Nashville, Tennessee, now Tennessee State University].  We had a classmate from the class right before mine, of '64' [1964], but a good friend, Estelle Baskerville.  Estelle Baskerville went to the Olympics.  So, we were like, she was like... I was like, whoa, you know.  And she went to Tennessee A and I.  So, we're like, I'm going--
Speaker 2: She's one of the Tigerbelles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm going to Tennessee A and I.  I'm going to go down there.  I'm going to do the four minute mile.  You see how long ago that was, when that was a big thing, right.  (Laughter).  I'm going to work on doing the four minute mile.  I'm going to Tennessee A and I.  So, I was working at A&P.  And my mentor, remember, from junior high school, [Mert] Woods, he comes in one day.  He says, "George, what are you going to do?"  I said, "Well, I'm going to go to Tennessee A and I, I think in January.  I'm going to get my money together."  Because my family, you know, that wasn't part of the, that wasn't part of the plan.  You know, I couldn't go to them and say that, you know.  Because it was like, "You know, we ain't paying for no... we're not prepared to pay for college like that, you know."  And I didn't, I wouldn't... it wasn't my way to say, like, you owed it to me.  You know, you're talking to a kid who started dressing himself at eleven and twelve years old.  So, you know he's not...  I couldn't wrap my head around going to ask them "Could y'all send me to college?"  That was just, it wouldn't be part of my imagination, you know, that you would... that that would be their responsibility, you see.  So, I said I was going to Tennessee A and I in January.  So, he, he told me about another person.  He said, "Do you remember [Ernest] Spaights?"  He said, "Now, when you were in junior high school, Spaights was the English teacher."  I said, "But I don't remember him."  He said, "Well, he had your sister in his English class."  I said "now--" He said, "Now, he's getting a Ph.D. from [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio], and he's going to be a professor at the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee.  So, he wants to take, he wants to take a--get a student he can help in college, but also help his family, like around the house, you know."  You know, probably so you know it's going to be an untraditional student you can take this up, okay.  So he said, "Would you be interested in talking with him?"  I said, "Yeah, it sounds good to me," you know.  And he had a five year old son, you know, and his wife worked.  So, you know, he wanted somebody...  It was like, "Well, you schedule your classes around taking him to kindergarten and picking him up and, you know.  And he would give you like a living allowance, and he'll pay your way to school."  So I was like, this sounds good.  So, I met Spaights.  In the meantime, Spaights would give you all these tests and everything like this.  And he's teaching at Ohio State, and he... after he gave me these tests, he says a couple of things.  But he looked at my grades, you know, my test scores, like particularly how my grades changed from the eleventh--you know, from the eleventh to the twelfth, and all those things.  And he looked at that, and he did some in-depth analysis of the scores and your grades.  And at the time I said he was teaching at Ohio State.  And he... one of the top students in our high school class was in his class.  Her name was Joanne something... but Joanne...   And I remember him telling me, he says, "You have a greater chance of succeeding than she does."  You know, I looked at him like, "You're crazier than hell."  Now, this girl was one of those real smart... I mean even to the point we thought she was maybe valedictorian of the class or something, you know.  And he like, he says, "No, it's something else, something else... you know, it's something else."  And he decided... he said--I guess he probably saw me as a project.  He says, "You stick with me.  You do this."
Story_ID: 97833
Speaker 1: And so, now, I was not a reader or anything like that in high school.  But after I started working with him [Ernest Spaights], my year after high school I read sixty-six books... sixty-six books.  I was reading a book... I remember once I read a book a day for like a week.  I just read, read, read... just read.  He began to tutor me in, you know, language, arts, English, and social studies.  I remember when we first got together.  But we're in Columbus [Ohio] now.  He hasn't moved to Wisconsin.  So, I remember he asked me a question.  He says, "What social class do you belong to?"  And I thought about it, and I was like--this is how I came up with my answer.  I said, "Well, you know, I got all the money I need.  I'm voted best dressed in high school."  I said, "I'm in the upper class." (Laughter).  And I remember him just smiling.  But now, you know, he's speaking from a sociological thing, you know, which would probably put me in a working class.  You know, but I said, "I'm in the upper class, you know."  And that, to me, goes back to that perception of yourself.  And see, it's... and in moving through things, it's all... it has so much to do with your perception.  It's not what you are, but how do you perceive where you are?  So, he did that.  And like I said, I moved with his family to Wisconsin.  And I took some courses, and he gave me academic courses that we--I had two courses with him.  And I had to listen to symphonic music.  And that's all part of my whole, you know, thing.  So, we moved to Milwaukee.  I moved with the family to Milwaukee, and that was the beginning of my college.
Speaker 2: Now, this is an African-American family?
Speaker 1: Yes, very much like... it's something like "Fresh Prince of Bel-Air," okay.  But I'm not a nephew.  I'm treated... once, I'm treated like a nephew, but I got responsibilities.  Like Geoffrey [Butler], I got to go clean the house, I got... those kind of chores.  I did that, you know, and then I went to class in the evening and things like that.  And they paid me, and paid for school.  And we had a deal that as long as I was--we could do this until I--get paid for school for the rest... from here on out.
Speaker 2: So, did you start at UWM [University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee]?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Because my grades... remember my high school [Columbus East High School in Columbus, Ohio] performance wasn't strong.  So I had to start at their junior college, which was the Milwaukee Institute of Technology.  I started there, you know.  That's, that was like the beginning of it.
Speaker 2: Then did you go to UWM?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't, no I didn't; I was there.  I only stayed with the family--well...
Speaker 2: This was in '65' [1965]?
Speaker 1: This was in '65' [1965] when I moved with him.  I moved with them before they left Columbus [Ohio], just to say, get acclimated with each other, okay.  Then after we moved, we, I lived with them until that December.  But we lived in a suburb, Shorewood, of Milwaukee, just across the street from UWM.  And I'd never been in, I'd never been in an environment where I was like the only kid, the African American kid.  I never, I didn't grow up like that, you know.  So, that was like a strange world.  And because I did a lot of things there around the house, I didn't have that real social life.  So, when I got back to Columbus that December, I remember seeing my friends.  And I said, I told them--I had my little bow-tie, (laughter) my little bow-tie and my sweater on, and my pipe.  (Laughter).  And I got off the plane, and I said, "What's happening?"  They said, "What did you say, Seven Rock?"  I said, "What's happening?"  So, they always tease me; to this day they always tease me.  "You got off that plane with that pipe in your mouth, saying 'What's happening.'"  (Laughter).  You know, so then I decided, I think I'm going to move.  So then when I went back, I got my own apartment.  We still, I still had my responsibility there, but I got my own apartment in Milwaukee.  That was my first apartment I got.  Then Milwaukee, for me, for a young kid from Ohio, it was cold.  I could not, I could not...  It was snowing in May and all that.  Milwaukee was so cold.  Milwaukee is colder than Chicago [Illinois].  So, now, as an adult I could handle all that.  But as a kid, I'm like, I don't need to do this.  I didn't have friends.  I wasn't... you know, I mean I had some, but it was like--you know, I just--I just never really connected, you know, like that, you know.  So-
Story_ID: 97834
Speaker 1: Then I decided to go back... then I decided to go to West Virginia State [University in Institute, West Virginia], that's what I decided to do.  I was like, well, my father [George Richard Johnson] and my uncle went there.  I decided to go to West Virginia State.  But in the meantime I went to school that summer, which is now the summer of '66' [1966].  I enrolled in [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] as a transient student, which means you don't have to worry about getting admitted.  You're just taking courses, and you're moving on.  And I applied to West Virginia State.
Speaker 2: So, you ended up staying (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.  Well, I had an accident in my brother's car, and I had to pay for it, the repair.  And that took my college money.  So, I, so I stayed on.  Then the next thing I know...  But the good thing about Ohio State at the time, Ohio had a policy that if you graduated from Ohio High School, Ohio State had to admit you, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, that's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: A lot of people... you know, you had...  If you graduated from Ohio High School...  So, but they had a heavy, heavy, high dropout, flunk-out rate.  You know, it was like, it was tough.  Because you had two quarters and it was over; you're sunk, you know.  So, fortunately I was able to make it, you know, through that.  But Ernest Spaights and I, and his wife Ethel, (unclear) Milwaukee, we became life-long friends.  And I consider him one of the-- a important mentor in my life.
Story_ID: 97835
Speaker 1: Ohio State, now what was your--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio].  I wanted to kind of... well, I went to Ohio State from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], because then I, you know, majored in that.  But I want to kind of regress a little bit about the high school [Columbus East High School in Columbus, Ohio], something that I think is kind of important.  Because in high school, you know, I was kind of entrepreneurial.  What I started doing when I was in high school, I started giving dances.  You know, so I became the social... the person in charge of the social life at high school.  But you paid to come to... you know, I was that type of person.
Speaker 1: So, you would rent a hall, get the acts together?
Speaker 2: I would rent the hall, get the ads, get...  I remember I would get different artists to make posters and put them up.  And they were always--like at the time, the biggest hotel in Columbus--I would have them at that biggest hotel when I was in the eleventh grade.  I remember once we had a big dance.  It was three of us; we called ourselves the Elegants.  And we had a big dance at this hotel called the Neil House in Columbus, on Ohio Street.  And it was a very successful dance.  You know, it was about like $1.50, yeah, about $1.50 dance or something like that.  But we had made $281 a piece on that dance.  And we really just packed people into that hotel.  It's like the first time anybody--you know, I'm talking about adults.  They would just get those little, you know, what's the--veteran's clubs.  That's where they would have--
Speaker 1: The VA [Veterans Affairs] Center?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the VA Center.  But having one in the hotel--that was unheard of.
Speaker 1: The American Legion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those things.  But this was a downtown hotel here, and it's a twelfth-grader putting this on, you know.  And so, it was very successful.  And it was three of us.  So, each time, we would take turns being the president on the ticket, you know.  And if you're the president on the ticket, that means you're in charge of that particular dance.  So the night of our dance, I go to pay for it.  But you can't pay for it at the regular check-out, okay.  Because this was a different, whole different--you know, not where you get your rooms.  So, they said, "Oh, they bill you, they do this."  So they never billed us, so we never really paid.  But we had now scheduled another dance, and something happened where the hotel did not record--did not put it on their schedule.  So, my partner, my friend who was in charge, calls.  He says, "Well you know, we have this dance."  They said, "We don't have it on the record."  They said, "Plus, you didn't pay for the last one."  So he calls me in a panic.  This is, it's a Saturday, you know.  And he says, "You know, they say we didn't pay.  You know, and they're starting renovation on this space and all this."  So, I said, "Okay."  So I made an appointment.  I was very cool about it.  I made an appointment, got my little shark skin suit on, had my little pleather briefcase.  And I went downtown, and I talked to the manager of the hotel.  Now, remember, I took my business courses while I was in high school.  So in business law, I took--I learned what a gentleman's agreement was.  So in that office, I came up with some dates that we called.  And I said "We called here..." say, I just gave a date, which was around the time we did, "... on say, November 18th, and we entered into a gentleman's agreement to rent this hall, you know.  Now, you may have neglected... your staff may have neglected to write it down, but it was... we entered that.  Here's our tickets, it's for tonight.  We got people coming..." because people would come back from college to go to our dance from Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], OU [Ohio University in Athens, Ohio].  And I said, "We got people coming from all over the state to this dance."  He said, "Well, you didn't pay for the last one."  I said, "We attempted to pay, and they told us to wait for the invoice, you know, the bill."  And I said, "But I'm willing to pay for that now."  He said, "You can pay for it now?"  I said, "Yes, and I can pay for tonight, too."  He said, "Okay."  He said, "Well, we're getting ready to start the renovation."  I said, "We got people coming."  He said, "Okay, we'll do it."  They stopped renovations, you know.  I remember I paid them everything.  We came back the next night... we came back that evening and they had a big banner that said, "Welcome, Elegants."  And I was like, you know, to be 17 or 18, doing that--you know, you're like, would have been negotiating like that, talking about you got a gentleman's agreement by law and you've got to honor that.  You know, I was just--that was one of the highlights of my life, you know, to have that kind of interaction.  We were very successful with that dance; we were very successful in doing those things.
Speaker 1: And you could do it at that point, I guess.
Speaker 2: To me, it's like you got people coming, you know.  (Laughter).  So, you got to do what you got to do, you know.
Story_ID: 97836
Speaker 1: But I think that promotion--I always wanted to be a promoter of things like that, you know.  And so that, I even carried on.  Now going back, getting back to when we were talking about [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio].  During my tenure at Ohio State, my time there as a student, we still continued that--our tradition.  Like, every other month we'd have a dance to pay our rent.  (Laughter).  So, we did a lot of those things there, too, you know.
Speaker 2: That's probably a more entertaining way of earn your money, I guess--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a crap shoot.  But yeah, you know, we did it, you know, we did it.  You know, so, it's--
Speaker 2: Did you ever attract any big name acts?
Speaker 1: My biggest name was The O'Jays, they were very big at the time.  I did do the O'Jay's.  I remember that was one of big times, too, because I had to pay them.  That's when I was in college and another fraternity, who didn't have the funds to do it, asked me to come in as a partner on this dance, okay.  See, now, I'm a member of Kappa Alpha Psi.  And the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha] was giving this dance, but they didn't have the resources to do it.  So, they came to me and said, "Let's go in partnership on this dance with the O'Jays."  So I said, "Okay, we can do that.  But we have to be in charge of the dance, because y'all don't know what you're doing.  And second is your brothers who come in--you know, how they get in free?"  I said, "We have to get half."  In other words, if it's a five dollar ticket, we're going to take $2.50 from each one of the, you know... personally.  You can give your half, but you can't give our half."  You know, so anyway it was a very successful dance, you know, with the O'Jays.  And I remember I had to go back there, backstage, paying them and stuff like that.  So, the second one I had a--this one didn't come out, but it would have been a very big dance.  I took on the management of a singing group at the time, Royal Esquires.  This is all college, I'm in college.  And I wanted to promote them.  So I had a contract with The Friends of Distinction.  You know, "You've Got me Going in Circles."
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And they were doing this long tour.  And I was like, "You jump into this one day.  Just tack this one day on to the tour, you know."  And I went and got a student loan.  Those were the days when you'd go over there and get a student loan.  You know, when I first started school, it was hard to get any money then.  Then you got student loans up the wazoo, you know.  So, I got a student loan to pay for this dance.  Then they called and said, "Oh, we can't..."  One of the members was pregnant or sick, or something.  So we had to, they had to cancel our venue.  But now, we've got all this money, so we blew my money.  But it was, those were kind of the highlights in terms of doing those things.  But I think it also, you know, prepared me for what I do now in that sense.
Story_ID: 97837
Speaker 1: But [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] was, I majored in accounting for a while, for a couple of years.  Then I changed and went into education.  I--
Speaker 2: Now why did you change.  Did you, why did you change (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, I had a car, and all the girls used to go out into the African American community to tutor.  So, I would take them out there.  I was the person who drove them out.  I was very active in the Movement.  I was one of these people who was active in the Movement, a fraternity person, and a businessperson all in one.  Because I always believed that you really have to be all three.  You can't be just one, okay.  And I still believe that.  You know, when I say that, you have to be multi-faceted in life.  So, they--so I would go out there with the girls, you know, just hanging around the girls, you know--you know, being the guy.  So, then they said "George, why don't you take care of..."  So, I started helping these people, you know, in the community.  So then I said, "Yeah, this is what I want to do.  I think I want to help people, that's what I want to do.  I want to do that."  So I said, "I'm going to change."  So, that's when I changed.  But I was (unclear) Before then, I was so dead set on just being an accountant.  Because I was like, that's it.  I was ready for this creative accounting.  It's like I was planning on creative accounting.  And so, so that's what I got.  It was more... and it was more... because... just going out there.  And I said, "I want to do that," you know.
Story_ID: 97838
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a black student organization then at OU [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  I was active in the black student organizations.  I, I mean it was... at the time that I almost really flunked out of college is because during that time--you know, during that time, you know, we were picketing, having meetings--a lot of people were smoking weed.  That's the time where one week you... you know, it was in vogue just to get a nickel bag.  And two months later, everybody had pounds.  You know, it just--you know, it came out of the sky almost.  It was like there was no transition.  You know, that conspiracy theory that the CIA planted weed and all that on campuses and all that during the sixties [1960s], during those times--it really fits that M.O. [modus operandi] You know--
Speaker 1: There was a time when wine was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was wine, you drank--
Speaker 1: --recreational--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you drank a little wine.  And maybe you'd spend a dollar and get a joint, and everybody would be--about ten people on one joint or something like that.  Then all of a sudden, it was just hordes of weed, you know.  So, so, at that time, you know, people were--you know, you're trying to--you're out picketing because you're trying to keep workers from going to work and all that.  You know, you're just doing a lot of planning.  Then you had a little social life.  And that was the--for me that was the semester, like, wow.  I took calculus... I took calculus, Accounting 3, and economics.  That was a heck of a load.  Now, I'm going to tell you how bad calculus was.  I was very good in math, remember.  But when I took college math, I was... that first course, I was very good in it.  But I wouldn't study.  So when it came time for exams, I knew I could do the problem.  I could figure it out, but I couldn't figure it out in time for the test.  So, I was like, damn.  So, I got thrown off.  I would never really--you know, it wasn't challenging enough to study.  It was more like you study just to get the practice.  So, I dropped that class.  And in some ways, I couldn't take it again.  Or maybe I could take it, I don't know why.  But I went to calculus.  Now, I went from college calculus--the last class I had was high school algebra.  So, I didn't have anything between there.  Now, I passed that class in college.  I passed the calculus class in college.  I mean I got a D on it, but it was also during like--like I said, during the time.  And that was a very difficult time.  Because you know, the whole--it was almost by design--let's try to get some of these students out of here--you know, this-- at that time, you know.  So, then the next few quarters, I really had to just buckle down and just... boom, you know.  So, I did that.  But that's--Ohio State was... that's some of the challenging parts of it, you know.  It was a fun time, but at the same time we--you know, you had those types of challenges that always would appear.
Story_ID: 97839
Speaker 1: [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] is a huge campus.  And at the time that you were there, they had the largest student population in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it still... maybe has.  But it was like, it was over forty thousand back then.  It was a large school.  But the interesting thing about Ohio State, we had our own environment at Ohio State.  People don't know that, but we had our own environment at Ohio State.  It was a lot of African American students there, but it was so spread out that you just needed to know five hundred of them.  You know, but it was like twenty-five hundred total.  But you know, that's grad school and everything else--commuters and so on.  But we had own world.  We had our own homecoming, homecoming dance, queen, king all of that.  We had our own separate, you know, thing at Ohio State.  And Woody Hayes was a very, was a tyrant.  I mean, you know, I mean people found out later, but we always knew that about him.  And he really alienated the players from the African American community.  So, we never rooted for Ohio State when we were in school... never, never--
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: Never rooted... I don't know a person.  I mean, there's people who root for them now who were in school when we were there.  Because you know, we're older.  We're like, "Oh, we're the ones in Columbus, we're..."  But when we were there, I never--we'd watch the game rooting against Ohio State.
Speaker 1: You know, that's something that--.  There was a general feeling in the black community that Woody Hayes didn't like black people or was a--.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, and it was like, if you could play...  For athletes, if they joined the fraternity, they could join Athletes for Christ.  That was it, you know.  But if they joined the fraternity, he'd bench them.  He would give them a very hard time, you know.  So we didn't grow up around, like, Ohio State... like being a big booster of Ohio State.  We had our own world for Ohio State, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, now the basketball team at Ohio State, before you got there, they'd won the championships at some point [1960].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: With Jerry Lucas and [John] Havlicek and all that-
Speaker 2: Jerry Lucas and all that, yeah.  We were for... for high school, we were for Ohio State like that, yeah, you know.  But like in football... Ohio State was football.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, at that time.  But for football, I'd never been to a game.  I went to one half of a game, and that's because some fraternity brothers had come in town and they said, "I want to go to a game."  We were like, "Well, we've never been over there, but okay."  You know, but that's--
Speaker 1: You all weren't there when they played [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and all those big pageants--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, we never got into that.  But we... so, but Ohio State, it was just a different kind of environment for us.  You know, like I said, we had own homecoming.  We had our own... this is our Queen, King, whatever, you know, we voted for them.
Speaker 1: Now did you... you were there I guess, I think it was 1960 or '61' [1961], that was before you went up there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That Jesse Owens' daughter was the Homecoming Queen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's before we... yeah, yeah, that's before us, you know.
Speaker 1: There was a controversy over who was going to kiss her.  Because, you know, the president didn't want to kiss her.  So, they had Jesse Owens kiss her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, okay.  No, we... yeah.
Speaker 1: On the fifty yard line, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: That's the story that she tells--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was that type of institution.
Story_ID: 97840
Speaker 1: [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] and Columbus in general, how would you rate the place in terms of racism in America and that sort of thing, and how black people fared?
Speaker 2: Well, I think Ohio State was like this.  Well, now, first of all I can only speak of it during my time.  I don't, I can't speak of Columbus and Ohio State now.  I've been, you know, I've been gone from there.  But Ohio State was...  Columbus, I think was a very, very conservative, "don't take risks" town.  Okay.  I remember as a kid I would say, "This city, everybody just wants to grow up and have a white collar job."  Now, white collar did not mean corporate executive in those days.  It meant working for the State; that was the Capitol, you know.  We didn't grow up thinking, you know, you're going to be a corporate executive, because those things didn't exist.  I mean, it was, it didn't exist back then.  I mean, you know, it was like--it doesn't mean a hundred percent.  But there were so few African Americans in corporate positions in those days that, okay, that it didn't exist.  So, what... so Columbus... Columbus, I thought, was that.  It was very conservative.  You got outside of that community and you could feel like you're not welcomed, you know.  I don't know if we're on camera.  But I remember a dentist was beaten up having dinner in a downtown restaurant, you know.  But I think overall, it's a very conservative--it's a very racist city.  But I think the damage, to me, is what is done to the African American community there.  It like kind of sucked the energy out of it.  You know what I mean, it's like... you know, they don't seem to fight... or something like that.  They don't seem to, like, challenge.  It's more like, "let's keep the status quo," you know.  And I think that's what happened with Columbus.
Story_ID: 97841
Speaker 1: [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio], as I said earlier, by its policy, so-- it really had a serious "let's flunk you out" policy.  You know, it really did.  It was not--we were our own support system.  We, we would go to the upper-classmen.  They would tutor us and tell us how to take course tests and all this stuff.  So, if you didn't have that natural skill, like, say a person like me who didn't have it.  Like, I remember taking a political science class.  And I knew all the answers.  See, I would know the answers.  But the writing was--you know, and she said "Be brief."
Speaker 2: So it was an essay?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was an essay.  And she said "Be brief."  So, I would give her two lines.  So, she was like, she said, "Well, what is this?"  I said, "You said be brief.  Isn't this the answer?"  She said, "Yes, but..."  (Laughter).  You know, being brief meant like two paragraphs or three paragraphs, you know.  But at the time--you know, where institutions may say, "No, this is how you can elaborate more on those things."  You see what I'm saying?  They would support you.  Where there, it's like, you know, it's like they had a mandate.  My first psychology class... in psychology, the small class was sixty students.  That was the small class in psychology.  They had classes up to sizes of maybe three to five hundred students in one class.  But let's say for a given quarter, there's three thousand students in psychology who are taking the psychology... this particular course, Psychology 101.  Three hundred is automatically going to fail.  They went on that Bell Curve, and it said it doesn't matter what your score is, ten percent of you in this class are going to fail.  If everyone scored in the ninety percentile, the ones who just got ninety or whatever it is, ten percent of you are going to fail.  We can't do anything about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, you're going to college and you're a freshman and you hear that kind of... you know, you hear that kind of talk.  You're like, "Whoa."  So that's saying to me that Ohio State had a policy that ten percent of their freshmen had to flunk out.  I mean, it's like we got to get you out.  Ten percent of you have to leave, you know, by the end of this year.  So, if they had four thousand freshmen, four hundred had to flunk out--drop out, whatever... however you counted it.  They had to get out of there, okay.  So that's how, you know, that's how Ohio State was.  So you can see, you know, it was a very tough university in that way, because you didn't have the support.  When I finally went to University of Michigan, it was much different.  You know, I went there for graduate school.  But Ohio State was very, very unsupportive as an institution at that time.
Speaker 2: But you graduated from Ohio State in 196-?
Speaker 1: Nineteen Seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Right, March of 1970, I got my master's.  And then in March of '72' [1972]--no, March of '70' [1970], I got my bachelor's.  In March of 1972, I got my master's from Ohio State.
Speaker 2: So you went straight through the master's program in education?
Speaker 1: Well, I took a year off.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, I took a year off from school, but I went right back.
Story_ID: 97842
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you, after school [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio] I read that you went right into... you applied to be the director of the Head Start Program?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, after I graduated from Ohio State, I became the educational director.  What happened, when I was in undergraduate school, I learned that because of World War II, if you had two years of college, you could get you a teacher's certificate.  So, when I was a junior, I applied for a teacher's certificate and began to teach night school.  I would teach math in night school.  But I'm still in, you know, college.  A lot of the programs--they had a lot of--that's when the Model Cities Poverty Programs came about.  So, they had contracts with the Board of Education.  So, I would be one of their teachers.  So, I'm teaching people who are older than me when I was in college, alright.  So, when I graduate, I applied for this job.  And I graduated in Education, and I applied for a job with Head Start as their educational director.  And the director wanted one person, and the Board wanted another person.  And they would not compromise with other.  I was their compromise.  I had only graduated from--I'd been out of college three months.  This was--I graduated in March, and this was in--I got the job in June.  So, it was probably less than three months in terms of applying.  But because I had that teaching experience--part of it was did you have any teaching experience?  So, I'm like, "Yeah, I have two years of teaching experience."  So I had this... you know.  So, anyway I end up with the job, you know. So I'm 23 years old, my first job.  I'm supervising four--no, 10 daycare centers, 47 teachers that I had to go and observe and train and all that, and I'm just out of college.  And I still had my little college ways.  You know, it's like I'm hanging people who might be smoking weed in the evening, or something like that, you know.  But after a while, I said, "I can't do this, guys.  I got to get up in the morning.  I can't, I can't hang with y'all like this."  But I took the job very seriously.  I studied, you know, early child (unclear), you know, and I was pretty good.  Philosophically, I could work things out with them.  And six months later, I got promoted.  I became the educational coordinator.  Now, my assistant, the assistant educational director, was a parent of a high school classmate of mine.  She was my assistant.  Now, I'm 23.  She's got kid's 23, and she's my assistant.   Then I get promoted because they had--in Columbus [Ohio] they had three agencies that had Head Start--the Board of Education, the Diocese, and the Model Cities Program.  Then I became... with the Governing Board of Head Start, over all three.  Then I became the educational coordinator for Head Start.  So then, I was the supervisor for all three educational directors.  So now I'm just 24, you know, so I did that.  Then six months later, I get promoted again.  Then I became Head Start, I became--well, they called it Regional Training Officer.  Then the State title changed, and I became the State Training Officer for Head Start.  And I was the Assistant State Training Officer.  And my territory was from... I did... from just north of Columbus was like the dividing line.  So, all the Head Start Programs south of Columbus was under my jurisdiction.  So, it was two of us who ran the office.  I was the assistant, and he was the senior.  But what we did, we divided up the territory.  So I had Columbus, I had Dayton [Ohio], Springfield [Ohio], a lot of the small cities.  And my partner, he had Cincinnati [Ohio].  And we were based at--that job transferred me--it was based out of the University of Cincinnati [Ohio].  So then with that job came a, it was a faculty appointment.  So I became a lecturer, you know, in education.  I didn't teach anything, but still I had to have the title.  And so, now I'm 24 and I have this.  And I would go around, and I was in...  And it was funny, because if you didn't do--if we didn't come to some agreement, it could affect your monies.  So people looked at me like, "What should we be..."  They looked at me like "Help us out," for one.  Then it was like, "I want you to help us out, because I don't want our monies to stop.  Or we don't want that... we don't want Washington [D.C.] to...  Because if you give us a bad report, then now we've got to deal with Washington in terms of funding and stuff like that."  So, but I ended up being a very good trainer for teachers and things like that.  So, I did that for two years.  So, it really was like... to have those jobs at that age, those were very serious jobs to have, you know, at that age to do.  But like I said, I took it seriously.  I guess that's why I kept moving up with it.  Then I decided to, I left there to go to graduate school.
Story_ID: 98001
Speaker 1: Alright my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name for us?
Speaker 2: George N'Namdi.
Speaker 1: And this is our second part of the interview we started two days ago.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: January 20, 2005.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Detroit [Michigan], and we're at 1300 Lafayette.
Story_ID: 98002
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now we left, when we off, we were discussing your activities as a supervisor at Head Start.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, right after college [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio], as I said, I was the educational director, and then coordinator.  Then I was a state, what you call a State Training Officer for Head Start.  In that position, I would go throughout central and southern Ohio working with all the various Head Start Programs, and helping them with their training and kind of doing some monitoring and evaluation of their programs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and that was--I was based out of the University of Cincinnati [Ohio], and I traveled to different places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is from 19... the early seventies?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started in like '71' [1971].  I started in '71' [1971] to... '71' [1971]... I think I did maybe about fifteen months that I was there.  Then I went to graduate school.  Well, while I was on that job, I also went to, I went to school at Ohio State to get my master's degree then also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you got married around that time, too, 197-?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We got married in 1972, yeah.  No, it wasn't '72' [1972], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Was it '71' [1971]? I've read it was '71--
Speaker 2: Seventy One, [1971].  Seventy One [1971], yeah, yeah, I'm getting my dates... you know, yeah, and we moved to Michigan in '72 [1972].  In 1971 I got married to Carmen N'Namdi--well, Carmen Kiner, and she was from Cincinnati, and we attended Ohio State together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, what was your master's degree in?
Speaker 2: In counseling, counseling education, yes.  Yeah, that was from Ohio State.
Story_ID: 98003
Speaker 1: Now, I know you went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to work on your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I'm not missing anything before I take you there, am I?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I got my master's from [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio].  And then I also took post-graduate courses at the University of Cincinnati [Ohio], in psychology.  I did that, and then I applied to the University of Michigan after that.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you know Paul Smith and Eleanor Smith at the University of Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I was not really involved into the social thing at the University of Cincinnati, primarily because my job always took me off... I was always away.  I traveled, and I didn't interact with other students in other departments.  You know, so I was set aside, you know, had a little small office.  And so, we didn't get to interact with a lot of the different people at the University.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in, so around, what was it, '72' [1972] or '73' [1973] that you go to the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: Seventy Two [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy Two [1972]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, September of '72' [1972], I went to the University of Michigan.  I applied, I guess, that fall before.  And I always remember...  I had done very well on my first master's degree.  So I had like maybe a 3.8, 3.9.  Undergrad was just okay, 2.3, you know.  Then I did pretty well with my post-graduate psychology course at the University of Cincinnati.  But I remember Dr. [Ernest] Spaights, the one I lived with in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  He wrote me a recommendation to the University of Michigan, and I got a call that said that I got this glowing recommendation, and everybody thinks I should finish my application process.  Not just from--his was glowing, but also the other ones that I got from my professor at Ohio State.  So, I think I was one of those people who got into the University of Michigan on recommendations, you know.  So then we moved to Ann Arbor [Michigan], to go to the University of Michigan.
Story_ID: 98004
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you like the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]? What was going on at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a little different than [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio].  Ohio State, remember, we were a little more antagonistic with the school.  We, we, we, were always protesting.  We were like against Woody Hayes.  You know, he was kind of a tyrant.  But, well, in view of them, they did similar things, but they're still part of the school.  Like, students, African American students went to the games.  That was like a shock for me.  Okay, I'm like, "Y'all go to the games?"  You know, they didn't have their own homecomings and things like that.  But what I did like about the University of Michigan, is that at the University of Michigan I felt that it treated you like you were smart.  In other words, if you got into the school, you--it's like we're going to nurture your genius.  You didn't feel like you had to prove yourself.  There's a difference.  And I got to study with some very good people at the University of Michigan.  So I enjoyed the school, and always could recommend the psychology department, particularly for anybody who wants to do psychology.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just yesterday [HM] Dr. Percy Bates at the University of Michigan was talking about the difference between the University of Michigan and other state schools in the Midwest--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --being as selective as they are.  Their funding is mostly private, though it's a state school.  But-- Where Ohio State lets everybody in that applies, if they're--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --graduating from Ohio State High School.  The University of Michigan doesn't have to do that.  You know, so, I, but maybe there's an assumption that they think if you get in, you're special.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think it's an attitude-- I think it's uniquely for graduate school.  I don't think it's for undergraduate school, okay.  Now, with Michigan, it--I don't put it on a pedestal, quite like a lot of other people, because I think institutions are institutions.  But I do, I did enjoy how-- the people that I got to work with, and the flexibility that I had in terms of developing a program, you know, in psychology.  So, that's what I really liked about Michigan, you know, U of M, going to school there.
Story_ID: 98005
Speaker 1: Were there some... were there any professors that stand out there, or people at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, I majored in psychology, but I did a lot of things in anthropology, and I worked with [HM] Dr. Niara Sudarkasa. Niara Sudarkasa. But she ended up being the president of Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania.  And I don't think she's there any longer.  But she was one professor that I worked with a great deal.  Another one in psychology I worked with was Klaus Riegel.  Klaus was a dialectical psychologist.  Which had-- he was very unique and he was a very brilliant guy.  And he may publish fifty articles a year.  You know, that's the kind of guy he was.  And then I also worked with my dissertation chairman, James Jackson, who is still at the University.  So, those are some of the primary people that I worked with there at the University of Michigan.
Story_ID: 98006
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Family interaction.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about it.  What did you discover?
Speaker 2: Well, what I did, I did an observational research where I went into homes that had families with two children and both parents.  And the children had to be between the ages of four and maybe ten, you know.  And I, and I coded the type of interaction that the parents had with their children, and how that differed for first-borns and second borns, and by sex.  In other words, were they praising their children?  Were they giving them instructions?  Were they reprimanding them?  Those... it was more detailed than that.  But it was like I had about ten codes that people could fit into, you know.  So that's what the dissertation was about.
Speaker 1: So what did you discover?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I discovered that parents spoke to their children an equally amount of time.  You know, it was like, say if they had fifty utterances to the first born, they had fifty utterances to the second born.  But the type of utterances was different.  Okay, the first-borns got more instructional or informational--either they were telling them something or they're being asked information.  You know, so you'd call it more intellectual or questioning--you know, cognitive kind of things in that sense of--you know, you're saying like "What did you do today in school?", getting information.  Or, you're telling them something about history or some event.  You had more interaction like that with the first born.  The second born got more praise than the first born--more reward than the first born.  Okay, you see what I'm saying?  So, that's part of the differences.  There... at the time there was a research that talked about large families.  In large families, the intellectual environment was decreased in large families.  Which... a lot of things are code words, you know, in psychology.  You know, so--
Speaker 1: Who has large families?
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, who has the-- you know, what group of people, in urban areas, have a lot of large families, right.  So, and the researcher was talking about the large families--if you take everybody's I.Q.--and a child's I.Q. is lower, you know, in relationship to adults.  They... the average would be lower.  So, the fewer children you have, the higher the I.Q.  Well, what my research says is that it's one way--one reason why first-borns sometimes achieve more is because of the type of interaction that they have.  It's not the I.Q.  Also, the first-borns get to become instructors themselves.  Okay, so they begin to instruct.  Now, but then at the same time, the second-born is there also getting this information.  So, at the time--and it's hard to bring up all the specifics of the research, because, you know, it's been a few years.  But it was, it was received very well in that--at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in psychology.  My committee, they thought I had a good research; I was on a good research path.  Because it did kind of address this other thing.  There's a different, whole different dynamic.  See, when you go back to--well, say Klaus Riegel in that dialectical psychology--which meant that you moved through the interaction of different forces--your history, your physical body, your environment--all these things help move you, that's what creates you, okay.  So, that was some of the premise that I kind of went on, you know, in terms of constructing a psychology or philosophy towards psychology.  And so I was more concerned about how these things come about, you know, then, from an observational standpoint as opposed to trying to label, like my predecessor had done.
Story_ID: 98007
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so what did you... did you... when you finished the project...  I mean, did you have any difficulty finishing, or--
Speaker 2: Doing the dissertation?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: Any bad committee members, or (unclear) any of that kind of stuff--
Speaker 2: No, I was pretty, I was pretty fortunate.  It was hard work, because I was a family guy, you know.  I was, you know, I had children.  And so, you know, I had to work.  My wife [Carmen N'Namdi] was a housewife, you know.  And I'm a student, so it was kind of demanding in that way.  But I had a very supportive...  Klaus Riegel started off as my chair.  And that was, I was very fortunate for that, because he laid the foundation.  But then he died in the process.  Then James Jackson, who was on the committee, became my chair.  And but fortunately we had the foundation, which kind of laid with Klaus Riegel.  So, we kind of stayed on that path.  I think it may have been a little more difficult if I hadn't done that--if I hadn't started with Klaus Riegel, in terms of the whole foundation for it.  There's another person that I work with.  She wasn't at the University of Michigan, but we became very close colleagues later on.  Her name was Geneva Smitherman.  And Geneva Smitherman is a linguist.  Before I did my dissertation, my exam, my preliminary exam, was on communication and language... psycho-linguistics.  And Geneva Smitherman, I recruited her from Wayne State [University] here in Detroit [Michigan] to be on my committee at the University of Michigan.  So, I had some very powerful people.  And Geneva and Niara [HM Niara Sudarkasa], those were some of the most brilliant women that I know.  They were just, you know, was very brilliant women, you know.  And I was very fortunate to have them on my committee, and working with them during my graduate school years, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, Geneva Smitherman well known in the linguistics circle.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 98008
Speaker 1: So, what did you decide to do next?  Did you decide to teach?  Did you go on to teach at a college level or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Well, what happened was, while I was in Ann Arbor [Michigan] I did a couple, I did a few things.  One, the Black Student Psychological Association, we had a project out in the prisons.  And so, we did kind of like volunteer work in the prisons.  My volunteer work turned into, evolved into a part-time job.  So, I became a therapist at Milan Federal Prison [now Federal Correctional Institution, Milan] while I was in graduate school.  So that was one thing that we, you know, had did in working with the brothers there.
Speaker 1: That should have been quite an experience.  I mean--
Speaker 2: It was an experience, yeah.  And at the time, I could get people out on the weekend.  They had weekend furloughs, and I could sign them out.  And they would, say, meet their spouses, you know.  I'd say, "Okay, now, I'll pick you up on Friday, and Sunday I have to take you back."  You know, and there was always a strange feeling, to take someone back to prison, you know what I mean.  It was like, I'm like "Awww..."  But you know, you had to do it.  But it's like... you know, so I had that.  It was an experience, you know.  I saw a lot.  I mean, I saw one guy who--he had been under state supervision or government supervision since he was three.  The longest he was not under government supervision--either in a foster home or a detention center or prison--was eleven months, since he was three years old.  So, either he... they took him out of his home with his mother and put him in a foster home.  He may stay there for like six months and then he goes back to the mother, you know, just different things.  So you could see how... you know, he would always say, "Am I institutionalized?"  You know, that's what he would always ask, you know.  And so, so, you got to see some people; you got close to some people.  I mean, I had families who would call me because they knew I was working with their son or brother, you know.  It's like they would call me, "How are they doing?"  You know, so... and I was kind of more... well, you know, more of a humanitarian kind of approach to it, you know.  It was like, particularly in those days, it was like... you'd just like... we didn't know the difference between being a criminal and being a political prisoner.  (Laughter).  You know, we used those terms.  So, we were coming out of that kind of school.
Speaker 1: Did you have, did you have any profound revelations about that kind of thing at that point?  I mean there's a, there's a famous Richard Pryor album, and he talks about political prisons.  He said, "If you ever been to prison, you'll say thank God for penitentiaries." Or something, and it was a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was... but in the community, as you are exploring why people do things--what's their educational motivation, how they're trained...  In your dissertation you're looking at anthropology, you're looking at linguistic stuff.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, what... was anything revealed to you--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in this process about, you know, that was profound, that you think--
Speaker 2: Well, one is like, I think the family is very important.  The family is so important.  And when I say that, I'm speaking of, of course, if both parents are there, it's good--I mean when they're both there, healthy and functioning.  But I don't mean that it's poor if there's only one.  It's really the structure and how they worked, you know, as a system--the boundaries that, you know, the parent or parents set up for the child.  I see where those are very important at a young age.  For-- and that's what--I saw that as extremely important.  I had a course at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] with a social work professor, Richard English.  And I remember saying that "I was very mischievous as a kid.  I just... fortunately, I didn't go to jail."  He says, "No, it's not..."  He says not jail, but the detention or something.  He says "No, it's not no accident that you didn't go, and your friends went."  He said, "Well, what about your life."  I said, "Well, I had to be home when the street lights, you know, started blinking.  We'd start running, because we had to be on that porch or in front of that house when those lights came on.  The other kids didn't have those boundaries.  Now, you may be doing some of the same things, but because you had that boundary, whatever you're doing, you know, if it can extend into the night it becomes... things can change.  But during the day it can be very mischievous, but at night it could become criminal, you see what I'm saying.  So that's how... he was saying the boundaries kind of hold things together.  And that's why... that's the difference, and that's what happens from-- to, say, children when they're growing up.  You know, it's like, what's the difference here?  What are some of the boundaries that you have?  Because, see, my philosophy in this is that to be... you need to have boundaries to be boundless, okay.
Story_ID: 98009
Speaker 1: When you know your boundaries, you're more secure, and you'll be more... you will always push the boundaries.  Think of the world being flat.  If the world's flat, you're like, "I'm not going too far because I don't know my boundaries."  Now that you know its round, what do you do?  "We just go explore forever," because you know your boundaries, you see.  Do you see the difference in that?  I'll give you an example with a kid.  You tell a child, "Don't play in the street because the traffic gets busy," okay.  And the child who knows, has that boundary, is more apt not to go out in that street.  Or if they do, they're always kind of looking back like, "Oh, I'm going to get in trouble."  So, they're not going to be the ones to go way across the street, because they know eventually they're going to get called back.
Speaker 2: It may be the difference in telling a kid, "Don't get hit by a car," than saying "Don't go past the curb." You know.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, if you don't go past the curb, (unclear) going to be in the street.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, you know... but you know that.  And so, you just feel free to do things, you know.  So, and I think that's a very important ingredient in terms of child-rearing.  But I do think, like, in terms of communication--how you communicate with a child; how the community communicates with the child's family.  All that fosters... in terms of your whole development.  And I think I saw that like in some of the people that I worked with, and who were in prison [Milan Federal Prison, now Federal Correctional Institution, Milan].  You know, they lacked that.  You know, (unclear) they really did lack it.  I mean there's a couple of people that I could say took the wrong turn, you know.  But a lot of them were just totally on the wrong street from the beginning.  You know, it's like--
Speaker 2: There's nowhere else (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, you know.  And ironically, I remember after--because when I was doing that, I had a plan to move to Detroit [Michigan].  But when I moved here, I was in a barbershop, and one of the guys from prison, he walks in, you know.  And so we, you know, so we started seeing it.  He turned into a nice family man, you know, bringing his kids and everything.  Now, there's another one who got into social work and, you know, you think he's got his master's.  He's gone on.  But he ended up back in prison maybe as a killer.  I mean, he killed some... he could... maybe a serial killer or something.  But the same, the same kind of people.  But if you were betting, on the surface, you'd bet on the person who killed... the killer, not the family man, because he had the persona, you know.  But, so, you know, it's really just tricky.  So I did that at the University of Michigan.  That's some of the, you know--
Story_ID: 98010
Speaker 1: Also I taught courses [at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan], and I was a graduate teaching assistant.  And sometimes I would make up, I would design courses that I would-- got the permission to teach.  And--
Speaker 2: Which ones?  I mean, can you give us an example?
Speaker 1: Um, I, most of my things was like on the family, around the family and family dynamics.  Because I combined my anthropology, anthropology studies, where I studied cultural anthropology, and focused on the family.  And I wanted to look at the family from a perspective of how were the African families in pre-colonial Africa?  That is your basis for deciding what's off in the family.  So, I would teach courses like that, mixing psychology and anthropology together.
Speaker 2: So, rather than use European family--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --structure as a paradigm, you used the African family structure, an African structure?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  To give you an example, I--  E. Franklin Frazier, who was, you know, one of the, was part of the Chicago [Illinois] golden era of sociology and did the book, "The Negro Family [in the United States]."  Well, E. Franklin Frazier... I mean it's very important what E. Franklin Frazier did.  Because it changed history, in terms of how we were related to.  He, he was talking about the effects of enslavement on African people in America.  What E. Franklin Frazier did, he used the European paradigm.  So, he found this... how it's the broken family, but it's based upon being broken if you use the European paradigm.  Now, it doesn't mean that the African families who were enslaved had not had destruction done to the family.  What it meant, you didn't know what the destruction was.  One example, you would say female head of households.  Well, if you look at the African family, the mother and children had their own structure that they lived in.  Because a lot of times, it was polygamy.  So each wife would have their own house and children in that house.  So, if you look at enslavement and say, "Oh, the woman's living in the house with her children, that's a bad sign.  That shows it's been broken down because there's no man in that house."  Well, historically, from a historical perspective, that woman would never have had a house where a man lived in anyway.
Story_ID: 97853
Speaker 1: So, you're teaching courses in--so we're now in the mid-seventies, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, let's see.  We're in Ann Arbor [Michigan], I was teaching courses [at the University of Michigan].  And another thing I think is very important to note, I mean, about Ann Arbor is that we had two daughters.  And the youngest one [Nataki Talibah] died while I was in graduate school.  Now, that's very important, because that's really kind of what sent our life in a whole different direction, or in a direction...  I was, well, my wife [Carmen N'Namdi] and the other mothers had a play group for the children.  And the play group, they--you know, the mothers would get together and let the kids play, you know.  You know... living in Ann Arbor, you know, everybody lived kind of scattered in a way.  And so, my youngest kid was, I guess she was fourteen months at the time.  And she had a pacifier around, on a string around her neck.  And when she was, laid down for her nap, I guess she got up and then the... the string got caught on the side of the playpen.  And when she laid back down, it strangled her.  So, she ended up suffocating from that.  And that kind of, that was a major thing.  That happened in November of '74' [1974].   And then a month later, my father [George Richard Johnson] died of a heart attack.  And so, that was a... of course, it was a very difficult time--but a life-changing time.  We were expecting our third child at the time.  But what we decided to do from that, we decided to do a school in her name, in her honor [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse of Detroit].  And we thought the school will not only continue her name, but also it would be a way to ensure the philosophical orientation that we were developing.  Like, when I speak of Carmen, my wife, Carmen, when I speak of the brilliant women, she's, you know, one of the most brilliant people I know, you know.  So, I always say, you know, Carmen, Niara [HM Niara Sudarkasa], and Geneva [Smitherman], those are the brilliant women.  And so what we did, we came up with this philosophy called the "philosophy of the norm."  And we weren't connected to Detroit [Michigan].  Because although Ann Arbor is forty-five minutes away from Detroit, we would only come up here for social... I may have done some consulting or something like that.  But it wasn't like we were planning on coming to Detroit.  And after she died, though, we researched different cities, and said we were going to the school, now what city are we going to do it in?  We looked at Chicago [Illinois], we looked at Washington, D.C., New York [City, New York], maybe Columbus [Ohio] or Cincinnati [Ohio] for a minute.  That's where... I'm from Columbus, she was from Cincinnati.
Story_ID: 97854
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the independent school movement, the Black Independent School Movement at the time?
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: The Council of Independent Black Institutions [CIBI]?
Speaker 2: No, not that.  No, I was very independent of that.  Now when I was in undergraduate school, you know, we did our independent educational things.  But it was just students doing things, you know, more like tutoring and things in the evenings.
Speaker 1: In the community on Saturday?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  But we called it the Pan African Communiversity.  You know, so, that... but that's the kind of thing.  So, we had that kind of leaning, but we weren't into a specific movement.  But we just researched schools... we're going to do this school ourselves.  And--
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the--because at that time in the late seventies [1970s], we're talking about maybe fifty independent African-oriented black schools in the country under CIBI.
Speaker 2: I knew they were there.  I didn't know... you know--you know, under [CIBI]?
Speaker 1: Yeah-- Yeah,
Speaker 2: You they had like New Concept of Chicago [Illinois] and maybe two or three others.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (unclear) In Detroit there was-
Speaker 1: Imani--
Speaker 2: Aisha Shule--
Speaker 1: Aisha Shule, yeah.
Speaker 2: And some others--
Speaker 1: I didn't know them at this time like that.  You know, I knew that they... wait a minute.  I knew that they existed, but I wasn't active in it.  I wasn't, I wasn't... it wasn't something I would go and seek out to learn.  That's not quite the way I would do it.  I just would get my own philosophy, and I'd do my own thing like that.
Speaker 2: Cause it seems like you were on the same, similar path--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --in terms of how you were framing this.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  It is similar.  But when I explain it a little more, it's a little different, though, okay, in terms of what we do.
Story_ID: 97855
Speaker 1: So, what we did, we researched these different cities, and Detroit [Michigan] won out.  Again, you know, people think like, "Oh, Detroit, you know, that's where you're from, here in Michigan."  I said, "No, but we weren't really planning on coming here."  I really wanted to go somewhere a little warmer, anyway.  I really wanted to be in [Washington] D.C.  My goal was to teach at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] and do research, and you know, live that life, you know, in D.C.  So, but anyway, Detroit won out.  And one, it won out because the political climate here is different than most places.  A lot of things start here, you know.  Like, this is like Malcolm X's place, the Nation of Islam.  These are things that started here, okay.  A lot of Republic of New Afrika... you know, based.  It was a very political place, and a lot of people were political because the labor unions were political.  You know, it's like even if you're not in that, you're still political in that way.  So, we thought that would be good.  And also, we felt that the value of real estate was such that it was affordable.  We could handle it.  We knew we could find someplace to rent, to do it.  We looked at D.C. and it was like, oh, it's expensive there, you know.
Speaker 2: And you were right in Detroit, more than any other place?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it has more property that you can acquire.
Speaker 1: Right, it has affordable... particularly at the time.  So, we, so then we decided to do the school.  And we decided, we just moved here cold turkey, without any jobs or anything.  So, I ended up getting hired at Wayne State [University in Detroit, Michigan], where I worked with Geneva Smitherman, and we were colleagues for a number of years.  And speaking of Aisha Shule [Detroit, Michigan], we volunteered there the first couple of years.  But we, we informed that we moved here to start a school, but we were going to volunteer, because we wanted to know what's it's like to have a school.  And I taught karate, and my wife taught, she did work with reading.  So, we did that for a couple of years before we started the school.
Story_ID: 97856
Speaker 1: But the difference in our school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan] is that we have what we call "the norm."  And the norm is that we take ourselves as the norm.  So, we would never have a black history month in our school.  Because if you're the norm, you would not have a history month like that.  You see, you understand what I mean?  Because, you know, like there's no white history month.  It's because the European Americans consider themselves the norm.  So, it's always their history.  Like, I wouldn't say "my black mother."  It's like, it's the norm.  So, it's your mother.  To give you an example, one of the kids said in school.  Like, they were studying Langston Hughes and Paul Laurence Dunbar.  And they were reading John Steinbeck, say "Of Mice and Men," or something.  And they said, "Wow, he writes as well as Langston Hughes."  But we identify other than ourselves.  So, he's a European writer.  You wouldn't say Langston Hughes is an African American writer.  Langston Hughes is a writer.  You see the diff--?  You see what I'm saying, in terms of the philosophy?  So, we only identify other than ourselves.  And that's the difference in the norm.  So, we, and so our reference point is always ourselves and not others.  So, that's why I said it's a little different than CIBI [Council of Independent Black Institutions] in terms of the philosophy, you know.  Because we wouldn't... we wouldn't identify...  If I have a photograph of Langston Hughes or Paul Laurence Dunbar, I would never call him a black writer.  You show the kid a writer.  "Here's a writer."  Do you see what I'm saying?  "Here's..." you know, whatever it is, it's just that.  So, you don't make it... See, when you identify it, you also are saying this is the exception.  You know, when you say "This is the first"...  When you say "This is the first" or "only" that means... that's something African-Americans never do.
Speaker 2: Now, now, it's easy to agree with that.  That when people are identified by the "first" and "only" then we are looking at ourselves in the context of somebody else's history all the time.  But to say someone is a "black" writer, is-- I don't think, it doesn't--I don't think it necessarily means that.  I mean, or--
Speaker 1: Why do they have to--
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to follow you.
Speaker 1: I'm saying is that if you have a photograph of them, and they're a writer, they're a writer.  You don't have to identify...  That's what I'm saying.  If you had a kid looking at a [William ] Shakespeare photograph, they wouldn't say he was a "white" writer.  They wouldn't say that.  Why?
Speaker 2: There, well the assumption of the--
Speaker 1: That's the norm.
Speaker 2: --yeah, of a European-American audience would be that he would be--unless he was identified as black, he would be white.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, I'm saying this.  In our school, if, if I'm showing you Langston Hughes, this is a writer.  I'm showing you Shakespeare, this is a European writer.  I will identify... other than ourselves, just like a European--if you're in China, they would use the same norm.  They would identify other than Chinese.  They don't go talking... you know, that's the tricky thing about the norm.  It's really the natural way of doing it.  But when you're not the norm, you always use somebody else as your reference point.  So, when you don't use the norm, "black" always pre-supposes "white."  If you say, "black people do this," what you've also said is white people don't do this.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, in terms of, in terms of CIBI--
Speaker 1: Well, I--
Speaker 2: --in identifying themselves as black--
Speaker 1: Well, it's more--
Speaker 2: --as far as... I mean it seems to me that they're saying they're nationalizing who they are--
Speaker 1: I understand that.
Speaker 2: --in a larger-
Speaker 1: I understand that.
Speaker 2: --in a world where, you know--
Speaker 1: But you're still using somebody else as your reference point, that's what I'm saying.  That's the only difference--is really that's where the difference is.  It's that we just feel that you don't need to use anybody as your reference point, you know.  I can't really debate, like, the whole CIBI's philosophy because I really hadn't studied like that.  But what I mean is that it tends to be more overtly political.  It's more overtly political more so than...  Ours is more on the subtle, the more subtle...
Speaker 2: Okay, alright
Speaker 1: It's subtle.  It's like you don't...
Story_ID: 97857
Speaker 1: A kid, I remember they were studying the boycott.
Speaker 2: Which? The Montgomery bus--
Speaker 1: The Montgomery [bus] boycott.  And the kid says, we said, "Well, she gets on the bus."  No, she... Rosa Parks is on the bus.  And a European person comes up to her and says, "I need this seat."  And she looks up and says to herself, "Well, this person is not handicapped.  This person's not elderly, you know.  I don't think I need to give this person my seat."  Now, what have you taught the children?  One, you've taught them like there's reasons why you can give a person a seat.  Okay, that's the first thing.  In this case, it wasn't reasonable to give up your seat.  And then we say the bus driver... that guy knew the bus driver.  And he went to the bus driver, and they got together and said she got to off the seat, okay.  Well, also, now you have not made her being the victim, okay.  Now, so, then people hear about it and say, "Oh, we're going to do something about this."
Speaker 2: Why would the... how do you explain how she--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.
Speaker 2: --why they asked her to get off in the first place, or change seats?
Speaker 1: Well, that's-- what-- the-- so people said, "We're going to do something about this.  Because you can't... just because you're friends with each other, you know... you can't just put someone off the bus.  So, then they boycott.  Now, our lesson was, we want to teach you that when an injustice has been done, you have a means to deal with that injustice.  So that was, that was our main point.  Our main point was not to show--it shows it without showing it.  We don't need to say, "Oh, give power... oh, white people didn't like black people."  See, when you're talking to a kid, what that says is "What's wrong, you don't like me.  What's wrong with her, they didn't like her?"  You see, so, our emphasis was a little different.  And one of the kids went to Kroger's--maybe not Kroger's--excuse me for saying Kroger's--but a grocery store.  And the grocery store had some cheese that was molded or something.  They said, "We should call everybody.  They're selling molded cheese.  We should boycott this store."  You see what...  This is a six-year old saying this.  So, to me, that's the lesson.  It's like you get an injustice, you do something about it.  To learn that, to say--when you just overtly say that Europeans... European-Americans did not like African-Americans--that, to me, the kid would just say "Why" alright.  That's a different thing than giving them some political tools.  But that's a whole different discussion.  We can--
Speaker 2: But is there an answer to why?  I mean is there an answer to that?
Speaker 1: Why they do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you need an answer to why they do it?  Because you really want to address injustices.  But if you address injustices--if it only occurs because it's racism...   Let's say for instance, if it's an all-African environment.  Let's say it's a class difference there, okay.  And, and, and say it was... Rosa-- the bus driver and the other one was all African people, of African descent or something.  But one was from the islands and somebody else was... you know.  But the same thing can happen, and ultimately you want the child to have the tools and the insight to the situation, not just to know Europeans didn't like African Americans.  Because you're only telling the child there's something wrong with them.  It takes a while to get that... I don't know if it ever gets out of your head.  You see, when you say... when you put it in that perspective...  See, that's what I'm saying.  It's a little, there's a little difference in the subtle... and what I'm saying about that.  And that's where the school, that's where the philosophy kind of differs in that way.
Story_ID: 97858
Speaker 1: Is there ever a time in the development of a child that you identify racism?
Speaker 2: Yes, as they get older.
Speaker 1: But they're going to figure it out sooner or later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's-- that, it's very--  But see, I'm one who believes in fighting, like, institutional racism.  But if I go to that grocery store, I'm not going (unclear) that individual clerk as if they have power over me.  Like, "Oh, you're just treating me this way.  You're a racist."  You have just empowered that person.  It's like, "Hey, you're having a bad day here.  You know, we're not going to deal like this."  So, you-- you know, there's another way that you can deal with that person.  You know, but you don't have to deal with them by empowering them.  So, in essence, you're saying, "Please don't be racist."  You know, that's what-- you know, you're trying to--  It's like, wait a minute.  I mean first of all, racism is a pathology, you know.  So it's like, you know, it's a sickness.  So, you, you, you're trying to plead with a mentally ill person.  And so, you're empowering this person.  So I'm just saying that it's just a little, sort of a different philosophy, you know.
Speaker 1: So, the language you use is different.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the emphasis on--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the position and that sort of thing is different.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  It's very different in the attitude, that you can see the attitude in the kids who--they're young adults now who went to the school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan], very different attitude, you know.  You know, the young people who went to Nataki, like as kindergarteners--they may be in their mid-thirties, and they're still close as if they--and they may not have even seen each other from high school.  They're still very close.  Because there's a, there's a way--you know, they call it the Nataki way.  You know, it's like "Okay, I got to-- we got to do this the Nataki way."  You know it's like, you know, it's like you turn things back on people, you know, as opposed to just, you know, being very confrontational.  You're not taking anything, you know, but you just turn it back on them and they, you know, they see it that way more so than being, you know, just--  It just-- that was our philosophy.  I remember I presented a paper in, at a psychology convention in 1975.  In my paper I mentioned that, you know, like why you don't start at a very young age talking about racism--you know, just drilling kids about, oh, you know, this and this and this.  I said, you know, it's like if you had a--if you've been in the military--and the way to learn to fight a war is to put you in the war, you see.  You don't do it that way.  You go put them in a nice, safe, environment.  Then you ease them out into those more hostile things.  You don't just go, "Oh, this is a war, I've got to put you out there."  Because you know it's going to get a lot of casualties, you know.  So, you always kind of protect them.  I'm saying for the young child, you want to protect their environment, because you want to make them strong.  So when they do hear this information, they will react to it; they'll digest it very differently.  And to be able to grow up and having your own self as your norm--having yourself as your beauty standards, you know, is-- that's it.  I mean, then you... you know, when things... when you start going up against stuff, you have some kind of-- you know, you have some strength there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a, you know I refer again to Richard Pryor on one of his albums.  He talked about going to Africa and seeing for the first time, you know, black people in charge of everything.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he said "There were no niggers in Africa."
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  It's very different, it's very different.  Your attitude is very different.  You know, I mean, like I said, we have kids... we have some students now who live in France and, you know, they just do a lot of things.  One of our up and coming--here in Detroit, one of the major up and coming play directors is one of our students.  I mean he even, when he writes his bio, he writes down, "I attended Nataki Talibah.  I'm a graduate of the Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse."  Now, who else would write down their elementary school?  You know, you're a grown person and you're writing down where you graduated.  Because in the theatrical area, that's his first experience, and that was his foundation.  And he's, and that whole community thinks so highly of him.  He's 30, maybe 31 years old.  And to give you an example of how highly they think of him, the Y is building a brand new theater and building here.  And his theater company, he will be in charge of the theater for that Y.  He's just 31 years old, you know.  But it's like, but it's a whole different attitude.  And if you're ever around them, they'll always say, "Well, that's the Nataki way, you know."  But it's also the way that you always--you don't look at boundaries.  Nothing is impossible.  Because you didn't grow up saying, oh, you're the only, you're the first.  You didn't grow up like that.  So, nothing was impossible.  It's like, you do it, okay.
Story_ID: 97859
Speaker 1: So, that was our foundation like, say, for our school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan] and why we kind of moved here to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay, so, the school started in what, '77' [1977]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-Eight [1978].
Speaker 2: Seventy-Eight [1978]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And it's still going?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, it's--what's that, 26, 27 years old now.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it's still here in Detroit?
Speaker 1: Still here in Detroit, yes, yeah.  It's now... it was a private school for many years, and now it's a charter school.  I think it transferred to charter maybe close to ten years now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's been the way of a lot of independent black schools.  The New Concept Development Center in Chicago became--
Speaker 1: A charter school?
Speaker 2: Betty Shabazz [International] Charter School now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there are several around the country.
Speaker 1: Well, you can't, you can't--it's, you can't not... you have to do the charter now.  I mean it's very, it's very difficult to...  Well, one, it's very difficult to maintain the momentum.  It's very funny, because the founders of a lot of these schools were the parents of the children, you see.  So, now--
Speaker 2: That's always true.
Speaker 1: --my wife [Carmen N'Namdi] is older than the grandmothers.  I mean, because sometimes... young grandmothers, you know.  I'm not making my wife that old, but it's like, you know, like that's how it is now.  So, it's a different energy.  You know, so, it's good that they have come around, come along.  Because now it's... you're able to do the same things or close to the same things, and not worry about that part of the financial thing.  There's other different types of worries, or different type of difficulties, because now you're part of a system.  You've got to deal with system issues, but you're not dealing with life or death, like oh, we've got (unclear) keep the gas on.  You know, those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 97860
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, what was your role in this?  Did you, did you-- is this a full-time for you after '78' [1978] or did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I was at the University.  But we [N'Namdi and his wife, Carmen N'Namdi] kind of founded the two together.  I worked two jobs.  I worked at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], and I worked at a health clinic in Detroit.  And the first, say, three years my check at the University--I got paid on Wednesday and it got deposited into the bank, and we used my check to make payroll for Friday.  For about three years, we did that.  So I was like the person who, you know, made sure--found the money when it came time to find the money.  Also, we had bus service.  The current mayor [of Detroit], Kwame Kilpatrick, was one of our students.  And he says, "No, you had van service, you didn't have a bus."  (Laughter).  You know, we had the little mini-van, you know.  So, he used to be one of the kids to take home.  And I used to drive the bus, you know, and I would get up at like 6 o'clock and drive the bus.  My wife would meet me at my job, which was not far.  And she would take the bus at 8 o'clock and take the kids to school.  And then I would teach.  And you know, at Wayne State you taught, most of your classes were in the evening.  So, I worked from 8 to 4 at the clinic.  And then in some evenings, say, twice a week, I would have classes in the evening.  But the ones I didn't, when I didn't have a class, I would meet my wife like at 4:15 and then I would drop off-- continue on the bus.  So, 6:30, I would be finished.  So, that was part of my day.  And so, I was more like, that part of the school.  I wasn't part of the teaching and things.  Like I, you know, that wasn't what I did, you know.
Speaker 1: You were very busy, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was busy.  It was a very big team effort.  We started with 18 children, you know, 18 children.  And three of them were ours, you know.  So I remember I was working at the University, and we didn't have a building.  I was interviewing for the school, and we used my office at the University to interview parents.  And they'd say "Where is the school going to be?"  I said, "We'll let you know.  We'll let you know."  (Laughter).  You know, they said, "Where is it going to be."  We finally found a place.  But it was just an interesting experience in starting the school.  It was very rewarding, you know, very rewarding.
Story_ID: 97951
Speaker 1: So what size is the school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan]?  I mean--
Speaker 2: We started with eighteen.  Now it's about, close to five hundred.  We have like a little campus.  We have two buildings.  One is ten thousand square feet.  The other one is thirty thousand square feet.
Speaker 1: Has the move from private school to charter school changed the-- how you approach the curriculum?  Because I know in some of the schools, they start off as--most all of them start off as some kind of private school, you know, with people paying tuition, and sometimes as they could, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because I'm not talking about wealthy people necessarily starting a private school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but people that--
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, let's say this.  It's always change.  First of all, it's always... there's always change.  But the way we look at the change, it's more how do we adapt the philosophy to the new format, to the new parent?  You know, so it's like, you're not relinquishing the philosophy, but you do change.  Because now you have to figure different ways of implementing that philosophy.  And when you first change, it takes a while to make that adjustment.  It's not just something--'cause you-- one, here you start a--you know, you may have a hundred students.  The next thing you know, you've got 250.  And some of these parents don't even know about (laughter) the starting schools, the political movements and all like that, you know.  Because now you're talking about young people.  I mean, you know, I mean the parents in the schools, some of them there are younger than my youngest child, you know.  So, you know, there's a whole different philosophy there, a whole different experience.  So, it has changed.  But it's like, but I wouldn't say you lost it.  You know, it's really more like how now we're adapting it.  And it really is like we always started the school to be more--have an educational influence.  We wanted to do a philosophy that would be shared with other people, you see--you know, with other--  We think of it as an educational philosophy, not just a school.  You know, so by having-- by charter, it really enables us to make-- to really test the philosophy.  See, it's easy to have that philosophy and you've got thirty kids.  You know, everybody, and all the families are all in sync.  But it's a different thing when you've got five hundred.
Speaker 1: Right.  I think, that's part of what I was getting at, too.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you probably draw from a broader range of people.
Speaker 2: A broader range, yes.
Speaker 1: In a charter, everybody can come in (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, everybody--
Speaker 1: But they may not all be motivated the same.
Speaker 2: Right, for the same reason, yeah.  You know, someone says, "Ooh, they do this over there..." you know.  They're like, "I just went there because they have Spanish."  You know, so, things like that.
Speaker 1: Some people come because they it's a better--a place to give their child a more political--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --education.  Some people might come because the discipline is better-- I've got a discipline problem child.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Yeah, totally different reasons, right.
Speaker 1: And here, they--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  But we're, we're, I think we're moving in a very good direction, very-- it's, I think it's ending up being very positive.  And it's really showing the true viability and strength of the philosophy.
Story_ID: 97952
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause-- You know like some of the teachers--the kids do things, and the teacher says, "Only at Nataki [Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan]."  (Laughter).  That's like one of the things. It's like, you know, because the arts is very big at the school.  You know, they do plays, and they do--you know, they take trips.  They take a big family trip every year.  They may go-- they've gone to Chicago [Illinois], to Cleveland [Ohio], just different places where the families would go to the hotels, one of these big hotels that have the family center hotels.  And they go to different, like the museums or something in that area.  They'll do that on weekends.  And in the fall, they always go apple picking.  And they, you know, like on a Sunday, they meet at an apple orchard and they pick apples and have hot cider and donuts, and those things.  So, you know, it's a whole family kind of centered school.  The eighth grade class, I think they take an eighth grade trip.  They go to Washington, D.C.  A couple years ago we took a couple of classes to Chicago.  And I remember meeting [HM Thomas] Tom Burrell, Burrell Advertisment [Burrell Communications Group].  We went by there, and they kind of adopted the school.  And we went by Johnson Publications [Johnson Publishing Company], and he [HM John H. Johnson] had lunch with the children and the school in their cafeteria.  And, you know, so they had these kind of experiences that just is different, you know.  I remember the president of Liberia came to the school.  I can't even remember the president, that was years--
Speaker 2: Who was that, [Samuel] Doe?
Speaker 1: It was back in the seventies [1970s].
Speaker 2: Was that before Doe?
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in the seventies.  The one who was there all the time.  I can't remember--
Speaker 2: [Charles D. B.] King, was that King?
Speaker 1: You wouldn't--
Speaker 2: [William] Tubman, King, one of them [sic, King died in 1961. During the 1970s the President of Liberia was either William Tubman or William R. Tolbert, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's one of the two.
Speaker 1: Right.  And we have photographs.  Like, they did an art project where they wrote--and then they sent their collages to Romare Bearden.  And he wrote, he critiqued them and wrote them back, a letter to the school.  [HM] Diahann Carroll's been there to read to the school.  Lois Mailou Jones is an artist who is from [Washington] D.C.  You know, it's just been a whole host of people.  And we just try to give them a whole kind of experience there at the school.  So, that's what I kind of did, you know, with the school; we've been doing that.
Story_ID: 97953
Speaker 1: But I also had my academic life at that time, and I was at Wayne State [University in Detroit, Michigan].  And as I said, I worked with Geneva Smitherman.  And there, I was, did a lot of research.  I taught courses on family dynamics.  I was in the Center of Black Studies and the College of Education; that was where my appointment was.  And I did some work with the teachers in Education, and also in Black Studies I taught courses on the family.  And we did research.  We did research on child abuse and neglect, substance abuse--you know, those kind of human issues.  But we were--
Speaker 2: Now, did you get involved in rites of passage at all, as such?  I mean, there are so many different forms of it.  And people that have... there's... Nsenga Warfield-Coppock's got a version of a book she's written about it.  And there are... I know the CIBI [Council of Independent Black Institutions].
Speaker 1: Coppock out in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We went to Ann Arbor [University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan] together.
Speaker 2: Did you, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Nsenga Warfield-Coppock?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  We were in...   she was part of our little play group.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nsenga...
Speaker 2: Yeah, Nsenga Warfield-Coppock.  She's written extensively about rites of passage and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't... see, I mean we were real young people together, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her husband at the time was Burt Coppock [Bertram Atiba Coppick], I believe.
Speaker 2: Now I don't know that.  But it's quite possible it was Coppock, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about--Coppack.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think... yeah, because we were all in the--they were all part of the play group.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, their kids were the same kids, you know, yeah.  I didn't get into that, as... you know, as much.
Story_ID: 97954
Speaker 1: Does the school get into that at all, in terms of rites of passage?  When, when youth reach a certain age, they make a, transition into another age group or into adulthood--go from childhood--I mean to (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, we stop at eighth grade, okay.  We keep them eighth-graders.  You know, you're not a man or a woman in the eighth grade.  That's our philosophy, you know.  I still call my 32-year old my kids, right.  But we do, we have those things, because I always thought that that was one of the most important things in development.  I call it "age grading."  And age grading is the ability--no, that you have rights and responsibilities in different age groups.  It's really... rites of passage is just part of age grading, in a sense that it is really one of the more significant... that we call it... you know.  But like, say, part of the whole--like I said, when I studied the family--part of the African tradition--that a kid from one to three, you didn't spank the kid from one to three years old.  They, you know, they had the right to just do what they--you know, you handled them differently, okay.  Okay. Then, from three to six, you had another way, okay.  And I think that, to me, is one of the... to me, you just can't have the rites of passage, you have to have all of it.  Because it's really-- you know, you just don't get there.  You know, you lay foundations, okay.  So, that's always very important.   See, now, when I was a kid, you had that; we had age grading.  You had a way to dress, that you couldn't wait--you're like, "Boy, I'll be glad when I get to be a teenager, and I can start wearing this."  That was all part of those types of things.  So, I had-- we had it incorporated into our school and into our philosophy that way, okay.  And I think that is one of the--that's one of our Achilles' heels now, because we don't have that.  The eighteen-month old dresses just like the grandmother.  You know, they can go get the same outfit.  So, the eighteen-month old, the pre-teen--I mean the elementary school, the pre-teen, the teenager, a mother, or a twenty-year old, you know, which still could be the mother, a thirty-year old and a grandmother could have the whole, same, you know, in vogue kind of outfit, you see, which now you have blurred those lines.  It's not just the outfits, but also, what comes with that outfit comes certain attitudes, you see.  And those attitudes could be a lot of different things.  It could be just, you know, a young woman in her twenties wearing jeans, their clothes may be just a little bit tighter than--you know, that's what you do at that age.  But if you've got it on a young kid, then it's like different.  You're putting him in a situation different than where they are.
Speaker 1: And they could... yeah, the implications of which could--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --could create confrontations and problems.
Speaker 2: Exactly, although--see, where that whole age grading comes in.  So we don't have it, like, the rites of passage like Nsenga [Warfield-Coppock] would have it.  But we do have it in principle, in terms of like, you know, you do certain things at different ages.  Like the fifth grade, for instance, just does a play, you know, at the school.  I mean I know that sounds like-- but that's something they can't wait to do, until they get to fifth grade, you know.  "When I get there, I'll be able to do this."  Eighth grade goes to - On that national--
Speaker 1: To [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: D.C. So, you have things that you work toward.  And you have to work toward those, you have to earn that.  It's just not natural, you know, you earn it.  So, people, their behavior begins to change to fit this new responsibility that they're going to be assuming, you see.  So, I think like the sixth grade may be behind the stage scene.  So, you know, the stagehands and stuff, they handle the lights.  And it's all very-- you know, so they have different things that they, you know, that they do in that way.  So, a lot of stuff, again, we would just put them in there naturally.  But we would not, I don't like... I couldn't see us having a formal-- like "Oh, we're doing the rites of passage."  In other words, I think you got to have all of that first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's not just... you don't want to just do things in a vacuum.  Then it's just a ceremony that you, you've done, but you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe-- I'm a very firm believer in developing this way.  You go horizontal, and you build up slowly going horizontal, because you have built a stronger foundation as opposed to going straight up, vertically.
Story_ID: 97955
Speaker 1: Now, one last question about school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan].  And I know this is a problem in independent schools.  It's when you reach out and take children to--say you go to eighth grade...
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And I know in Chicago [Illinois], high school--being admitted to the right high school is crucial for parents who really know what's going on.  It's like a life or death thing for their child, to get them in the right school.  If you can't get them in that right school, you know, the rest of their life is bound in mysteries and shadows, almost.  You know, because you don't... you can't just put them in any public school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you feel like it's a craps shoot--
Speaker 1: --or go to the one in the neighborhood that you live in.  You've got to get them in the right one.  And coming out of the independent school, you're not in the public school mix.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you may not--I mean, so how do you--how did you all deal with the--
Speaker 2: Well, they--
Speaker 1: --this problem which can be political, educational, and everything--you know, how to get them in the right school.
Speaker 2: Well, here [Detroit, Michigan], some of the schools like Renaissance [High School], Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School], Martin Luther King [High School]--those are testing schools.  So, we get a lot of students that go to those schools, you know.  There're a lot of them, they go to different--some may go to parochial school, and some of them are in the suburbs.  You know, but see, now they're empowered a little different, okay.  Because even those schools, like, say in Chicago, people still make it out of those other schools, okay, even though sometimes it may be a little difficult.  But you'll still make it.  There's still--
Speaker 1: There's so much fear attached to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --going to the wrong one though.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But still, people are still coming out of there making it.  I mean you just can't say, "Oh, no one ever goes to college."  You know, so it's, it's, it's different, you know.  So, they do well in terms of that.  Like there's a school, Cass Technical High School, which is a nationally known school here in Detroit.  There was-- I mean when I was really more active and knew--you know, knew the kids--the principals there liked our kids because they brought a different vibe to the school.  You know, it was a different, it was a different feeling.  So, they always would say, "Oh, that's one of those Nataki kids." You know, that's how they kind of identified us.  So, they didn't have a very big problem with that--you know, with the schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then did they have any problem adjusting to the curriculum, and the whole different approach to teaching in a Cass Tech?  Because Cass Tech is going to be teaching almost from the opposite paradigm.
Speaker 2: Well, and let's remember, the whole thing is to do a foundation so they can build, you know.  Now, they, they, they--I've heard stories where they're trying to correct the teacher. "No," Like, you know, "we were in Africa... we're African people who were formerly enslaved."  But we would never say that we were slaves, okay.  So, they made me go to school and say, "You know, see we were really enslaved, you know."  (Laughter).  So, they have those kind of types of, you know, type of dialogues--you know, trying to, you know, like, you know, "Oh, we were this and that," you know.  So, it's a little different you know.  So that, that... they know.  See, it's like, that's the whole thing.  You roll it out gradually, now you have these kids with a strong foundation.  When they come bumping up against this, they're like, they know that.  I mean, to the point where they can be--I mean I can see my son and some of his good friends who--they're close friends to this day, who went to Nataki.  And they, and they may be listening to somebody speak or something, and someone says something that's really... that's just so against the philosophy.  And they look at each other, and it's like, "did you," as if to say "Did you hear that?"  You know, but you can see what they're saying.  You know, they're just in tune that way, okay.  So, they, you know, it's like-- it's not like a naive perspective on the world.  It's just that you have a foundation on the world, you know.  And that's different, it's different, you know, starting life with a philosophy.  A lot of people don't have a philosophy.  It's like, "What are you doing?"  You know, "What's your philosophy?"  They just live, you know.  They don't have a philosophy.  That's-- you know, that's how--you know, that's how it is.
Story_ID: 97956
Speaker 1: It's like, we would never go up to--like we got drug-free week in our school, you know.  It's like, you know, we don't teach about drugs.  We don't teach about drugs, because you're pre-supposing that everybody's going to be into drugs.  Now, you may teach about having respect for your body, but that covers a whole lot of things, you see.  You know, that covers cleanliness; that covers what you... your diet.  That covers exercise, that covers your perspective on sex and, you know, the use of drugs--everything.  Do you see what I'm saying?  Now, you have a philosophy about what you can, and will, and won't do in terms of your body.  So, you don't have to say don't do drugs.  You know, because it's like you have this other thing, so you don't have to say it.  I didn't grow up with someone telling me not to do drugs.  I never heard someone say, I mean my parents never told me not to do drugs, never. I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, just to be fair, though, some people do now.  I mean, a lot of neighborhoods do.  I mean--
Speaker 1: I understand that.  I'm just trying to-- I'm just saying, I understand how people have to say it.  But what I'm saying also is that the same people who spend a lot of time saying "don't do drugs" do drugs, okay.  But I'm saying if you taught those same children to have respect for their body, you know, be conscious of what they're consuming--that's different.  You see, it's like, oh, this is not a drug, this is something else.  This is not a drug, this is a pill.  You know, so now you got Ecstasy or something like that, because you're not thinking of it like that.  Do you see what I'm saying?  So, you accomplish the same thing, but you're giving them a broader perspective with which to operate.
Speaker 2: More of a positive, pro-active approach to it, then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, I suppose, you know.  See, the things that come into our life-people, most programs in the African-American community come in on a negative thing.  You know, it's like we are guided more by the--say, that ten, fifteen percent of the population that's real negative, or does negative things.  That's what we get guided by.  Most programs are geared towards that, you know, all those things.  So, and ironically, that goes back to E. Franklin Frazier, that I was saying much earlier about that--you know, that whole perspective.  We start off with a negative perspective, and that still exists today.  Patrick Moynihan, the late Senator Moynihan, well, he was a professor, and he picked up on--he just expounded on Franklin's thing and just made it law.  And then you had a poverty program based upon that.  So, our whole thing--things come to us from a negative perspective.  No one ever looks at, like, "what are we doing right, that so many of these kids are going to college?  What is making them get there?"  No one looks at that.  No one looks at "what makes them get there?  What makes the parents"--it doesn't matter how much money they make.  Because a lot of times, people won't make it... they won't say, "How does this mother who makes $20,000 a year raise these kids?"  Okay, "How does this mother, or these two parents who make $200,000 raise this kid?"  Because it's like the same kind of environment.  Both of them can be neglectful.  You know, because you're working all the time, you're gone.  You're neglecting.  Of course, you can buy the trappings, so it appears that you're not.  But still in the end, it's the same.  You know, the other one's working very hard to stay-- just to keep up.  But they're doing the same thing.  So, you need to look at what happens that these children, that propels them ahead?  Not what happens that keeps them out of there, because that doesn't tell you anything.  You know, it, you know, so let's... you know, that's the whole thing in terms of the whole philosophy.  We just focus so much on the lack.  And when you focus on the lack, you get what you focus on.
Story_ID: 97957
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me switch gears a second and ask you about art.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you collect art, I mean, before you started your galleries?  And how did you, I mean, how did-- what was your-- how did your interest in art begin?
Speaker 2: Well, it started when I was in undergraduate school [The Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio].  And in my, in undergraduate school, I would buy art.  And my fellow students would think like, "You're crazy.  You just spent $125 for those paintings."  And I'm like, "Yes."  I mean, I'm paying it off on time, but I spent that money for these paintings.  And I don't know exactly why, or where that came from.  But this was back in the sixties [1960s], I would buy paintings.  And my early paintings were all abstract, too.  I bought a lot of abstract paintings, and again, I don't know why.  I would go to a lot of art fairs and buy things, you know.  But I was like twenty-one years old doing this.  I bought art and antiques, that's what I did at a very young age.
Speaker 1: It's unusual.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: I mean I only knew, I knew a brother named Gordon Lewis in Dayton [Ohio] that did that.  He was a young man, he was a brother of a young lady I knew.  He went to Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.] and he bought art.  He has, he's got probably a valuable collection, I would say.  He just started collecting them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I don't know.  My early pieces, I still have many of them.  But I, I, just bought it because I liked it.  I didn't know artists, I didn't-- I mean, I bought people who were artists that I knew.  But I didn't know like the historical artists, the people-- I didn't study art.
Speaker 1: So, you don't know what inspired you to start collecting original art?  Did you have original art at home when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, as earlier I stated, there was a lot of us children in the house.  And my mother [Ima Jo Winston Johnson] liked to decorate, so she would always have things on the wall.  And so, I liked to decorate.  It came from that kind of perspective, I liked to decorate.  So it turned into, like, I started buying art.  Then by my senior year, I bought a lot of antiques.  I mean I still have-- I still have furniture now from my college apartment in my living room, or in one of my dens or something.  I still have that, because it was good furniture.  It was antique furniture I was buying at that time.  I didn't know exactly where this came from.  I just thought it was like... when people asked me that question, I think of it as coming from like, say my mother who always, my-- I liked to decorate.  I liked, I used to like doing that.  Because we would get new furniture a lot, and so I always liked to come in and straighten it out.  I would straighten out the-- straighten up the house and things like that.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about furniture as being antique, or this being old, or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was almost the opposite.  Because we-- I was the fifth generation in the house.  My mother didn't want antiques because she, when she moved to the house, it was my father's [George Richard Johnson] house that had been passed down, and it had all these antiques.  And she was like, "I don't want this old stuff," you know.  She was like a young woman from Texas, you know, they don't want that.  You know, she was like, "Uh-uh, uh-uh, I want new stuff," you know.  So, that's (laughter) that was my introduction to antiques.  So, were not into antiques.  You know, she was like, she wanted new furniture, you know.  So, but it's... I don't know where it really came from.  But it was like started in 1968.  So I was 20, 21, 22 years old, and I started buying it.  And I just started buying it, you know.
Story_ID: 97958
Speaker 1: Now, when I was in high school [Columbus East High School in Columbus, Ohio], I gave my dances.  And when I gave dances, I would always contract with the students--my friends who were student artists.  You know, they would make my posters.  So, you know, I always had kind of a little respect for it in that way, you know.  So, I did collect it.  Then, like, when I was in Ann Arbor [Michigan], people always thought we had like a real adult house.  You know, when you come to our home, you know, we had art on the wall.  We had antiques; we had an old Victrola [Victor Talking Machine Company], the crank record player, you know; this antique rocking chairs, and things like that.  They're like, "How do you get this kind of look in a house?"  You know, but we all had student housing, right.  You know, so everybody else had that ready-made stuff.  And I always thought I was an adult, you know, I was a serious adult.  "Y'all just, y'all playing at this," you know.  So, we-- but that's... I don't know exactly where it came from.  We never really talked about it like that.  But I remember, like I said, my first big purchase was $125.  But to put that into perspective, at [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] at the time, $150 was tuition for one quarter.
Story_ID: 97959
Speaker 1: Tell us how you got the idea for the gallery.
Speaker 2: Okay. The gallery, let's see.  Well, I opened the gallery... well, after moving to Detroit [Michigan], I started-- I started buying art from a person from Chicago [Illinois], Archie Listenbee.  He would come through town and I would buy art.  And people would say, "Why don't you get this art."  So, I started off having him come through.  And people would come by and buy a few pieces.  And so, then I kind of thought that art was very important to have in your community.  And, and part of psychology is that I thought that, you know, you got to be--really support your culture.  You know, you've got to be a supporter of your culture, because your culture is your fiber; that's what holds your part of civilization together.  So, so then I decided to do a gallery.  I had a partner, Rosalind Reed, and we were opening up what was called the Jazzonia Gallery in 1981.  The Jazzonia is from a poem by Langston Hughes, where he talks about culture.  And my wife [Carmen N'Namdi] kind of gave that--we got that name, she gave us that name.  And after about two years, we ended our partnership, and I've changed the name of the gallery to G.R. N'Namdi Gallery.
Story_ID: 97960
Speaker 1: And let's see.  From there, we--G.R. N'Namdi Gallery.  We were in downtown Detroit.  I had two locations there--one in Harmonie Park, and then one in the David Whitney Building.  From there--I'm just giving you some of our movement.  Then we'll kind of go back and kind of talk about more of the content of the gallery.  From there, we moved out to Birmingham [Michigan].  Birmingham is a suburb of Detroit.  And at the time, in the eighties, Birmingham was like the center for the gallery.  It's like a very wealthy suburb... and so, a lot of your major galleries.  So I thought it was very important to have an art gallery where our art is in the middle of the gallery district, okay, as opposed to, you know, being like an offshoot, you know.  So we moved out to Birmingham and we stayed out there for thirteen years, okay.  Eight years ago, we opened in Chicago.  And eight months ago, we just opened in New York [New York City, New York], in May of 2004, yeah.  The gallery--we took more of a kind of formal approach to art.  I'm not, I was not trained in the arts.  You know, I just kind of learned by talking... speaking with artists and having discussions.  Before I opened the gallery, I spent maybe like close to a year and a half just going to New York meeting with artists and talking about their work, and just learning about art.  Because I didn't know... I mean, like the work I bought earlier, I bought it just because I liked it, you know.  Then I started learning more about the fine art.  The fine art, meaning that's what the museums buy.  That's the collectible, the major collectible work.  Okay.  And so, that's when I began to learn about it.  And I remember opening [the Jazzonia Gallery] in 1981, I opened with my first show, which was all New York artists in Detroit, and all abstract artists.  And that was just unheard of, first of all.  You know, it was like, one, I didn't have... I didn't include Detroit into it.  And two, it was all abstract.  And people would come in and say, "Well, why didn't you use the Detroit artists?"  Or, I remember one comment, it was like "I thought it was supposed to be a black gallery," you know.  And I would say, "All these artists are African American here."  You know, so that's how I would... you know.  But then we end up becoming a major abstract gallery that presents abstract art.  Because people kind of grew to it, you know, in that way.
Story_ID: 97961
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the artists are not all African American now, are you saying?  Or are they?
Speaker 2: Well, the gallery is primarily African American artists, but it's not totally.  We do have-- we do a lot with, like, say Latin American artists.  Then we have other artists.  We have Japanese, we have Chinese artists and Korean.  We have European-American artists, European artists.  We, but it's not, but it's primarily African American.  It has more about style.  Now, if you go into our galleries, normally you could not say it's an African American gallery.  Because our style is such that it, it just--it could just be a gallery, okay, any gallery.  Because we don't-- you don't come in and see a lot about, you know, the faces or things like that.
Speaker 1: No representational art, so much.
Speaker 2: Representational, yeah.  We have it, you know, but it's still, it's still-- it may be only thirty percent of what we do.  So, seventy percent of the time, it's pretty abstract, you know.  So that's, that's, that's what we do there.  And then we take-- When we deal with artists, we deal with-- even when I say African artists, we deal--or African-American artists--we deal with African artists from the Diaspora, not just say African.  We have artists from France, and you know, Brazil.  You know, just different... you know, like that.
Story_ID: 97962
Speaker 1: Now, how does it work?  Do you purchase most of the works and then re-sell them?  Or how do you--
Speaker 2: No, we do a lot on consignment.  But we're like an exhibiting gallery.  So, our exhibits stay up between six and eight weeks.  And now, since we have three of them, we kind of rotate those exhibitions.  They go from one gallery to the next.  I mean, not necessarily immediately afterwards, but, so that's what we do there.  So, you know, so that's what we do there in that way.  So, we do-- we work primarily on consignment with the different artists.  But we're a gallery that--we work to promote the artists, okay.  It's not just about selling the work, but it's also about promoting their career.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because in the art field, the galleries are very important.  Because, see, the museums take their cues from galleries, alright.
Speaker 1: Well who--well, go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Who are some of the artists?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was going to ask that.
Speaker 2: Some of the artists that we work with--we work with [HM Edward] Ed Clark out in New York [New York City, New York] who grew up in Chicago [Illinois]; [Alvin] Al Loving in New York, he grew up in Detroit [Michigan]; Allie McGhee, who's from Detroit who still lives here; Nanette Carter, who's in New York; [HM] Howardena Pindell from New York; Vicente Pementel, who's from the Dominican Republic but now lives in Paris; Tyrone Mitchell, the sculptor, from New York; James Little from New York; [HM] Richard Hunt from Chicago; William T. Williams.  Some of the, we deal with some of the major, major artists around the country, particularly in the African American community.  Carol Ann Carter, who's a professor at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]; you know, [HM] Artis Lane out of--
Speaker 1: Los Angeles [California], right.
Speaker 2: Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Los Angeles, right.
Speaker 2: So we have kind of a mixture of artists that we, that we kind of represent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She's very, she's real strong in terms of representation, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, she is, you know.
Speaker 1: So there's a mixture of different--
Speaker 2: Barbara Chase-Riboud.  Barbara Chase is out of France, you know, she lives in France and Italy, you know. And oh, yeah, Herbert Gentry is one of the artists.  We do carry some of the work, historical works, like Jacob Lawrence, Beauford Delaney, Romare Bearden and those people... Charles Alston.  Like we say, we've exhibited Lois Mailou Jones.  But we do, we do, like I said, we try to do formal exhibitions.  We now do catalogs with our shows that travel.  So, we have a document of what they do.  So, you know, those are the-- that's what we kind of do with the business.  And like I say, we try to position the gallery more so now to become an important institution in art.  Because the more important that the gallery becomes in the art business, the more the museums or curators will listen to what the galleries-- they will know what the gallery is presenting, you see.
Story_ID: 97963
Speaker 1: What's the market like for black art?  I mean who do you sell to?  Is it mainly people who just want art for their home, or the hotels and institutions, businesses?  Who are the--what's the market?
Speaker 2: It's a mixture.  We have, we have a lot of different people that we, that we sell to.
Speaker 1: [We should probably pause a second.  One second.] Okay, alright.  So were talking about the market.
Speaker 2: The market for art.  Well, we do a lot individually in terms of the art.  We... the individual collector... some businesses do collect.  But we primarily work with people who want to collect.  And it goes across races and even economic levels.  You know, I always say I got a schoolteacher plan.  Like, when a schoolteacher wants to buy art, I've got a plan for you, you know.  (Laughter). So, we try to help build the collection.  We want people to get interested in art, and being proud of having an art collection.  And I always encourage people to be collectors.  We do spend a lot of time educating people about art.  We probably spend more time particularly initially.  Because we feel that the more you know about what we do and how we do it, our job becomes easier to do, you know.  Because we don't have things that are just--the work of art to me kind of, has a certain-- it's an intellectual dialog that you're going to have also with it.  You know, it's not something you can say... you walk past a window and, "Ooh, I love that."  You know, you might.  But a lot of times it takes a little bit more, you know.  The fine art is something you don't buy a lot of times just on a whim.  You know, you can.  But it's like a lot of times people have to be educated about what they're looking at, you know.  So, we do spend a lot of time in that way.
Story_ID: 97964
Speaker 1: So, you just [G.R. N'Namdi Gallery] opened up in New York [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: I just opened up in New York.  And it's been very well received.  We're at this point... we're probably the oldest African American owned gallery in the country.  Now, there's other people who've been out there, but they may be artists who started off selling their own work.  Or they're like private dealers.  But I'm talking about gallery-- gallery as like you have a storefront, a meter on that's operating 24 hours in terms of expenses.  You know, we're like the oldest in the country in that regard.
Speaker 1: Now, do you ever do prints and that sort of thing, prints and all of that?
Speaker 2: Yes, but maybe... I may be saying something different.  When I say print, it may be different than what you say is a print.  Okay, when I talk about prints, I'm talking about graphics, which are original works of art.  I'm talking about lithographs and serigraphs.  See, there's a lot of art in the African-American community that people call prints, but they're really reproductions.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: Sold in the bookstore and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they call them prints, you know.  But I'm not-- no, I don't handle those things.  Although in my early career, I was buying them.  But I didn't know that I was buying reproductions.  People said prints, you know, so that's what I would buy, you know.  But after a while, you learn, you know.  I learned in different ways, you know, about, you know, whether it was different--whether it was not, you know.  So, I'm kind of a personal student.  If you have some information, I will sit down and try to get that information from you, and learn from you.  I respect that, you know.
Story_ID: 97965
Speaker 1: What's-- now you've been successful at this, you know.  Where a lot... some people started galleries and they don't do very well.  But you've been pretty successful.  Is there, is there a formula to this kind of success, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think our formula-- Well, one, we don't think of ourselves as being successful yet.  You know, we think we're moving ahead and going in the right direction, but we're not successful yet.  You know, we always-- And that's what keeps us moving ahead, is that we think-- But one, I think our approach, our educational approach to art is very important.  Service is another thing that is very important, you know, in terms of art.  When I first started out, I would take things out to your home and people would say "I don't understand this work."  I would say, "Let me just hang it up."  Then they said, "Well, I'm getting kind of used to this here."  Okay, because a lot of times when you haven't grown up with things on your walls, you don't realize what you have been-- the lack of visual stimulation and energy that you've been living around, it's just not there.  So, what happens is, you go to take it down, and they say "Oh, man, leave it here, wow.  This place is totally different without that."  So, we began to be able to place a lot of art that way, because it had that kind of a-- people began to see.  And so we spent a lot of time with it that way, educating people and getting people used to what they want to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so many-- I think, well, African-Americans probably represent kind of a new market, a market that's opening up in terms of fine art, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it is, it is.  But we haven't really touched the market.  But it's a new market, but it's also a market that-- but art is general is really just opening up.  You know, if you look, if you go back twenty-five years, it was a smaller group of everybody dealing with art.  But with the African American market it is, it is a new market.  But it is a market that--you know, we've not even got one percent of one percent of that market yet, you know--I mean the potential of the market.  You know, because it's-- the gallery system is a system that takes a lot of time with people.  So, it's not a business that you can have a whole lot of customers.  You know, you don't operate in having mass, because you're not selling in mass volume, you know.  It's like you can get one person, and they may take up a good--they may take up two solid weeks, working on that person, okay.  So, it's not like you come in and you see it and you take it home.  It's like-- it just doesn't happen that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Story_ID: 97966
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  This is away from the gallery.  But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I always-- that question for me-- I will just kind of apply it to myself--what I would like to bring or leave, you know, or contribute.  And I, I, I'd like to-- and Detroit's [Michigan] a very good model for this.  Because it's one of these cities that, good or bad, you know, whatever issues that you have to deal with, the African American community has to deal with it.  So I would like to be able to say you leave a foundation, or help build a foundation for greater self-sufficiency, so that you can just-- you build, say you build up your cultural district, so that now you have a--it becomes a very touristy destination.  Which then, not only helps the artists and the galleries, but also it creates a number of other jobs and off-shoot jobs.  So, that's what I'd like to see--that we use our culture, we maintain ownership and possession, possess-- possessive of the culture.  And at the same time, we become the evaluators of our own culture, you know, and not have our culture based upon someone else's.  You know, but what are we doing?  Okay, so I see that as a very strong component of what I would like to contribute, or like to work towards, you know, in the arts, you know.  The-- Like here in Detroit, we do a lot of things in the arts in terms of community projects.  We just did a-- we took trash cans, for instance, and made them all public art.  You know, I got funded.  The governor appointed me to the Michigan Arts and Council Committee, you know.  So, I'm more like setting those things up like that, to-- so that we can... everything can be taken further.  You know, I'd like my son [Jumaane N'Namdi], for instance, to take the gallery [G.R. N'Namdi Gallery] to a much different level than say I have, I've taken it.  And if, say, if I had grandkids--I don't have any now.  But if I do, and they want to be in this business, that they can take it another level further on.  But we're always building on what we have, you know.  So I think that will be, to me, my contribution, that I'd like to say.
Story_ID: 97967
Speaker 1: Now, of all the things you've done so far--and you've done a lot of different things.  Is there any one major thing that you would do differently at this point?
Speaker 2: No, I couldn't say that, because my philosophy doesn't allow me to say I would do anything different in the past.  Because I think whatever you've done or experienced in the past is your base for what you're doing for the future.  But I guess I would just say, to try to learn more and more from what I've already done, you know.  Because I think that's--to want to change, or to hope to change, is-- you have to go through what you have to go through.  Now, I work with a lot of people.  A lot of young people come to me and ask me-- they want to start businesses or something like that.  I try to, I try to explain to them how to-maybe-- I'm like, "Well, you're going to have to go through all these steps.  There's fifteen steps.  I can really tell you how to avoid ten of them.  But you won't... but you're not able to do that.  To be able to be successful, you're going to have to go through some of them.  But I'm going to show you, there may be five of them that you don't have to go through.  So, at least you can use my experience not to go through five of them, and you can only go through ten."  But I can't avoid-- you can't avoid all the steps, you see.  So, I try to work with people that way--you know, to use my experience to help them more so than--you know, I want to say, "Oh, I want to do something different."  I've always been a person who loved where I am now.  You know, it's like, "Wow, this is a nice age to be."  You know, I always felt better... getting older and having those experiences--you know, like losing a daughter [Nataki Talibah] and my father at that age.  I mean, I was, wasn't even thirty years old.  But it was, it's like a terrible, tough experience.  But it was one that was like, it was life-changing.  And it's like-- and it's, it's one that you-- you know, it's like, it becomes something that you have gone through.  So, it becomes something that is part of you, and you cherish that, having that experience.  So, you don't look on it like its negative.  It's like, you know, it's positive.  It's like, you know, it's like, how many of these people had an opportunity to have a daughter for fourteen months?  You know, so that becomes positive to me.  Because that's the only way I can look at it.  Because if I look at it the other way, you know, I'm only looking at what I lost, or what appears lost.  But this way, I'm always looking at what I had.
Story_ID: 97968
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at your career to this point--and you've done so many things-- I mean involved... from the age of a little kid--you know, all these jobs.  And I mean, what would you consider at this point, although you're still young, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  I think, really, I guess it's the school and the contribution to the arts, I think.  It's, it's--although the arts is a business, it's also--it takes a certain amount of dedication.  It takes a certain amount of sacrifice to do it.  Because if I, you know, if I wanted to do something--if I was just in it for the money, for instance, I could have go and gotten a McDonald's franchises if I just wanted money.  Or, there was something else I could have done.  But it was more of my commitment to the arts.  So, I think it's really going to be in the arts and education that--you know, the founding, the co-founding of the school [Nataki Talibah Schoolhouse in Detroit, Michigan].  And then also doing the gallery [G.R. N'Namdi Gallery] and having a son [Jumaane N'Namdi] who's carrying it on, and having daughters who, you know, they work at the school.  They're still supportive of the gallery, you know, and understand the big picture of what it means, you know, in terms of--you know, as an institution and its contribution.  So, it's, I think we have always started off more from a contribution standpoint as opposed to making money, in terms of our projects, you know.  It wasn't like-- I didn't start the gallery to make money.  I started to have a gallery because I was working at the university [Wayne State University in Detroit, Michigan] when I had the gallery-- when I first started the gallery, you know.  So, I think, I think it's making that contribution to the arts; I think that would be what I've done right now, you know.
Story_ID: 97969
Speaker 1: Now, were your parents [George Richard Johnson and Ima Jo Winson Johnson] surprised that you-- at your rising academia and all that?  I know your father died just before you got your Ph.D., or while you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --processing getting that.  But-
Speaker 2: I don't know if surprised.  Extremely proud, very proud.  I remember-- my father, you know, he was just-- you know, he kind of rolled with you, you know what I mean.  So, he was always kind of supportive.  I remember we were part of the same fraternity, but I didn't grow up knowing that he was part of this fraternity.  So, when I joined, when he learned I joined, he just started relating to me like I'm part of--  And then I learned, I said...  He said, "Oh, I was in the fraternity, and your uncle was in the fraternity."
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Kappa.
Speaker 1: Okay, Kappa.
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi, yeah.
Speaker 1: Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 2: Right, right, Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  So, you know, so I didn't know that until I joined in college.  You know, so because he didn't-- we didn't talk about, you know, those years as much.  But, so, he was always proud, you know, in terms of doing--proud of what he had done, and I mean proud of us, his children, and things like that.  And my mother was very proud, too.  She was, she died--  I had the gallery and the school, and things like that.  But she, my mother died when I was 40.  So, I'm like 58 now, so it's been a while.  But she, I remember she came for a long visit to Detroit [Michigan].  She was ill, she knew that she was ill.  She had lung cancer, she was a smoker.  And so, she came spending some time.  And I remember her saying how proud she was.  And then she talked about, you know, us naming ourselves.  She says like, "I'm so proud--" you know, because at first there was family resistance--you know, like, you're named after your father; you know, you can't do that.  But anyway, she was like so proud that... she says, "You had to do this like this."  You know, so she was really proud of it.
Story_ID: 97970
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question we ask is similar to legacy.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Um, oh.  (Laughter).  How would I like to be remembered?  I guess everybody would like to be remembered as somewhat of a good guy or something like that.  But I don't think I need to have the "good guy" accolades, you know.  You know, it's more... that's okay, but I don't really need to have that.  I need-- I think I would like just to be someone who was focused, directed, and made a contribution, you know.  So, it's just that way.  I mean, just like-- it's interesting.  Because yesterday--you know, I mentioned earlier that I did counseling and things like that.  But just yesterday, I was getting a cup of coffee.  And someone said, "You may not remember me.  But twenty-five years ago, you came to my agency.  You were a counselor.  You know, and you volunteered your time, and I really want to thank you.  You did such a good job."  And I'm like, you know, you look back and like, you just think you passed through, you know.  And here this person--I mean just yesterday talking about twenty-five years ago.  And I'm like, he said this agency.  I said, "Oh, yeah, I remember that.  We used to go upstairs."  He said, "Yeah, that's it."  You know, so I like to let people know, like... there's going to be some people who remember me that way.  And there's going to be some people who... "You know, as an art dealer, he would never show my work," you know.  (Laughter).  And there's some who-- "He always showed my work.  He was the big picture."  He was this and that.  So, I just want people to think I'm like, just a contribution, you know, that you were a person who--you know, made a contribution.  You know, it was about adding something to it.  That's really it, you know.  It's like... because I'm not a good guy, I'm not a bad guy.  Just a guy, you know, just trying to add something to our, to the greater good for humanity and us, particularly African American people.  So, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, Sir.
Speaker 2: You're welcome. Thank you.
