Story_ID: 106369
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today, with, with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Kojo Nnamdi, K-O-J-O, N-N-A-M-D-I.
Speaker 1: And now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Kojo Nnamdi is my professional name, but it's the name by which most people, including the members of my immediate family, refer to me because I've used it as my professional name for so long.  I was born and christened, baptized Rex Orville Montague Paul in Guyana, South America, in January of 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But by the year 1970, my ideological journey had take me to a place where I identified very closely with Africa and considered my English name, as we said in those days, a slave name, a name that had been bestowed on my family by others, and thought that it was appropriate for me to choose an African name.  It coincided with the time when I started working in radio, and so I chose the African name and used it on the radio and kept using it on the radio for the last forty years, but never legally changed my name.  So that despite the fact that I am generally known to the world as Kojo Nnamdi, my official documents don't say that.  I chose the name Kojo because in a Ghanaian language it means born on Monday, which I was.  And I chose the surname Nnamdi because I was an admirer of Nnamdi Azikiwe, the first independent leader of Nigeria.  And because I had such great regard for him, I decided to choose his name.  Even though Nnamdi is usually used in Nigeria as a Christian name, I chose it as a last name.  The result of this is that in my broadcasting career, even though I myself am from the Caribbean, people from Ghana and Nigeria have often been involved in furious arguments about which one of those countries I'm really from (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, it could be both--
Speaker 2: Could be both.
Speaker 1: --and, and we just don't know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, but okay, that's a good one.  And, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 8th, 1945.  I was born in what was then British Guiana, South America.  Since independence in 1966, it's been known as Guyana, G-U-Y-A-N-A. It's the only English speaking country in South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you born in Georgetown [Guyana] or, or, or some other town?
Speaker 2: I was born and lived my entire life in Guyana right in the center of the city of Georgetown, at a location that was so central that it was where my friends gathered, where my elder brothers' friends gathered, where my eldest sister's friends gathered because it was in such a central location in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and let's see.  Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a radio talk show host.  I generally describe myself as a broadcaster because during the forty years I've been involved in broadcasting, I have held several positions.  I started out as the news editor at Howard University Radio WHUR here in 1973.  And during that time I worked as news editor, news reporter, ultimately news director.  And then in 1985, I moved to Howard University Television where I hosted a talk show called "Evening Exchange," which I continued doing until my retirement from Howard in 2011.  And in 1998, I also started doing a talk show [The Kojo Nnamdi Show] at WAMU Radio in Washington [D.C.], which I am still doing today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 30th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the studios of WAMU-FM American University Radio in Washington at 4401 Connecticut Avenue, NW, in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 106370
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we have to ask that only require a short answer.  They're sort of a warm-up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess I do.  The question is what is my favorite food.  My wife prepares a variety of dishes, and I think the one I like the most is her grilled chicken.  However, being from Guyana, I also have a favorite food from that country that's called cook-up rice, which my wife also prepares very well.  So I would say grilled chicken and cook-up rice are my two favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Antigua, West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: This comes from a song: the greatest thing you'll ever learn is just to love and be loved in return [From Nat King Cole's 'Nature Boy'].
Story_ID: 106371
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so I'm gonna ask about your family history now.  I'm, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's side, but separately, then we'll put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Gladys, G-L-A-D-Y-S, Alethea, A-L-E-T-H-E-A, Paul, P-A-U-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Paul was her married name.  Before that she was a Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is April 17th, 1908, and she was born in British Guiana, South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what, what, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them and are there any stories about their activities and what they were going through historically, you know, in the past?
Speaker 2: I can't trace mother's family very far back.  Her parents, who live--who were alive when I was born, but both of my grandparents on her side died shortly after I was born, I think before my first or second birthday.  And they lived in our home during that time.  I cannot tell you their names.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did your mother grow up in Georgetown or?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Georgetown and she grew up in Georgetown, but she went to boarding school in Barbados for a while and then returned to Guyana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is something special.  I mean, I take it--I don't think everybody gets a chance to go to boarding school, right?
Speaker 2: No, apparently her parents were fairly well off and chose to send her to boarding school in Barbados because they thought that would be the best education she could get at the time.
Speaker 1: So now did your mother go on to college or?
Speaker 2: No, my mother never went to college.
Speaker 1: And in terms of your grandparents, I mean did they--what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  As I said, I think--as my mother grew up and learned to drive when she fifteen years old because her parents were fairly wealthy, but I have--I either have no idea or do not remember what they did for a living.  My oldest sister knows about these things a lot more than I do.  I was the child of--when I was born my father was forty-five, my mother was thirty-seven, and they didn't--my mother did speak some of her parents, but my father never did.  So I, I didn't--I don't know a great deal about my grandparents.
Story_ID: 106372
Speaker 1: Now there--are there stories that, that--about the black community in Georgetown--I mean--I guess every--most of--most pe--people there are black already, but they--but is, is there any stories about the history of that com--community and how your, your family fits into it?
Speaker 2: Only on to some extent my father's [Hugh Eustace Paul] side, because Guyana's a country that's divided between an African and an East Indian population.  East Indian population today is slightly outnumbering the African population.  But where I grew up in Georgetown it was mostly African or black population.  And my mother [Gladys Alathea Duncan] said that her father had I think eleven brothers and sisters, all of whom had passed by the time I was born, and so I never knew anything about them.   But I knew that my father's father, my grandfather on my father's side, came from the Bahamas.  And he was what they called a pan boiler, which was a skill that was necessary in the sugar industry at that time in Guyana.  And it was said that my father's father had two brothers, none of whom I ever knew.  And my father was significantly darker than my mom.  And in places like Guyana where shades of color made a significant difference, I would suspect that my father and his family may have had a sense of, of, of racial consciousness, if you will, that may have been greater than my mother's, but I don't know for sure, I don't.
Story_ID: 106373
Speaker 1: I want to ask about your father [Hugh Eustace Paul] in a minute; I just wanted to--to make sure we get your mother's [Gladys Alathea Duncan] side.  So they--her parents were well off, but you're, you're not quite sure what they did?
Speaker 2: No, and they--and my mother had an extremely large extended family among whom we grew up.  That was definitely in the African tradition, that I have--had and have to this day--a wealth of cousins and uncles, none of whom were first cousins, maybe a few second cousins.  But the extended was so large that no distinction was made over how closely related these cousins, and uncles, and aunts were; it was just dozens of them.  And some of them lived in rural areas, and when they came to Georgetown on business or on vacation, would stay at our home and spend time with us.  Our home was always full of people.  The door was never closed.  And it was for us children a wonderful and remarkable environment in which to grow up, because it never mattered to us exactly how we were related to these people.  Once we were told they were cousins, or aunts, or uncles, that's how we accepted them.  And on occasion we went into the country areas and spent time with them.  And to this day, my sister and I and my brothers swap stories constantly about all of these relatives that we had.  But as the youngest born in the family, I am very vague as to exactly what these--what the relations were.  But my mother had a very large extended family, and as I recall, she said it's because her father had eleven brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother's parents have large holdings of land or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  As far as I know, when my mother's parents died, I'm not aware of anything that she inherited.  She had older siblings, much older siblings, most of whom had died by the time I was born so I never knew them.  They may have inherited something, but nothing that I'm aware that my mother ever inherited.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, let--well, what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was what would be described today as a housewife; however, she was also a seamstress.  And so to augment my father's earnings, she sewed; she made clothes for various people.  She sewed dresses for women; she sewed--made most of her own clothing; made every pair of pajamas I ever wore in my life, along with my sister and my brother.  And most of her days were spent between the kitchen and the sewing machine.  When I was growing up, the sewing machine, because it was an old Singer sewing machine that had enough room in the bottom of it for me to fit snugly while my mother was sewing, a lot of my time was spent sitting under that sewing machine pretending I was driving a car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where she spent a lot of her time.
Story_ID: 106374
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Hugh, H-U-G-H, Eustace, E-U-S-T-A-C-E, Paul, P-A-U-L.  He was born on February 14th, 1900, in British Guiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and once again, was, was he born in Georgetown or, or?
Speaker 2: He was born in Georgetown.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: His father was a pan boiler, a, a, a skill trade in the sugar industry, who immigrated to Guyana from the Bahamas and who later went to Ghana to teach pan boiling--or went to West Africa; I'm not sure it was Ghana--went to West Africa to teach pan boiling.  And I am not sure if and when he ever returned to Guyana, but I know he went to West Africa.  And my father--
Speaker 1: So you never met your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Never met any of my grandparents that I'm aware of, and my father didn't talk a great deal about his father or about his parents period.  I don't anything at all about my grandmother, only that little bit about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: So, so now did your father have a chance to go to school and finish and--
Speaker 2: My father was forced to leave school, my sister tells me, when he was fourteen years old because that's the point at which his father or mother, whoever was his primary caretaker at the time, died.  And so he left school at fourteen years old and worked for the rest of his life.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what, what kind of work did he do?
Speaker 2: He was a clerk at a Canadian shipping company--Canadian ship building company--called Sprostons, S-P-R-O-S-T-O-N-S, where he worked for forty-nine years, retiring at the age of sixty-five.
Speaker 1: Forty-nine years at the same--
Speaker 2: Yep, at the same company.
Speaker 1: --company.  Okay, so did he have any stories that he shared with you about growing up or--
Speaker 2: Not, not a great deal that I remember.  When he chided my brother and me for not going to church regularly enough, he would tell us that when he was our age they went to church every Sunday because they called it going to get a mouthful.  And they went to get a mouthful every Sunday to start their week off right.  But beyond that, he didn't talk a great deal about his growing up.  This much we knew because friends of his told us that when he was a young man he was revered as a great dancer.  And he always--he didn't much like talking about that.  People would claim that they saw him win trophies for dancing.  He always deemphasized it and said they were exaggerating.  We later found out after his death that this was all true, that bandleaders in his day used to ask him to come to parties in which they were playing, and then advertise on the flyers that Eustace Paul would be dancing at their party as a way of attracting people to the party.  And I never knew why he deemphasized it so much, why he pretended it wasn't true until my brother told me just about a year ago that my father used to say: where did it get me?  And so he apparently felt that it didn't do much for him, so there was no need for him to highlight it in his life.  He was a modest man.
Speaker 1: And he had a talent that didn't have a fi--any financial reward in his--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --his community.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact one of Guyana's oldest bandleaders, a guy named Tom Charles, lived his final decades in Washington [D.C.].  And when he met me at a function, he is the one who said, "Son, when my band was playing, I would go and ask your father to come to the dance.  And if he agreed I would put his name on the flyers without his permission.  And then he would see his name on the flyers, and he would stop me in the streets and say I told you I was coming to the party.  Why'd you put my name on the flyer?"  He said, "I said that's the way I get people to come to the party."  When I reflect on that, today that would be worth money.  He would--he would get paid for doing that today, but in those days that didn't happen.  So it was really after he died that I found out just how great a dancer he was.
Speaker 1: Well, what style of dance did he do?
Speaker 2: The Charleston, the jitterbug; all of the dances that they were doing in the early part of the twentieth century he had apparently mastered them all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the--these are the dances with big band music.
Speaker 2: Yeah, correct.
Speaker 1: Like the Lindy Hop.
Speaker 2: Waltz, the Lindy Hop, that kind of thing.  Yeah, heard he was very good at all of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And on the few occasions when we were growing up and he would waltz with my mother [Gladys Alathea Duncan], it was clear that he was very graceful and smooth as a dancer, but he didn't do a whole lot of it.
Story_ID: 106375
Speaker 1: Now, now what did--so your--okay.  Is there a story about how your parents [Hugh Eustace Paul and Gladys Alathea Duncan] met?
Speaker 2: There's not a story about how they met, but there's--there is a story that because my mother came from well-off circumstances, there was a story about my grandmother asking my father when he asked for my mother's hand in marriage how would he be able to support her in the manner to which she had become accustomed, and his responding that he would support her in the manner to which she would become accustomed (laughter).  That's the only story I know about his proposal--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'cause he was a humble clerk and he knew that that's how my mother would have to adjust the life, and she did; she did very well.
Story_ID: 106376
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now when you consider your parents' [Hugh Eustace Paul's and Gladys Alathea Duncan's] personalities, their dispositions or sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: In my bearing and the way I walk I definitely take after my father, in terms of physical resemblance and demeanor.  In terms of my personality, especially my affection for humor, I take after my mother.  I didn't realize how much my mother laughed until she spent her last ten years living with me here in Washington.  And what struck most people who came to visit with her, as they described her, was how jolly she was.  She loved to laugh, and I think that's what I take from her.
Story_ID: 106377
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how many-- do you have any--now you have siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How many do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can, can, can you name them from I guess the oldest to the youngest, and put yourself in the order, and let us know a little bit about what they're doing?
Speaker 2: The reason why I'm hesitating here is because the first--the oldest of my siblings, Hugh, H-U-G-H, Aleister Roland Paul, P-A-U-L, died--was born on February 1st, 1940, and died on November 12, 2013.  My sister, Jacqueline Esta, E-S-T-A, Sandra, S-A-N-D-R-A, Paul was born on November 13th, 1941.  I, you have my birthday, am the third son.  And I have a younger brother, Maurice, M-A-U-R-I-C-E, Paul, who was adopted after I left home.  He actually was a friend of mine, and I am unsure of his birthday.
Speaker 1: So he was adopted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He came to us--my mother [Gladys Alathea Duncan] used to tell the story that my youngest brother came to spend the day with me and never left.  And after I left home to come abroad, when I went back home--his name used to be Maurice Simon, and when I went back home his name was Maurice Paul, and my mother revealed that she had adopted him 'cause his own mother had died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're still very close today.  He lives in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm unsure of his birthday.  I'll have to look in my calendar to find it.
Story_ID: 106378
Speaker 1: All right, now can--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I have is a vague memory of seeing my grandparents kind of puttering around the house.  My siblings and my mother [Gladys Alathea Duncan] tell me that that's ridiculous 'cause they died when I was a year old or less, and they died within nine days of one another.  But I, I have a vague memory of seeing them puttering, kind of walking around the house.  After that--the earliest memories I have after that would be when I started what here would be called preschool.  I don't have really any memories prior to starting preschool.
Story_ID: 106379
Speaker 1: Now did you live in the same neighborhood growing up the whole time or did the family move around a lot?
Speaker 2: I lived not just in the same neighborhood, but in the same house for the entire twenty-two years of my life before I left Guyana.
Speaker 1: Okay and was there--can you describe your house in the neighborhood for us?
Speaker 2: My house was located between--on the one side was a winery, where they made wine; and on the other side was what was known as a rum shop, where they made and sold rum in a bar, a bar that was frequented by stevedores [longshoremen].  And several people expressed amazement that our parents could raise us in between those two establishments and somehow we still didn't get into trouble.  It was a predominantly black neighborhood, but in terms of the social status of people living in the neighborhood in the--on the block on where I lived--on which I lived--it was mixed.  You had people from every class of society.  The so--the people who owned the winery next door lived above it, the Sorquans [ph.] were a Chinese family that was quite wealthy.  Their cousins lived across the street, and their children--between them they had about nine children--were the same--many of them were the same age as my siblings and I, and so those were our earliest friends.  But as you went down the block, there were tenement yards on the block and there were people who owned major retail stores on the block.  So there was a--there was a mix of people that was, in those days, a typical urban area in which all of the things that you expect in urban areas existed.  And ironically, while Guyana was and is a third-world country, its urban areas are like urban areas anyplace else.  And so I grew up in this urban environment and regret that to this day I've never lived in a rural environment.
Story_ID: 106380
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The most dominant one, two short blocks away from where I lived was one of the city's two largest marketplaces.  And so from very early in the morning the sounds of people delivering goods to the market on pushcarts, in trucks, on horse and donkey driven carts, and sometimes by car dominated the early mornings.  The sounds of people going by on their way to and from the marketplace because the way marketplaces operated--operate--they're early morning places.  People buy their vegetables and their food stuffs because most people in Guyana in those days did not have the privilege of refrigeration in their homes.  So you bought the day's meal that morning, and you generally went to the market to get it.  So the sounds of people going to and from the marketplace dominated.  Directly across the street from the marketplace was the elementary school to which we all went.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Bedford Methodist School.  So shortly thereafter, the sounds and noises of children on their way to school at Bedford Methodist School was the signal that it was time for us to start getting out of the house and going to school.  The sounds of people on their way to work, 'cause I said, we lived in the central part of the city and I those days in Guyana most people's primary method of transportation was bicycles or walking, so the sound of people talking and chatting and going by on their bicycles was the other sound.  It was a very, very busy intersection that we lived at in the mornings, so that's what we woke up to.  And in the evenings when the stevedores--'cause the wharf was about five blocks in the other direction--the Atlantic Ocean actually--where the Demerara River, which led into the Atlantic Ocean where ships dock--the stevedores, at four o'clock when they got off, would head for the rum shop next door to us.  So the evenings were dominated by the sounds of mostly men boisterously drinking in the rum shop next door.  They--those were--that was the, the--that was the city music--that was the background music to my growing up.
Story_ID: 106381
Speaker 1: Well, speaking of music, I mean that's, that's--what kind of music was played?  I mean, what kind of music music was played?
Speaker 2: There was the local music, which was calypsos and local folk music.  The music that we heard on the radio was generally music coming from either the United States or England, which was the colonial power there at the time, popular music generally.  In my father's era it would have been one kind of music.  By the time we came along is when R&B started to dominate in the airways, but in their day they were listening to Bing Crosby, and Duke Ellington, and Count Basie.  In my day we were listening to more R&B artists and the like.  But because Guyana was the only English speaking country in South America, we were located right next door to Dutch Guiana, which is now Suriname.  And our radio stations could pick up the music coming from those stations.  So merengue music, which they like to play on that station, was also very popular in Guyana, and we listened to all kinds of other music that influenced our local music.  But the, the local music that we generally listened to and enjoyed the most was of the calypso variety.
Speaker 1: So Guyana just, just for the sake of those who don't know where it is, I mean, it's in the--it's on the, the--
Speaker 2: Northern--
Speaker 1: --northern--
Speaker 2: It's on the northern tip of South America, bordered by Brazil, Venezuela, Suriname, and the Atlantic Ocean to the north.
Speaker 1: It's the--it's the I guess the eastern most part of South America that comes out--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Kind of northeast--
Speaker 1: North--okay.
Speaker 2: --part of South America.  It kind of looks--the shape of it looks like a, a lion if you look at it on a map.  But it's a country of 83,000 square miles with a population of less than a million people--three quarters of a million people.  And that population has been stable for at least four or five decades, 'cause so many people leave the country, and the population hasn't been growing at all.
Story_ID: 106382
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so at, at Bedford Methodist School [Georgetown, Guyana]--I mean, now did you like school?
Speaker 2: Hated school (laughter).
Speaker 1: We don't get that much, but I'm glad I asked that question.
Speaker 2: Hated school.  The fact that I seemed to be good at it notwithstanding.  I liked sports.  I really liked playing games, and I thought that school, which involved corporal punishment in those days, was a hassle.  I had no idea that this is what I would need to get ahead in life.  I just knew that there were some things in school that I was good at, some things that--some subjects that is--that I was good at, some things that I want--wasn't particularly good at, but my parents had a hard time every single morning getting me up to go to school 'cause didn't like school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I loved the school, because the school was directly across the street, as I said, from the market where there was always something going on.  And directly across the street from the market was a large playground known as Boulder Pasture where you could play soccer and cricket, which is where when school ended at three o'clock, I often did not get home until six o'clock in the evening.  Because between playing catch in the market and playing sports on the pasture across the street, those were the highlights of my days.
Speaker 1: Now I believe, correct me if I'm wrong, that the top sport was cricket.
Speaker 2: For me at that, that time it was, yeah, it was.  Later it became soccer and then cricket again.
Speaker 1: Okay, but cricket's similar to--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --baseball, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think baseball--
Speaker 1: Baseball is similar--
Speaker 2: --derived from cricket, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, de--de--derived from cricket.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah, cricket was my favorite sport then.
Speaker 1: Then soccer later on.
Speaker 2: Well, the reason was this--that when we were growing up, you could fashion what you need to play cricket fairly easily.  You needed a bat and you needed a ball basically, and you could make those out of just about anything, use any kind of ball.  Soccer required a certain kind of ball.  It was kind of expensive, and so you kicked around anything that looked like a ball.  We used to play soccer with rocks (laughter).  I'm serious.  You kicked around anything that you could kick.  But it wasn't, wasn't very organized at the public school.  And when I started to go to high school and soccer was organized and we had real balls, then I got into soccer.  But from the age of five until I was eleven or twelve, it was all cricket--mostly cricket.
Speaker 1: Okay, were, were you good?
Speaker 2: I thought so.  I was--I batted left-handed even though I'm naturally right-handed.  Because my older brother was left-handed and so I guess mimicking him, I batted left handed.  And I struck the ball very well I thought and had good movement of the feet and so cricket was the sport that I played until I got to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: But in my days at Bedford Methodist cricket was my sport, yeah.
Story_ID: 106383
Speaker 1: Okay, was--all right.  Now what, what else were you interested in growing up?  I mean--the reason I--why I asked in kind of a general way 'cause I think you, you seem to have a broad--you--you're a, a broad--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --generalist in terms--you know, be--being a radio host--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What I was interested in then was that my parents had friends who were involved in a wide variety of fields and who had an intense interest in politics.  And we had the privilege of being able to participate in the conversations that our parents, friends and relatives had.  And that fascinated me.  I spent a lot of time when I should have been doing homework at night in conversation with my parents' friends, with my parents and their friends, or relatives who were visiting with us.  And they were interested in--you know, I remember--I had to be nine years old in 1954 when the Unites States overthrew the regime of Mosaddegh in Iran and replaced him with the Shah.  But that was something I was keenly aware of, because they were taking about it in my household.  My parents and their friends were talking about that.  They talked politics, they talked sports, they talked culture a lot, and I was interested in conversation.  I guess that's how I can best put it.  I've always been interested in listening.  I always liked listening, so I listened to them a lot.  To this day my friends express amazement how much stuff I remember because I just listened a lot, and I was always fascinated by people.  Whether or not other people considered them important was irrelevant to me.  But I found interesting things about people, and that--I'll tell you what, I remember that from the time I was a kid.  The, the, the rum shop next door to me where the stevedores gathered to drink there was a room, a large room, that was used by a shoemaker as a shoemaker shop attached--it was part of the building in which the rum shop was housed.  The shoemaker's name was Murphy; he was known as Murph.  And a lot of the stevedores would come out of the rum shop and hang with Murph in the shoemaker shop.  That was my spot.  In the afternoons when I came home from school, it was straight down to the shoemaker shop where I would listen to these stevedores telling all of these stories.  I became like their mascot.  I'll never forget on my eighth birthday my mother told friends: he celebrated his eighth birthday down in the shoemaker shop with the stevedores.  They had a party for him.  I was a part of that group.  My elder brother was never much interested.  But the stories I heard there and the characters who were there absolutely fascinated me, and so I spent a lot of time in that shoemaker shop.  Murph only had one leg.  His other leg was cut off at the knee, and my parents used to say if you spend any more time in that shoemaker shop you're gonna end up just like Murph with only one leg.  I didn't believe that.  I just knew that that's a place I liked to be.
Story_ID: 106384
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what kind of--what aspect of politics or what, what age--discussing most--mostly local political issues or global issues or what?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: BBC News was very important in those countries at that time, and so people discussed everything everywhere.  As a matter of fact, we had a dictionary in our house, and routinely the guys from Murph's shoemaker shop were sometimes literally out of the rum shop would be knocking on our front door asking for the use of the dictionary or the encyclopedia to settle an argument that they were having downstairs.  People were just interested in everything, which is where I think I got that from.
Speaker 1: So this is a time of African and Ca--Caribbean independence, when you were coming of age in the early--
Speaker 2: In 1950s--
Speaker 1: --late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: --early '60s [1960s], during the time when the anti-colonial movement/struggle was taking root in that part of the world.  So it was a very vibrant political environment in which new ideas were being introduced into the culture.  And from the perspective of my father and his friends, a number of these new ideas were quite unsettling.  There were friends of my father who believed that British colonialism was a good thing; they'd done a good job; and that they should continue to do that.  Others who believed that new ideas were more important, so it was a--it was a vibrant and good time to be there.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--discussions must have been fascinating (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People (unclear)--what, what kind of ar--arguments would people make for colonialism?
Speaker 2: That--you have to remember that all of these people had been essentially raised by the British.  They had gone to schools as were run by the British.  The history books that they had read in--read in school talked about the exploit of the--the exploits of the British.  The schools that we--the songs that we sang in school were "Rule, Britannia! Britannia, rule the waves!  Britons never, never shall be slaves."  We're sittin' up there black as night, the descendants of slaves talking about we are Britons.  We were raised to consider ourselves Britons.  We were raised to see the British tradition as the most important thing.  That took hold in a lot of people who actually believed that.  And so the notion that black people and East Indians could govern themselves, the notion that they could replace the British bureaucrats who were running the country was anathema to a lot of people there.  But then you had people usually--often younger people--who had more radical i--ideas, as a result of their education either at home or especially if they'd studied abroad and come abroad and come back home.  So you had these ideas, and people were drawing on ideas not only from the European capitals or the Unites States in which they studied, but they were drawing on ideas from India and from Africa and other places.  It, it was a--it was a great time for people who had--who were interested in ideas at the time.
Speaker 1: It was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Furious arguments.
Speaker 1: Yeah, push for Indian in--in--independence.  I know a lot of people from the Caribbean were involved worldwide (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --they--from Garvey to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --all, all those Trinidadians that got involved--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, those people, when they went to the capitals in the rest of the world and saw other movements in other countries similar to ours, became involved in those movements, became leaders of some of those movements.  Your right, people like Marcus Garvey, people like C.L.R. James, people like George Padmore who became a part of larger movements and then came back to the Caribbean and infused the cultures there with the consciousness that they had gotten, thereby giving rise to other people in those local environments arising to lead anti-colonial movements in those territories.  Those anti-colo--colonial movements took a variety of ideological forms from communism to people who were upholding the, the need for capitalism.  But they were all engaged in, in a spirited debate and very often in a spirited struggle against colonialism and for independence.
Story_ID: 106385
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think--I don't--I don't know what role or what he was doing when you were coming up, but I know Forbes Burnham became the president at some point.  But I don't know his traject--jectory.  Was he in the news in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, we went--I went to the same high school as he did, but of course he was a generation before mine.  But he was an integral part of that anti-colonial movement.  He became one of the leaders of the first mass-based political party in Guyana that was opposed to colonialism, the People's Progressive Party or PPP, a party that would come to power first in 1953 under colonialism only to have the British suspend the constitution and kick it out of power in 1955 I think--party regained power in 1957.  And at that point, because it was such a strong and powerful unity of Africans and East Indians, the British colonial powers saw it as a threat because the party was, in their view, tending towards communism and socialism.  We're talking about the Cold War period here, and so the British MI5 and the American CIA worked together closely to break up that movement and break up that party.  And long story short, when they were finished doing that, Forbes Burnham, who had been the secretary of the People's Progressive Party formed a--broke off and formed a separate party called the People's National Congress, and that was the party that ultimately came to party and led Guyana to independence in 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay.  People's African Con--People's--
Speaker 2: People's Progressive Party.
Speaker 1: --Progressive Party and then--
Speaker 2: And then he formed--
Speaker 1: --then, then the--
Speaker 2: --People's National Congress.
Speaker 1: --People's National Congress, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so they come to power in '66 [1966]-(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Six--they came--they came to power in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and got independence in '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 106386
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did you know--another political figure I can think of Guyana is Walter Rodney.  Did, did you know him?  Were, were you all contemporaries or anything?
Speaker 2: Walter Rodney was three years older than I was.  We went to the same high school, but he was my mentor and even in death in 1980 at thirty years old, in very many respects continues to be my mentor.  Walter Rodney in many ways taught me how to think independently.  He taught me to question my own viewpoints, my own allegiances.  In very many respects, who and what I am today is in some measure because of Walter Rodney's influence on me.  He was a friend; he stayed at my home when he came to Washington; and reading his works, listening to his speeches, and following his career helped me to understand that in the battle of ideas, in the intellectual arena of ideas, that honesty is extremely important and that you do not maintain allegiance to ideas simply because they were ideas that you happen to hold.  If those ideas are bankrupt, if those ideas are not relevant to the contemporary situation that you're living, you have to get hold--you have to let go of those ideas.  But yeah, Walter--Walter Rodney was a big influence on me.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you know him from childhood?
Speaker 2: I knew from when I was about ten or eleven years old just before I went to high school, 'cause in high school in Guyana we started with what would be junior high school in this country.  And since my brother and sister--my brother went to an all-male high school.  Since my brother was at that high school before me, he knew Walter and so I knew Walter.  And then when I got to the high school I knew him, but I got to know him even better in later years after I had come to the United States.
Story_ID: 106387
Speaker 1: Yeah, but of course--well, we're on Walt--Walter Rodney.  He was an author of 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa,' which is a--is a tremendous book.  And the--it's really, you know, one of the most important books of the mid '70s [1970s] I think, you know.  Just--a, a lot of people thought that, you know, so it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had--by that time, in the early 1970s, I considered myself a Pan-Africanist and thought that the future of black people in the diaspora in America and in the Caribbean and any place else was inextricably linked to the future of Africa, and that ultimately the future of Africa was--had to be the future of a united continent under Pan-Africanism that would be able to muster the resources of land, and agriculture, and industry, and the political will to deliver for black people around the world whatever it was that we needed.  It was a pipedream, okay, but it was a pipedream that had been shared by many others before me.  And then along came Walter and taught me through 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa,' through a--to look at the world in more realistic and contemporary terms because we Pan-Africanists were looking at a world that had gone by, not realistically at the world that existed today, and to examine societies in which you lived from both a theoretical standpoint and from a practical standpoint to talk about where people are and how they got there.  'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa' explained in fairly simply language exactly how the development of Europe contributed to a phrase that he used, the underdevelopment, not simply the lack of development, that Europe was developed at the expense of Africa's development.  But the other thing it taught me was that the idealistic notion that we had that before Europe arrived in Africa that Africa was this communal society in which everybody was getting along beautifully--Walter, being a historian and looking at reality, pointed out that class divisions were already arising in Africa and that's what facilitated the plundering of the continent; that this notion that Africa was sailing along harmoniously is a notion that is in a way racist in itself, because it suggests that Africa was not developing; that, that the fact that development follows certain patterns in which classes are created.  The notion that there were societies in which there was development that was taking place in which there was no antagonism at all was really just a, a dream, an idealistic notion that we had.  And that's what helped me to start looking at the world and societies a lot more realistically.
Story_ID: 106388
Speaker 1: And the other thing--Walter, when I first knew him when we were in high school, he was about two classes ahead of me, or three, in high school, and we had a teacher who used to organize debating classes.  And when he was organizing our debating class, he would come to us with anecdotes about the debating class that Walter Rodney was in.  And to hear a teacher quoting a pupil in debating class was quite impressive; I'd never heard it.  But in later years when I got to know him, I realized that Walter was such a good debater because he took the other side's arguments seriously.  He always said that if you are representing your opponent's argument, you have to represent it not only as well as, but better than your opponent--your opponent can represent it and then you have to strike it down.  If you can strike it down when it is best represented, then you know you're achieve--you're achieving something.  But if you think that you can win in the--battle in the arena of ideas by disregarding or minimizing your opponent's point of view, you're only fooling yourself.  If you take it seriously, and during the course of taking it seriously, you realize that it is a better argument than yours, than abandon your own argument.  But--and ever since then I've learned that no matter how ridiculous an opponent's argument sounds, I begin by taking it seriously because that's the only way I can deconstruct it, is if I take it seriously.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--so--
Speaker 1: That's guided my entire career.
Speaker 2: Now this is--now what was Rodney's background, you know?  And--
Speaker 1: He--after he left high school at Queens College in [Georgetown] Guyana, he went to the University of the West Indies [Mona, Jamaica] and did undergraduate work in history, and then he went, I think, the University of London [sic School of Oriental and African Studies, London, England]--
Speaker 2: Now that, that part--
Speaker 1: --in which he did--
Speaker 2: --we can probably read, but, but I just--I just wondered, in Guyana where you--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --where, where you grew up, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --near his family.  Like, what, what was something--
Speaker 1: He--I, I tend to think he we might have gone to the same elementary school, but he was ahead of me so I don't remember for sure.  He may have gone to another.  He came, like I did, for a lower middle-class family in Guyana.  He had brothers and sisters.  He, he was--for a--for a guy of small stature, he was a pretty good athlete. He was a good high jumper in high school, and he was unlike any of the other guys, like, of his age who were brilliant in school.  Walter was both brilliant in school and popular with girls and boys of his age.  Indeed, one of the greatest mysteries when he was growing up was when did he study, because he seemed to do everything else that everybody was doing.  He participated in the sports; he went to parties; he had a girlfriend; he did everything else, and then when everybody else went home and went to sleep and couldn't get work done, Walter would have all of his work done, and he'd be first in class all the way through school.  So people would be like when does this guy study?  He was just a regular guy, and I think that's always been one of the sources of his appeal.  He knew how to communicate with other people.  He wasn't your typical nerd kinda guy, even though in many respects he was.
Speaker 2: Now that's something that, that we would not have known and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I appreciate it.
Speaker 1: Wally is what we used to call him.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Wally.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 106389
Speaker 1: I just wondered, now, now did you--considering what you're doing now, were there radio shows with opinions and guests on Guyana when you were growing or, or televisions shows that--or did you have te--television growing up?
Speaker 2: There was no television in Guyana.  Radio was king, and that had a significant influence on me because--because radio was king, we grew up listening to the radio.  It's a significant distinction to what I encountered when I came abroad, because what do I mean by listening to the radio?  In Guyana, stories were aired on the radio--dramatic series, soap operas, they were all on the radio.  And my mother her favorite stories and soap operas on the radio that she listened to.  And one of them came on a noon every day.  And we came home for lunch from school every day at 11:30.  And if we happened to be a little late and walked into the house and we greeted my mom and said hey!  She would get--she would go, shhh, I'm listening to the radio.  When I came abroad I discovered that radio was background.  Because there was television and other stuff to entertain people, people would turn the radio on as background to whatever they were doing.  In Guyana when you turn the radio on, it was for the purpose of listening to it.  So we knew the birthday requests came on at 4:30 in the afternoon.  That's when the music we liked would be on.  We knew that the news came on at nine o'clock at night.  We knew the death announcements came on at 9:30.  In the same way that people now know what time their favorite shows come on on television, that's how we listened to the radio.  So I grew up listening to the radio and so it fascinated me, and so one of the first jobs that I applied for out of high school was a job at the one local radio station that we had--well, we had two by then.
Story_ID: 106390
Speaker 1: Okay, but be--before we get you to high--graduated--what can you tell us about high school?  Now you, you, you say you were--you were a fairly good, good student, but you didn't like school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't like high school either.
Speaker 1: --yeah--okay.
Speaker 2: But I went to what was in those days considered the elite high school in Guyana.  It was called Queens College, and it was the same school that Walter Rodney went to.  But the reason we were able to go to that school was because the school had an enlightened British principal who made it his business to make sure that working-class Africans and East Indians got into that school by way of creating government scholarships-government-funded scholarships; that if you did well enough on your entrance exams you could go to those schools because otherwise your parents had to pay an arm and a leg.  I did not get a scholarship, but because I did well enough to get into the school, my parents sacrificed and paid for me to go to that school.  Well, it was the school at which my elder brother was attending; my sister was attending the sister school and so I wanted to go to that school.  My first amazing disillusionment when I went to that school was cursing.  I simply assumed that nobody cursed in that school, and from the very first day I got there it was people cussing left and right around me.  I was like oh, this is different.  Second, I hadn't gone to an all-male school before, and things can get pretty rough at an all-male school. That part I liked, that it kind of toughened you up in a hurry because boys will, as they say, be boys.  The schoolwork I--as I said, I, I wasn't big on schoolwork, but I discovered that I liked French; ultimately, I liked Spanish; and that I was good at English.  And so that and knowing some basic math kinda got me through, but I never tried very hard.  I remember every period--a period was a month--at the end of every period you were graded and you were placed.  And there were thirty-three kids in my class.  I brought home my monthly report card, and I came in 33rd.  And my father said if you can come in in the top ten, I'll get you a watch.  The next period I came in 5th.  My father gave me a watch.  The period after that 33rd, back--he took the watch back.  I just did enough to get by, but sports and extracurricular activities at that school were at such a higher level than my elementary school that I loved it.  I could play soccer.  It was mandatory.  Sports were mandatory--cricket, mandatory.  I joined the cadet corps because by the time I was thirteen or fourteen, the little military bug--you could carry guns; you could join the cadet corps--started acting in plays.  Because it was an all-male school, I had a high-pitched voice, I had to start out playing female roles.  I played Portia in (laughter), in "Julius Caesar"; I played Orinthia in the "Apple Cart."  But once my voice started changing, I started getting male roles.  I was involved in every extracurricular activity I could think of.  I joined the tour club.  I didn't have a whole lot of time for schoolwork.  I was too busy having a good time at school, but I somehow managed to pass and maintained my interest in conversation and in listening to people and in world affairs-
Story_ID: 106391
Speaker 1: The only history we learned was the history of, of Britain until an enlightened teacher came along and started teaching us what he called West Indian history.  And when he introduced me to Toussaint Louverture. That was the first time in my life I remember being genuinely interested in history, in anything that happened in the world before I was born.  That was when it came to life for me, because I had never seen myself in history before.  But when he talked about this guy that led a rebellion in Haiti against the French and defeated the French in 1804, I--it changed my life.  I could see myself playing a role in the world that I never even imagined before.  Right up until that point I was gonna play my way through life.  At that point is when I first started seriously getting interested in changing the world.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, now what counseling did they give you in high school in terms of college?
Speaker 1: None that I remember.  But as I said, it was an elite high school patterned after a British public school or what would be called a prep school in this country, so expectations for all students who went to that school were high.  Everybody who went to that school was expected to get a good job in the civil service, and in more cases than not, to go on to college or a university someplace.  I had no interest in going to college or a university anyplace.  I wanted to work and earn money and--but I did like French, English, and Spanish (laughter), so I stayed in school for another two years after what you would consider graduation to take higher exams, what would we called advanced level exams in Britain, because I kinda liked those subjects and enjoyed the school environment.  But, but I never seriously thought about going to college.
Speaker 2: Now what year would, would, would your graduation take, take place and how old were, were you?
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] and sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] was when I completed the exams necessary to get a job in the civil service or to get into college in the United States.  I stayed for another two years, and in '63 [1963] I completed the exams that could get me a higher salary in the civil service or to get into an elite university in England.
Story_ID: 106392
Speaker 1: Okay, now I know you ended up--you wound up at McGill University [Montreal, Canada], which is--now that's like the--
Speaker 2: Oh, there was--there were years before that.  No--
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: --I, I had worked--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for four years.  I had no interest in going to college.  And I was doing clerical jobs and the I--in order for me to go to college, my mother felt I needed to make more money and save more money, so I got a job selling insurance--industrial insurance.  The people paid on a weekly basis that paid me so much money I bought a brand new motorbike.  And I was having a good time and knew then that I wasn't ever going to college because I was making more money than people who had gone away to college and come back were making.  I was taking them out for drinks;  I was (laughter) taking them out to party.  So I was like what's the point?  But I still was interested in politics, 'cause it--as I said, it was still a vibrant political culture that were still--we were living in at the time.  And so the partying culture and the political culture kind of merged at that time in Guyana.  And then my mother conspired with a friend of mine who was at McGill University in Montreal [Canada].  And I had gotten a passport because I had traveled in the Caribbean before.  And one day in 1967 my mother came to me and said here is your passport, here is your ticket, here is your admission to McGill University; you are leaving next week.  And I said but I got a motorbike to sell, I gotta--she said I'll take care of those.  And so I, I jokingly say that my mother essentially mailed me to university.  That's essentially what she did.  I had nothing to do with it, and she sent me off to McGill.
Speaker 1: Now this is--this is what, 1967?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're like?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two.  I'd worked for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  McGill is--was told--I was told that it was sort of like the Harvard [University], or at least the Princeton [University] in Canada or something, right?  It's the top-rated university--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of, of Canada.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 106393
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: I had several friends there, and so that's who she conspired with.  And when I went there, I liked being at McGill.  I still didn't like school very much, but 1967, as you may recall, was when the Black Power Movement was at its height.  And so immediately out upon a--upon arrival in Montreal, that's what I got involved in on campus.
Speaker 1: Now was--so I take it Black Power was on the campus--was, was on the campus in--of McGill in, Mon--in, in Montreal?
Speaker 2: Yep, my roommates were all involved, especially one.  He started a newspaper, demonstrations on campus.  I lasted one year, but it was a year that marked a significant turning point in my life, because it was the year in which I first felt actively involved in a movement.  And--
Speaker 1: Was there a name for your organization there at McGill?
Speaker 2: No, we had a--my roommate started a newspaper called 'Maroon,' and started organizing for a black writers congress to which we invited Walter Rodney and Stokely Carmichael and others [the Congress of Black Writers took place in 1968].  And it was the year in which there was an uprising, if you will, by black students at Sir George William University, also in Montreal.  They were our comrades at the time.
Speaker 1: So Sir George--
Speaker 2: Sir George William University--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Montreal--
Speaker 1: What were the issues--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --where students took over.  It was a sit-in.  Students took over the administration building, ended up burning a computer, and--
Speaker 1: Now that's a big--now (unclear) you have to explain that too because it's not like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mainframe computer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that takes a room with it, doesn't it pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't involved.  I wasn't there at the time.  I had dropped out and was in New York, but went back for those demonstrations.  And as a result of which, a lot of people got kicked out of school and went back to the Caribbean.  By then--
Speaker 1: Now, now what could be the issue here they--you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Racism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just felt that there was discrimination against black students.  We wanted courses taught about black people's history.  We had all kinds of demands on the administration, but that wasn't my school.  I was at, at McGill, but a lot of the McGill people joined in those demonstrations.  It sparked a lot of stuff, yeah.
Story_ID: 106394
Speaker 1: So what was the school's reaction to the demonstrations by the black students?
Speaker 2: After the computer was burned, they clamped down; the police came, arrested several people.  And as I said, by then I was in New York, and my recollation--recollection--of that it is somewhat hazy.  But a lot of guys from Trinidad were involve, and that most of them, if not all, got kicked out of school and sent back home, 'cause when you got kicked out of school your visa expired--went home and got involved in, in Trinidad and different kinds of movements.  I was in New York, got a job as a clerk on Wall Street--by now we're at 1968--got married in October of 1968 in New York, joined the Black Panther Party in New York in I guess June of 1968 at, at City College [of New York], where I was not a student, but where there was a, a chapter of the Party--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now City College of New York, that's the home of--where John Henry Clark was teaching there and people like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but I wasn't taking classes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Jeffries and--yeah.
Speaker 2: I was working on Wall Street and just going there to go to meetings of the Black Panther Party chapter.
Speaker 1: Who, who, who was leading the Black Panther Party in New York in those days?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I only knew the guys who were students at the school, 'cause one of them worked on Wall Street with me part time and so he took me to meetings there.  But I was not--I was not a member of any kind of hierarchy in the party at the time.  Membership in the party in those days was fairly loose and easy.  But I was at that point looking to get more seriously involved.  And New York--well, I was also trying to be an actor at the time.  I forget to mention that part of my life.  I'd done a lot of acting in Guyana, and I was trying to be an actor in New York, so I was working on Wall Street in the daytime and then hanging out at night.  So my marriage broke up in New York.
Story_ID: 106395
Speaker 1: So now let's go back and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Did--when did you meet your wife?  Was she from Guyana too?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew her from Guyana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had been dating in Guyana, we had been dating while I was at McGill, and we had a son who was born while we were married.  We got married in October, 1968.  Our son was born in March of 1969, and we stayed married until August of 1969.  In August of 1969, I learned of a development in Washington [D.C.] where there was a black education program at Federal City College [now part of the University of the District of Columbia] that had decided to leave Federal City College and establish itself in the black community as the Center for Black Education.  I had a cousin from Guyana who was involved with the project.  He told me about it, and I decided that the next chapter of my life should be in Washington.  My wife in New York, bless her heart, saw a different life for us.  She saw me continuing to work, us getting a house, raising a family.  I wanted to be a part of a movement and so we broke up, and that's how I happened to arrive in Washington in August of 1969, to go to the Center for Black Education and be a part of that.
Speaker 1: Now in New York in terms of the acting, were you--were you trying out for mainstream productions, or were you in the Black Arts Movement--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I was just hanging around more than anything else.  I was going up to Harlem.  I think around that time Barbara Ann Teer was starting the National Black Theatre.  I was just hanging around, thinking that I could get into something.  But as it turns out, I got into something in Washington that had me to do some acting again, which is what got me into broadcasting.
Story_ID: 106396
Speaker 1: All right, 1969, Center for Black Education in Washington, D.C., right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now te--tell us about--well, now the Center for Black Education came out of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I believe, or had something to do with SNCC?
Speaker 2: The Center for Black Education--so anyway, I get here and my cousin tells me about this program.  And I come to a couple of meetings, and I discover that the Center for Black Education is an outgrowth of a black education program at Federal City College in Washington, which is the precursor.  It's one of the institutions that's the precursor to the University of the District of Columbia.  The Black Education Program--Federal City College was created in 1968, after the riots in Washington, D.C., as a way to placate the restless youth in the city.  It was put together in a hurry.  In the Black Education Program there was being headed up by a guy named Jimmy Garrett [James P. Garrett], who had come from San Francisco State University here to run the program.  And the program employed a number of former SNCC members, among whom were Courtland Cox, Charlie Cobb [Charles E. Cobb] to name two.  When I got here in 1969 was when the program broke away from Federal City College because it saw black education in a comprehensive way and felt that black education was not simply the teaching of the history and culture of African Americans, that it could include the teaching of math and science within that context.  Federal City College would have none of it, so the program decided to relocate itself in the black community.  It relocated in northwest Washington [D.C.] on Fairmont Street, 1435 Fairmont Street, NW, and 1437--bought two buildings there and decided to start this college-level program there.  I became a part of it.  Students dropped out of colleges around the country to come to the center.  It organized a program in which several of the former SNCC members were teachers, coordinators of it.  At that time, those--a few of the SNCC people had started Drum & Spear Bookstore and Drum & Spear Press Publishing in Washington, D.C. [founded by Charlie Cobb in 1968].  So the three organizations became united, if you will.  They became connected so that the bookstore, the center, and the--and the publisher, Drum & Spear Press, were all operating in unison, being in large measure run by the same people.
Story_ID: 106397
Speaker 1: As more students came to the center, the center got some more buildings and established dormitories where students could actually live.  It had, as I may have mentioned earlier, a Pan-Africanist orientation.  It felt that the ideas of organizations like the Black Panther Party with which I was previously affiliated were incorrect, if you will, were ideas that did not tie the future of black people in America to the future of black people anyplace else.  And this ideology of Pan-Africanism that we were pursuing suggested that people in the diaspora and people on the continent had to be linked.  And so the educational curriculum at the Center for Black Organi--Education--was organized with this in mind.  At the same time the Drum & Spear Bookstore--Drum & Spear Press was publishing its first book, "History of Black Revolt," by C.L.R. James, Drum & Spear Bookstore was selling a lot of books about black history and culture.  And the center began to expand into--we had a communications core [coordinating committee] of which I was a part.  And having been an actor, that communications core inspired me to start a drama project in which we produced plays, one of them written by Jimmy Garrett, who by that time had a reputation as a playwright.  And he had a play called "And We Own the Night," which had received great reviews, so that was the first production that we did.  We went on to do some other plays and at the same time continuing instruction.  We set up a project in Tanzania.  We set up a project in Guyana, because we felt that it was important to connect with Africa and the diaspora.  And one of the things that the drama group was asked to do was radio.  How this came about was because in those days commercial radio stations had an obligation to present public affairs programming generally on the weekend.  Generally on the weekend they had to do something called ascertainment in which they pulled listeners in the immediate area and assessed what their priorities were, what they wanted to hear, what they wanted to talk about, and they were required by law to organize public affairs programming around those issues.
Story_ID: 106398
Speaker 1: So we were--it may have been Drum & Spear that was initially approached by WOL Radio, an A.M. station here in Washington [D.C.] that was at that point owned by a broadcasting group whose name now escapes me.  It'll come to me, but they wanted--they had Drum & Spear doing an interview show I think about books, but they, they had more time that they needed to fill.  And they asked us if we could do something of a more dramatic nature, so we started doing children's plays for them.  It was called "Saya Watoto: The Hour of the Children."  And they were written by people who had formerly been associated with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--Jennifer Lawson, Minnie Hayes.  And they wrote the scripts and the dramatic group at the center performed them on the radio.  It aired every Sunday night for an hour.  And after some time doing that, the station asked if we could also do a news magazine, and so we created a half hour news magazine called "Sauti" in which we did news stories and analysis.  I was the editor, and I did a weekly commentary under the name Brother Uwezo.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what did Brother Uwezo mean and wa--what did Sauti mean?
Speaker 1: Sauti means-meant in Swahili "the voice."  Brother Uwezo, I think I just picked up the name from someplace and had no idea what it meant.  It was just a name that I wanted to use on the air so that I didn't have to use my own name.  We continued doing that for a while, and I was working at Drum & Spear Bookstore.  The bookstore closed I think in 1972 [sic 1974].  The bookstore closed down, and I was working for a while as a freelance writer, writing speeches for the president of the National Urban League, writing stuff--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--for, for, for Whitney Young as well as--
Speaker 1: No, it was then [HM] Vernon Jordan.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--he passed in '71 [1971]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was then Vernon Jordan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vernon Jordan, yeah.
Story_ID: 106399
Speaker 1: In 1971, by then I had remarried in Washington [D.C.], and I had twins who were born in August 31st of 1971.  And so after the bookstore [Drum & Spear] closed, my wife was in college.  And after the summer of 1973, when there were not that many conventions coming to Washington and the speech writing business was running dry, I figured that it was time for me to try to get a real job.  Howard University Radio had gone on the air in 1971, and we kept it on the radio in the bookstore at Drum & Spear Bookstore.  And the station at the time aired a lot of what would now be considered talk radio.  It had a format that was more like a Pacifica station [independent progressive radio] than a music station.  And so in 1973, I decided to apply--I, I found out that there was a position of news editor that was being advertised at WHUR.  And having edited "Sauti" for a while and having the orientation that I thought the station was looking for, I applied for the job and got the job as news editor in November of 1973.  At the time, WHUR Radio had a broadcast in the evening that spread over three hours called the "Daily Drum."  It started at five in the afternoon and it went on until eight in the evening, and it was a combination of news, music, and information that had no real schedule.  It was music being played between five and eight p.m. and news and information could drop in anytime, but it was quite revolutionary for radio at the time.  Problem was that while it was hip, didn't have a lot of listeners.  And so under the leadership of the then news director, a guy named Robert Taylor who became a friend and colleague who, like me, at the time had come from a kind of activist background even though in his case he had been the editor of the Howard University newspaper, "The Hilltop" before he got into radio.  We came from an activist background and saw the "Daily Drum" within that context and felt that the power of persuasion is what we could try to do through news and information programming.  It soon became apparent that the "Daily Drum" did not have, have many listeners, and one of the reasons it didn't have any--have very many listeners--is because it wasn't tightly scheduled, and because, as a newscast, the reporting on it was not of a standard where it could compete with other newscasts around town.  And so we decided we had to professionalize the operation, but we wanted to professionalize it such a way that it would not lose its edge.  And so we decided to start hiring people who could write and people who had some news experience.  And we decided also that we wanted to continue to cover the world and we wanted to continue to do local affairs.  Long story short, instead of a three-hour long period in which stuff dropped in at any time, we made the "Daily Drum" a tight one-hour long newscast that was really patterned on All Things Considered on public radio, a kind of All Things Considered black newscast in which we took you around the world and brought you home, and in which we had great writers and great reporters.  We had people like Charlie Cobb, who came out of SNCC, but then went on to work for NPR and other stations; Gene Wiley--people who are really good writers.  And as a result of that, by the late 1970s the "Daily Drum" had gotten a reputation as being--of being a topnotch newscast that offered a lot more than any other newscast around the city was able to offer.  And I was editor of that newscast, and by 1980, I guess, had become the news director at the station.
Story_ID: 106400
Speaker 1: Okay, by 1980, all right.  And you were there--
Speaker 2: I was there from 1973 to 1985.
Speaker 1: What I remember--I remember public radio coverage of Festac 77 [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture] by Charlie Cobb.  In fact, a friend of mine had taped all of them at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was, was the "Daily Drum" involved in the, the coverage of Festac in '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: I guess so 'cause it was in Nigeria, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think Charlie probably went and covered it, unless he was gone by then.  No, I think Charlie was still there [sic Cobb left WHUR for NPR in 1976].  In 1975, while we working at WHUR, Charlie Cobb and I went to the Watergate Hotel.  We had decided that the on-air employees of WHUR needed to be organized into a union.  And we went and had a secret meeting at the Watergate Hotel with a woman who was the local head of the American Federal of Television and Radio Artists, Evelyn Freiman, and we formed a union at WHUR.  It took a strike of two or three weeks before there was arbitration and the university recognized the union.  But I think that was a significant step in professionalizing the operation.  Even though we had all come from activists backgrounds, I refer back to one of the things that Walter Rodna--Rodney--taught me, that if you are honest in the aren--in the battle of the arena of ideas, then that's your best chance of winning.  We realized that journalism did not have to be biased; it just had to be true.  It just--if you were on the right side of history, then simply reporting the facts as they occurred or when there was need for analysis in trumpeting the facts as they occur without putting any kind of spin on it, if you are on the right side of history then those facts, those analyses would eventually make an impression on people.  And that's what the "Daily Drum" was able to do.  It became for black people in Washington at the time the newscast of record and the newscast of choice in the same way that WHUR at the time had become for black people in Washington, the radio station of choice.  So it was a big deal for us (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, HUR was--I don't--I don't what the--I don't have a sense of the local reaction to HUR, but as a visitor to Washington, D.C., you know, if we turned on the radio it stayed on HUR--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause it was a wonderful station.
Speaker 2: And to this day, even though it's competing in a different environment and does have much of the information programming that it had then, I call it legacy radio.  It still manages to do well because it's the one station in America that parents pass on to their children.  It's got a legacy audience of people who--whose grandparents and parents listen to HUR so they just listen to it too.
Story_ID: 106401
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right--so there were other events.  I tell--trying to think of the '70s [1970s] events that the Pan-African Con--Congress in Tanzania that you--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974] the Center for Black Education was deeply involved, as was I, in organizing that.  I went on an organizing trip to Guyana and Jamaica for the 6th Pan-African Congress, but when I got that job in November of 1973 working in radio, I could not leave in June of 1974 to attend the 6th Pan-Africanist Congress, but we reported on it.  The Congress took place.  Shortly thereafter, the Center for Black Education kind of folded around 1974--'73 [1973], '74 [1974].  The Center for Black Education folded, and thereafter my life was wrapped up with broadcasting and journalism.  It turned out to be the way forward for me.  It wasn't necessarily the way I would have chosen several years ago, but the way things have worked out it turned out to be all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I keep going backwards in history, but the Congress of Af--African Pe--People was another big even that happened in '72 [1972]--
Speaker 2: Well, there was--in 1972, there was the National Black Political Convention in Gary, Indiana, in which the Congress of African Peoples and the Center for Black Education were big organizers.  In 1972 there was also the first African Liberation Day in May of 1972 that was huge.  But a lot of things came together in 1972 that kind of led up to the 6th Pan-African Congress in 1974 in which a variety of, of people then called Black Nationalists, I guess, were involved that was moving towards the mainstream of politics.  And the National Black Political Convention acted as a launching pad for a lot of that stuff.
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: Amiri Baraka played a big role in that.  He was one of the conveners of it.
Speaker 1: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [HM] Richard Hatcher, Amiri Baraka, Charles Diggs, as I recall were conveners of that.
Story_ID: 106402
Speaker 1: And but-- by the late '70s [1970s], most of the--most of those activities had you know, dried up or, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, by the late--
Speaker 1: --at least but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the late '70s [1970s], times had changed significantly.  But for my own career at WHUR [Howard University Radio] and the "Daily Drum," the late '70s [1970s] were in a way the best of times.  We had established the credibility of the broadcast; we were expanding; and as a station itself, Howard University Radio was finally making a serious impact in large measure because of a program called the "Quiet Storm" that was hosted by a guy named Melvin Lindsey.  That broadcast, which started I guess in the early '80s [1980s]--well, let me back up for a second.  We made a decision at one point, Robert Taylor, the manager of the station and I, and another friend who had all been in Marxist study groups and studying.  Because we still had a kind of activist approach to radio, we, we decided that the notion of alternative radio, the notion of having a station that took pride in being different but wasn't attracting a great deal of people to the ideas and the news that we were promoting didn't make sense; that if, in fact, the news was good and the ideas that people were promoting were good, then we wanted to attract the largest possible audience to hear that.  And we made a decision, as we jokingly put it at the time, pump the funk, okay.  That--that's where the audience was that wanted, and so our love for Dizzy Gillespie and John Coltrane will have to take backseat to our need and desire for a larger audience for the news and information that we felt we were putting out there.  And what really helped us to do that more than anything else was the fact that Melvin Lindsey and the "Quiet Storm" were on the radio.  Because before we took over the station, by which I mean we were the news department, the station manager was Cathy Liggins, now [HM] Cathy Hughes.  When Cathy Hughes got ready to leave the station--or Cathy Liggins--she said to me she recommended me to be the next general manager, but that she knew that I had no interest in management.  I was too much the activist.  So the news director, Robert Taylor, became the general manager, and so we had the opportunity to program the station in the way we wanted to program the station.  And Cathy Hughes had left the legacy of Melvin Lindsey and the "Quiet Storm," which was a great anchor for the music of the station.  We decided that for the rest of the day we were gonna, as I said, pump the funk, use--through popular music.  And the "Daily Drum" led into the "Quiet Storm," which became the highest rated broadcast in Washington, and so people started tuning in a little earlier and listen to the "Daily Drum."  And that's how the station first began to become a real power in the commercial market in Washington, D.C.  And then the "Drum" began to get its largest audience.
Speaker 1: Can I explain--now, now we interviewed [HM] Dyana Williams--
Speaker 2: Yes, she was before that time.
Speaker 1: --ten years ago I guess, and she was telling us about the "Quiet Storm."  She had pictures of herself in Howard University Radio with, with the afro and everything.
Speaker 2: She and I started around the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: In '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: I always--my, my memory--I think she had something to do with the "Quiet Storm," didn't she or in terms of--
Speaker 2: No, Melvin was a student intern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when Dyana and I were doing it.  He started doing the "Quiet Storm" as a student intern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then when he graduated, he left and went to work, not on the air, for another station just doing--and when Cathy Liggins Hughes became manager of the station she brought him back to do the "Quiet Storm."  I think by then Dyana had left.
Story_ID: 106403
Speaker 1: Now explain to us what the--"Quiet Storm" as a concept is now all over the United States.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: My hometown of Dayton has the "Quiet Storm" late--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's there, everywhere.
Speaker 1: --late at--now what is the "Quiet Storm?"
Speaker 2: "Quiet Storm" is a song by [HM] Smokey Robinson, but the concept--Cathy Liggins, who essentially originated the concept--Melvin Lindsey was the guy who played the music and who liked the music. Cathy Liggins [HM Cathy Hughes] said around 7:00 in the evening what are young men and women doing?  She said, "Every young man that I know is trying to get some and every young woman that I know is trying to give some up, and they don't wanna have to be gettin' up to change the mood music all the time.  They want somebody to play that mood music for them so that they could get about their business."  That's how the "Quiet Storm" originated.  It was, as it turns out, a no-brainer.  You play--I used to joke with Melvin and say, "You playin' that black elevator music again."  You play those slow love songs from seven to midnight, it creates the romantic environment that a whole bunch of people wanna be in at that time, and they don't have to be thinking about programming it themselves--caught on--caught fire across the entire country.
Story_ID: 106404
Speaker 1: All right, so "Quiet Storm"--you know, so the, the, the, the "Drum" leads into the "Quiet Storm"--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the "Drum" did well.  I became the news director, I guess, in 1980 or '81 [1981], and then in 1984 I had a major argument with my former colleague, Robert Taylor, who was then the manager of the station [WHUR], and I was demoted from news director.  And at the time, I had created a segment for the "Daily Drum" called the "Insight" segment," a 20-minute interview segment that would be--that would come at the end of the "Daily Drum."  And my responsibility became programming and hosting that interview segment every day.  I had been a reporter, I'd been a news editor, I'd been a news director, and I had been associated in the minds of listeners with the rise of the station, so I guess they didn't wanna get rid of me.  But I was hosting that interview segment called "Insight," and the segment, I really liked it.  I was able to draw on all of the contacts I'd made as a reporter over the years and have guests come in and discuss the issues of the day.  That "Insight" segment still airs on the "Daily Drum."  The "Daily Drum" today is half an hour long, 10 minutes of news and 20 minutes of "Insight."  But because I'd fall out of favor with the manager with the station that I was doing the segment--
Speaker 1: What was the argument about?
Speaker 2: As I said, philosophically we had been coming from the same place.  We were both very far left of center, but when the station began to do well commercially--Robert Taylor, who by the way is now deceased [death: January 2012]--it affects the way people think about the station and about themselves.  And Robert began to have a vision of himself as a business mogul.  He started organizing conferences about how to get in business and how to make money.  He began to be more and more obsessed with making money.  By then all of our kind of socialist principals had fallen by the wayside in, in his own life.  And he wanted to fire the music director, who was the most popular person--he fired the music director, who was at the time the most popular person in the station.  It's just radio station politics.  The music director, after he was fired, filed a-it's not a lawsuit, within the human resources structure of Howard University--filed a--
Speaker 1: A grievance.
Speaker 2: A grievance.  And his lawyer asked me if I would be a character witness for him.  I said not a problem.  The guy's got great character.  I don't know--I cannot attest to his music director skills, 'cause I don't know anything about that.  I'm a news guy, but I can testify.  And the manager got very upset when I testified as to the guy's character 'cause he wanted to get rid of the guy.  And so he demoted me.  Strange things happen.  Shortly after--this was in 1984 I guess--'84 [1984].
Story_ID: 106405
Speaker 1: By 1985, the general manager [Robert Taylor] would essentially be escorted off the premises by the FBI for corruption and I would be approached by Howard University Television to host a show there called "Evening Exchange," which was the direct result, I guess, of the development of my hosting skills on "Insight," the radio broadcast.  The program "Evening Exchange" on Howard University Television was hosted by a guy named Bernie McCain, longtime radio and television guy.  Bernie had like three jobs.  Bernie was also hosting a radio show out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] from midnight to five a.m., then driving back to Washington [D.C.] to host "Evening Exchange."  And it became logistically difficult for him.  And so in April of 1985 I was approached to do "Evening Exchange" on a part-time basis.  I did it for a couple of months, they liked it, and they asked me if I would do it on a full-time basis starting in the fall of 1985 when the season began.  Sometime during that time, the WHUR general manager was led away in handcuffs.  The station came under new management, and I left and started working for Howard University Television on "Evening Exchange."
Speaker 2: So were you doing--were you still doing the, the "Insight" segment before--
Speaker 1: No, I quit.
Speaker 2: --you, you had quit that already.
Speaker 1: I was doing the "Insight" segment while I--when I first started doing "Evening Exchange" on a part-time basis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I kind of wanted out of the radio station anyway, and so after two months of doing "Evening Exchange" on a part-time basis and the season ended--because in those days, the season ended at the end of May and began again in September; television doesn't have seasons anymore; it's year-round (laughter)--the television station made me an offer of a full-time job.  And so I left the radio station, I guess, in June or July of '85 [1985], left "Inside" behind and started doing "Evening Exchange" on a full-time basis.
Story_ID: 106406
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Evening Exchange" was a live one-hour television broadcast that took phones that aired from seven to eight every evening, so it was a lot like "Insight" except with cameras.  And of course, I was to discover that the cameras made all the difference in the world.  Coming from a background where, as I began by saying, in a country where people listened to the radio, it became apparent to me when I started doing television that people don't listen to television as much as they watch it, and that things are said on talk radio that people hear you can say them on television.  But unless you say them two or three times, people may not hear them at all because they're busy watching television.  So it was a new experience and a new challenge for me, doing "Evening Exchange."  It was every night, five days a week, much like what I'd been doing before, except it was an hour long and it was television.  And so from 1985, I was doing that, and then as the television station began to have some financial difficulty, instead of doing the show live nightly, we started prerecording it; and instead of doing five nights a week, we were there two or three nights a week.  And that's what I essentially was doing up until--from, from about nineteen--we started recording the show I guess around 1992--1993 maybe--about '93 [1993]--and that's what I was doing up until 1998.  The show gave me an identity and I was able to give it an identity that I may not have had before as an individual.  I'd always been associated with the "Daily Drum," but then "Evening Exchange" gave me an identity to the point where they changed the name of the show and called it "Evening Exchange with Kojo."  And it was that that I was doing in 1998 when a guy I knew from WAMU Radio [American University Radio] approached me and asked me if I would be interested in doing the "Politics" program.  It was called "The Politics Hour with Mark Plotkin" here at WAMU, and I agreed to have a conversation with the program director at WAMU Radio about doing that.  After that conversation, I agreed not just to do the "Politics Hour with Mark Plotkin," but the entire show, which was then called "Public Interest," ten hours a week from noon to two, Monday through Friday in addition to continuing my work with "Evening Exchange."  And so from June--from June of 1998 until I retired from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 2011 I did both jobs--the radio station ten hours a week, and two or three hours of "Evening Exchange" every week--wore me out.  And then--
Story_ID: 106407
Speaker 1: What, what was a--let me ask you this, what was the typical day like for you in terms of preparing and you know, producing these programs?
Speaker 2: I started out doing the two jobs very ambitiously.  I would go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] from around 8:30 to 10 in the morning; then I would come to WAMU [American University Radio] from 10 until the show ended at 2 and then be here for about another hour gathering materials for the next day's shows; then I would go back to Howard, work there in my office until about 7:00 at night, planning and preparing for Howard's shows; and then I would go home and do the reading for my next day's shows on WAMU.  I could handle it, but it was a very rough schedule, especially because since Howard was financially strapped, I only had one producer.  I started doing that show with five producers, but by 2000 and--oh no, by 2001--2002 I only had like two producers, and then by 2003 I was down to one producer.  And so I was doing most of the ideas for shows myself.  My producer did the actual booking, but ideas and guests suggestions, as I said, I was doing all of that myself.  And then in 2005, for reasons that I can never--I was never able to quite discern except that they were financially strapped, Howard University cut my salary by eighty percent-eight zero.  Fortunately, I had this other full-time job at American University Radio, but it wasn't paying that much money at the time, and so I really had to kind of scramble.  But I continued doing the show at Howard for twenty percent of what I was making before until in 2011 I said no more.  I can't do these at the same time, and so--then, of course, at that time my salary at WAMU Radio also built up.  And--
Speaker 1: Now was it--did, did the 2005 salary cut coincide with the change in administration at Howard or something?
Speaker 2: No, it really didn't.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) the--
Speaker 2: It, it coincided with the change in management--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the television station.  And the new manager [John Hughes] invited me to a meeting and said this is all Howard can afford to pay you.  So you know it's--in the broadcasting business you learn to roll with the punches.  And so I said okay, if I continue doing good work or work to the best of my ability and continue my radio job something may break through for me, and something did.  Radio began to really work out for me, and so that's why I'm still in radio today.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's a strange--well, I've heard other strange stories in broadcasting and this is--
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is another one.
Story_ID: 106408
Speaker 1: Let me then go back and ask you about some of your--the programs and--on "Evening Exchange."  Now Washington [D.C.] is one of the--is the best news town I guess in the country--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: --including the national news that's going on the air as well as--we got a local politics that's, if, if not anything, it's, it's dif--it's exciting anyway.  There's always something going on.  I mean you, you, you were on TV during the years of [HM] Marion Barry [Mayor of Washington, D.C. from 1979 to 1991 and 1995-1999].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  One of the things that, that helped me out a great deal at "Evening Exchange" and after I came to WAMU [American University Radio] is that I've always had a great deal of interest in international affairs.  As I said, that started in my youth and being born abroad, I always had an interest in international affairs.  And when I started studying Marxism and socialism and stuff I got interested in developments in all parts of the world--Europe, Asia, Africa, South America.  And I was able at the "Evening Exchange" and Howard [University], despite the fact that we were talking about a predominantly black station with a predominantly black audience, because contrary to some beliefs, black people are interested in everything.  And so at Howard University Television, we were able to incorporate everything into our shows, in particular, into a show called "Our Weekly News Analysis," where on a weekly basis we would discuss developments in Africa with the same prominence that we would give developments in Ukraine, with the same prominence that we would give developments in El Salvador, with the same prominence that we would give developments in southeast Washington, D.C.  So we developed viewership, an audience that was willing to listen and talk about a variety of topics.  And because I'd been living in Washington since 1969, and because I had been involved in covering as a reporter and as an editor all kinds of matters, international and local, but I was also an intensely local guy.  This was my town; this is where I was raising my children; this is where I knew people; this is where I'd been working for a long time, and so "Evening Exchange" and ultimately "The Kojo Nnamdi Show" was also able to develop an intensely local identity.  And so the travails--the triumphs and travails of Marion Barry for instance, was something that I'd been living with since 1969.  And when he entered politics around 19--I guess '71 [1971], '72 [1972], I'd always been there, always been covering it.  And so I've been able to have like one foot in, in local matters and the other in everything else that was going on around the country and the world.  But I--I still see myself in very many ways as an intensely local guy.  I've, I've never really been interested--the show, "Public Interest," when I started doing it, was nationally syndicated by NPR.  The first--the second--hour of it was nationally syndicated.  But I'd never seen myself as being a national figure.  I liked the idea of, of being rooted in a community in which I know everybody and everybody knows me; I like that.
Story_ID: 106409
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You've alluded to your philosophy I guess in terms of journalism.  Just to formally ask you, what, what's your journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: Tell the truth, as I said, when I started out in this business I definitely had an agenda.  When we programmed WHUR Radio, it was a time when we had strong socialists ideas.  But we said one are the problems with the socialist ideas that we had then is that people believed that people who embraced those ideas, embraced those ideas because they couldn't figure out how to be successful in capitalist society.  But if this group of socialists could produce a number one commercial station in a commercial environment, then that would give validity to our ideas.  And we did it; we pulled it off, but when we pulled it off, as I mentioned earlier, our socialist ideas got kind of lost at that point.  And ever since then I have declined to characterize myself ideologically.  But philosophically, I've always believed that the truth will set you free, that if we focus on facts and context, and context is extremely important because why?  I have always chosen to participate in long-form journalism, as opposed to short-form journalism or shouting matches on the radio, is because if you're gonna give people information, you also have to give them context.  And so my philosophy of journalism, if I have one, is that you have to be honest; you have to give people the facts, that you do people a disservice if you do not give them the context in which those facts operate.  And there's so much of what I see now that--in which there is no context in which--in which anybody can have an opinion about anything, and somehow or the other all these opinions are supposed to have equal weight because there's no context for these opinions to operate.  And so that if I say I don't believe in climate change, then my opinion should have just as much weight as the overwhelming majority of the world scientists because well, it's my opinion; there's no context, okay.  If the context is science and the study of science, then obviously my opinion shouldn't have as much weight, but if there's no context then everybody then everybody's opinion has the same weight, which is kind of silly.
Story_ID: 106410
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now--so what about your guests on--ov--over the years on these--yeah, con--considering all these venues and stuff, especially what you're doing right now, what, what are some of the highlights or, or surprising moments, you know, from your career?
Speaker 2: Surprising moments are easier to tell about than highlights, 'cause I always have a problem trying to figure out what the highlights were.  Surprising moments are when the person you're interviewing who has been interviewed, especially if it's a person who's been interviewed on the same topic by a lot of other people, find something about this particular conversation that is different that draws them in in ways that other conversations don't.  And that's not something that you can plan.  A lot of people believe that in interviewers, the focus--in interviews--the focus should be on the interviewer.  I don't happen to believe that.  I believe that the focus should always be on the interviewee.  That's the person who has something to say.  But if that person gets really engaged in the conversation and is prompted to say things that they may not have said in another environment, things that you didn't even expect the person to say, then for me that's more fulfilling.  Specifically, a surprise, we--when [HM] Governor [Douglas] Wilder became the first African-American governor of Virginia I think it was in 1990 or something--somewhere way back then--and on the day of his inauguration, "Evening Exchange' went to the capitol in Richmond to interview Doug Wilder.  And because it was the day of his inauguration he had a very tight schedule.  And his handlers--well, his communications people--told us that he would have half an interview--half an hour to interview the governor because this was the day of his inauguration.  And we had an hour time to fill 'cause "Evening Exchange" was an hour, and we had no idea what we would fill the other half an hour with, but it was a prerecorded broadcast.  And we sat down to interview the governor.  Of course he had been a graduate of Howard University Law School, so he wanted to make sure that on this day his alma mater was among the televisions stations, and there were many that would interview with a tight schedule.  And at the half an hour mark of the interview, his communications director started to step onto the set to say the half an hour was over, and Governor Wilder waved him off and said, "No, no, no, no, I wanna continue talking" and stayed for the entire hour.  And at the end of the hour when I said, "And that's all the time we have." He said, "No, no, I can talk a little more."  I said, "No, no, that's all the time we have, okay, is one hour.  That was a surprise, but that's the kind of surprise that tells you, "Okay, I did something right here today; this person wanted to talk some more."  Authors--we interview a lot of authors on "The Kojo Nnamdi Show."  They're generally on book tours.  They're generally doing four, or five, or six interviews a day.  A lot of those interviews are three minutes for televisions, four minutes, five minutes.  And even the interviews which are longer, after a while there's a pattern; they're bored; they can't remember what city they're in; they can't remember the difference between one hotel room or another; they just know that this is another radio show that they have to do an interview for in order to promote their book.  And when during the course of that interview you can see it in the author's eyes--there comes a moment at which the author realizes that the interviewer has read the book, the interviewer is really interested in the topic, it's not just a job for the interviewer.  You see that light go off in their eyes, the light that says sure, I'm sleep deprived and sleeping in one hotel room after--all of a sudden, I wanna talk about this.  When that light goes on, that's always a surprise to me, and it's a very gratifying surprise.  But in terms of highlights and what interview stands out most in my mind, I can never figure that out.  Every single day it seems like I get a new something.  I get a new feeling about an interview.  I am nervous every single day, and I've been doing this broadcasting for forty years.  And I've been doing this particular show for fifteen years, and every single day I am nervous.  I am not sure I'm fully prepared to do this interview.  I've come to believe that's a good thing because if I ever am not nervous, it means that I've grown so used to it that I'm not as interested in it as I was before.
Story_ID: 106411
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so we were talking about some of the moments that, you know--I hear what you're saying about the--because pe--'cause people always wanna know like what person's your favorite and all that sort of thing.  It's just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I can never figure that out.  Whoever I'm interviewing that day is my favorite.  Because while I have a wide variety of interests, I may not be interested in every single topic we discuss on the broadcast that I do, but I have to get interested in it by the time the broadcast comes around.  So it's that I'm really not interested in.  Like the inner workings of financial markets, for instance, those shows are where I work hardest because I know that I'm not naturally inclined to be interested in the subject.  But I'll be damned if the audience is gonna know that.  The audience has got to think that this is my favorite subject on earth.  And so that's why I get nervous, because I know that going in I don't know beans.  But by the time this show gets on the air I've got to know enough to convince the audience that I am comfortable with this topic.  So every single day the topic that I'm doing that's my highlight; that's my favorite topic.  And when it's done, I don't have a great deal of time for reflection, 'cause I'm preparing for the next day's topic.  And so that's why I have difficulty recalling what the highlights are, because the highlight is the next topic for me that's coming up.
Story_ID: 106412
Speaker 1: Okay, how has--how has the show here at WAMU [American University Radio] been different from "Evening Exchange" and your, your "Insight" and other programs at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: When I decided to accept the position at WAMU, I went to the vice president at Howard University, who was in charge of the television, and I said I've been offered this job at WAMU.  I don't have to take it.  I've got a full-time job at Howard that pays me well enough to support my family.  But before I take it, this might be an opportunity.  Here we have a predominantly black university, arguably the nation's most prominent predominantly black university, on one side of town that's predominantly black.  And it's a public television station where I host the program.  I've been given the offer to host a program on the campus of a predominantly white university, American University, on the predominantly white side of town in a more affluent district.  It's a public station, and it's financially stable.  Wouldn't it be an interesting experiment in a city that is racially divided like Washington, D.C. was in 1998, and still to some extent is--wouldn't it be interesting if these two stations sharing a host could collaborate on a variety of projects investigating the conditions of life in Washington across racial lines.  Because the financially stable station would be able to help raise the money, and the television station brings to the table the visual aspects of it.  We could do joint broadcasts, etc.  He said that would be a great idea.  That's the main reason I took the job in radio, because I saw the possibility of bringing these two things together.  I discovered a number of things.  You know they say academic politics are, are so vicious because the stakes are so low (laughter).  One of the first things I discovered was that the vice president had done this without consulting the president of Howard [Haywood Patrick Swygert].  Apparently, the president of Howard at the time had a major, major grievance with American University, for reasons that to this day I am not aware of.  But he was not pleased with the idea of me coming to American University.  So the joint collaborations that I looked forward to went as far as it was it was the year of a mayoral election, and the two stations collaborated to present a mayoral debate between--if it was 1998 between Anthony Williams who was to become the mayor and whoever was running against him [Carol Schwartz].  And it was beautiful; it was great--black journalists, white journalists, a mixed audience; it was great.  After that apparently the president of Howard University said, "I don't want to do anything else with American University."
Story_ID: 106413
Speaker 1: So that's the first thing I discovered, how academic politics can shatter dreams.  The second thing I discover was that after being in broadcasting in Washington [D.C.] at that time for twenty-five years, that the overwhelming majority of white public radio listeners didn't have a clue who I was.  The man who hired me didn't have a clue who I was, but after we conversed for a while and realized that we'd both been in broadcasting in Washington [D.C.] for twenty-five years, and he realized what I'd done, he is the one who persuaded me to try to do the job five days a week instead of just the "Politics" hour.  But the overwhelming majority of the listeners to the radio station here at American University felt that they had discovered me.  After twenty-five years they had no clue who I was, so it was brought home to me just how deep the racial divide was.  The third thing I learned was that one of the reason that in radio the racial divide continues to be deep is because of how radio itself evolved in American.  It didn't evolve like television, where it came and everybody was watching it.  Black people had a hard time getting into radio, and the radio stations traditionally in the early days of AM radio that played black music were found way down to the end of the band; they were usually not very powerful; and they played mostly the kind of music that were--that were generally music stations, and they played the music that black folks like to listen to.  And so white folks either didn't listen to these or didn't admit that they listened to those stations.  And so there was a divide in radio that doesn't exist in television.  And so white people just didn't listen to black radio, and they didn't watch this black television station that was on.  So when I came to the radio station, the listeners here thought that they were discovering me.  Well, of course, black viewers and listeners in Washington had known me for twenty-five years, and when I would go around town with my friend Mark Plotkin, who's the one who persuaded me to come here, he would say, "Wherever we go all of these black people know you; how can they all know you?"  I thought--he said, "I thought I was well known in this town, but we go to Wizards games and everybody who's working at the--at the, the basketball stadium knows you, everybody who's working in the foot--" 'cause you know, we, we work, we sell the beer, we--okay, so I learned that this historic division of radio extended in this way.  I would go around town and all the black people would know who I am.  But it's been fifteen years since I've been working at WAMU and four years now--well, this is my third year since I left Howard University Television.  For the past three years, wherever I go around town and black people see me they say hey, Kojo, what you doing these days?  WAMU happens to be the number one station in Washington, D.C. among--has the highest listenership.  It's unique for a public radio station to have the highest listenership in any market.  But WAMU over the past year has consistency [sic consistently] had the highest listenership.  Unfortunately, only about 10 to 15 percent of that listening audience is black, because we listen to our stations that play our music, and where we can hear our people, and radio is still that divided.  So most black people know me, but they now think I'm unemployed, okay, 'cause they don't know that I'm working here.  Had that historic venture, that dream that we had in 1998 taken place where all of those black people who are watching Howard University Television was hearing the same program on American University Radio, I'd like to believe things might have been a little bit different.  But it is what it is.
Story_ID: 106414
Speaker 1: So your listener demographics have, have shifted I guess.  There, there, there aren't a lot--are you suggesting then that, that a lot of the black people listen to you on, on, on HUT [Howard University Television] don't--
Speaker 2: They have--
Speaker 1: --tune into--
Speaker 2: --Public radio.
Speaker 1: --WAM--AMU.
Speaker 2: No, we, we do have--as I said, it's grown, but it's not just WAMU.  Public radio in general that's talk radio does not have a high percentage of black listeners.  It's one of the challenges that public radio has been trying to deal with.  But the reason it's so difficult is because the listening habits of radio have--are deep.  They have been cultivated over generations.  As a general result, those black stations that are talk radio, like WOL here in Washington [D.C.], to some extent Pacifica WPFW here in Washington, I listen to them, but a whole lot of black folks don't.  The, the listenership is gonna be exclusively black if it's a black talk radio station, or almost exclusively black; it's just not going to be very large because we have been reared on thinking that black stations play music; that's what we do.  So our stations tend to be music oriented, even though to their credit, guys like Tom Joyner and Steve Harvey do include a lot of information and have found just the right mix of music, humor, and hard information and analysis that can hold onto a black audience.  You won't find that pervasively in radio generally.  And public radio where there's not--it's mostly talk radio and there's not gonna be a, a lot of music played, we don't get a lot of black folks.  And, and public radio has often tried to solve that by coming up with a black host and a black topic, but people don't listen to radio quite like they do television.  People have favorite radio stations.  Very few people have favorite television stations, except maybe some Fox and MSNBC viewers, but most people don't have favorite television stations; you just look for a program, but in radio it's different.  With radio we have loyalties.  We got this station program, this station program.  I'm listening to these--one of these four stations in my car, not listening to anything else, so a lot of it has to do with the tradition.
Speaker 1: I think you're right, I think you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 106415
Speaker 1: Now what are your, your future plans?  Do you plan to, you know, retire from WAMU and, and then just disappear like, like your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm currently--
Speaker 1: --suggest you have already?
Speaker 2: I'm currently sixty-nine years old.  I thought that at this point in my life--my father was deceased at sixty-seven, and he had been retired for two years by then.  I thought that I would probably have been retired by now, but for some reason or the other, coming to WAMU seems to have given my career new life.  And to the extent that that continues, I really love what I'm doing.  I love that fact that radio and information can still help people to make intelligent decisions about their lives and their politics.  I enjoy doing it and so I really have no plans.  Like I tell people, I don't think I've ever had a career in mind.  I've always had a job.  And it's like, you know, people say what's your lifestyle?  I've never had a lifestyle.  I've always had a life.  It's involved children; it's involved grandchildren; it's involved paying the bills.  It's life, so this is a job.  I really enjoy doing it and I'll probably do it as, as long as they'll have me, and by "they" I mean the listeners-- people who listen to the radio.
Story_ID: 106416
Speaker 1: Now you just--you, you recently came back from Ethiopia.  What, what, what were you doing in Ethiopia?
Speaker 2: Went there with the relief and development group CARE [Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere] to take a look at how they, other nonprofits, and the Ethiopian government are trying to address issues of hunger and poverty in Ethiopia.  And we spent nine days.  It was my first time ever in Africa, and I think we were able to get a lot done.  I'm not much of a--of a tourist-type traveler.  I really like going to places to work, and so being able to work in Ethiopia taught me a lot more about the place than I think I'd learned had I gone as a tourist.  We did a lot of interviews there, talked to a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: So this material is gonna be used as a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We've been using it--we did an interview with the U.S. ambassador.  We had an interview with some pro-democracy bloggers who, who are living in, in a very difficult environment because the government doesn't take kindly to what they're doing there.  Journalists have been arrested.  We, we did interviews with CARE people; we did interviews with people who have been working to get sex workers off the street in Ethiopia by getting them involved in different professions; talked with the U.S. Ambassador to the African Union.  A lot of people didn't even know there was a U.S. Ambassador to the African Union.  But mostly we got a chance to look at the conditions of life for poor people and how they're handling the challenges of, of feeding themselves and of finding ways of sustaining themselves year-round.
Story_ID: 106417
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that the African American community, which has seen significant progress since the time that I arrived in this country in the 1960s--my hope is that we as a community can continue to understand that the issues that we face are going to become more complex as time goes on because when we faced slavery, when we faced Jim Crow and outright segregation, the issues were clear and simple on their face.  Today the issues are much more complex.  They require a greater degree of sophistication to understand.  And in order to do that we have to focus on education even more than we did to lift ourselves out of the depths of the degradation that we were suffering.  And so my hope is that that focus on education, even as a nation we struggle over public education and the best way to provide it, that in the final analysis, as it was in the beginning, that that is the best and brightest hope for the African-American community is education in the digital age.  My concern is that from a cultural standpoint we seem to feel that the acquisition of wealth does not necessarily bear a relationship to education, that, that our culture, that the culture of the African American community, is a culture that can be maintained on the basis of acquiring wealth in any way that's possible, and that it seems to me that as a culture that has treasured education from the very beginning of our existence in this part of the world, for that culture to be subjected to the notion that keeping it real is somehow trying to act in such a way that we turn our noses up at education, is the greatest disservice that can happen to our community.  It is--it is a, a major concern to me that people who are seen as nerds in the African camer--American community are seen as acting white; that we have, in part, developed a subculture in which education is seen as a nonblack thing to do.  That I think is my greatest concern.  And I may not have expressed it well, but it worries the heck out of me.
Story_ID: 106418
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, wa, wa--is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Not really.  But I come from a generation--we talked about being born in the 1940s and seeing the anti-colonial struggle in the 1950s, and seeing the Black Power Movement in the 1960s, and for me seeing the Antiwar Movement in the late 1960s and the 1970s.  I come from a generation that saw that we could change the world and therefore believed that we could change the world, 'cause we did.  And it scares me that we now have generations of young people that don't believe they can change the world 'cause there's still a lot of changing that needs to be done in the world.  If the final analysis of everything that we have learned in the world has not taught us of ways to e--eliminate poverty and gross inequality in the world, then we haven't made the kind of progress that I was hoping that we should make.  And If I do have one regret about my own personal involvement in anything is that I couldn't have had a greater effect in helping people to see that, that they can change the world.
Story_ID: 106419
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise, if you back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I've never considered what my legacy would be.  I'm stumped.  I would think that--I've always seen my life as having been dedicated to a cause, and that cause being to try to rid the world of inequality and poverty, and that I think that everything I have done, at least in my view, has been with the interest of the poor people of the world in mind, that being able to have people see that they could live better lives.  And by better lives I mean more productive lives, lives are more rewarding.  I don't have a great deal of admiration or respect for the acquisition of wealth.  It's just something that--it's just something I'm not really that interested in, but I have a great deal of interest in people who can organize themselves to bring change to society and to improve the lives of people who are poor and deprived.  If I have a legacy, I would hope that it's inspiring others to try to do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106420
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your family.  Now you have children and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I have five sons, all adults, seven grandchildren.  My eldest son is--Pierre is forty-four, three children, wife.  I have twins who are forty-two years old, one as--one child and a stepchild with his wife; my other has three children.  I have a son who turned twenty-six in January of this year.  He works I retail.  He's not married yet, no children.  And my youngest is twenty-two.  He lives in Florida, not married yet, no children.  They are my greatest legacy, my offspring, and of course, my wife, Pamela, who will no doubt outlive me, my wife of twenty years.  The mother of my twins was my second wife.  She died in 1982, after an aneurism.  I got married again in 1994.  I had two children in between those two marriages.  Those are my last two sons.  But whatever they accomplish, though, that will be my legacy.  It's on them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to bring up before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of, no.
Story_ID: 106421
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you for, you know, sharing with us.  Now the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: It's funny you should ask that question.  I was christened Rex Orville Montague Paul, as I said at the beginning.  I have become Kojo.  Even young people--very few people call me Mr. Nnamdi.  I've become Kojo, and I think I've become Kojo because people feel that they know me, and they feel comfortable talking to me.  I'd like to be remembered as a guy who listened, because even though I'm a talk show host, most of what I actually do is listen.  My guests do most of the talking.  I feel that listening is a skill that if more people had it, this world would be a better place because a lot of us hear, but we don't listen.  I wanna be remembered as the guy who listened.
Speaker 1: Well said.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thanks a lot.
