Story_ID: 578951
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Michele Norris, M-I-C-H-E-L-E, N-O-R-R-I-S.  And not to confuse you, but professionally my name is Michele Norris, but in the larger world most people know me as Michele Norris-Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that's hyphen, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, now, there has to be a story behind your name, pronouncing it, you know, and I was gonna say--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --when I first heard it on public radio [National Public Radio], I said, "Well, that's gotta be a black woman."
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And sure enough--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, it's true.  So, I know there's gotta be a story, I think it has something to do with your father [Belvin Norris, Jr.].
Speaker 2: When you go back to me I was raised in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and actually, most people, if you came home with me, most people would call me Mickey, because that's what my family calls me.  My father would step on that first syllable, and I'm not sure why, he just did, and it's, you know, I wish he were here, to sit with me and help explain this, but it was just--it's not because we're French, because I get all kinds of mail and empty air from people inquiring about my name, and they say, "Is your name French" because--point of order here, in French, they actually put the, the pronunciation of the accent is actually on the second syllable, not the first syllable, it's actually (pronunciation) Michele.  It's not because we're French, my father's from Alabama.  So he just decided that he would distinguish me in, some way, and it was, you know, and I get a lot of mail about it, a lot of people say, why don't you just pronounce your name the right way, just say Michele.  I guess it's one of the early lessons I learned from my father, that it's okay to be a little bit different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing wrong with that.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe we'll bring it up at another time, we were having a discussion earlier about the names on public radio, Renee Montagne, and Sylvia Poggioli-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they all seem to roll off the tongue.
Speaker 2: --right, there's not, you know, Bob Smith, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, Bob Edwards, yeah, ordinary name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Bob Edwards.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, seven, sixty-one [September 7, 1961].  I was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, Mount Sinai Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am host of a radio program on National Public Radio [NPR].  Journalist, radio host--
Speaker 1: Okay. You're actually, you're the actually, the first African American host of 'All Things Considered,' right?
Speaker 2: I'm the first African American female host [sic.]; Lee Thornton, for a short time, hosted 'All Things Considered.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--oh boy, pop quiz--May 2nd, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP], we're on the eleventh floor and we're in room 307, I believe, and we're in Washington, D.C. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, okay. Probably-okay. Oral history, that's what this is about--
Speaker 2: That's fine (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 578952
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone--
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: --and they only require short answers.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, a favorite food--mango.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Always write your future in pencil.
Story_ID: 578953
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Belvin Norris, Jr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Norris, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Norris [Elizabeth Brown Norris], many people call her Betty.
Speaker 1: What, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Brown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And known as Betty?
Speaker 2: Known as Betty.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, March 2nd--oh boy, I always get this--I have to make sure, 1931--'77 [1977], yeah, 1931.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I might need to double check that because they were going back and forth from Alexandria and Minneapolis, so there's a chance that she might have been born in Alexandria, which is where my grandmother's people are from, but I'm pretty sure it's Minneapolis (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alexandria, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Alexandria, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Minnesota, okay.
Speaker 2: Way, way, way, up north, near Hibbing [Minnesota] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, all right, well, tell us something about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them, first of all?  How far back?
Speaker 2: Well, we know that I was raised in Minneapolis, grew up on the south side, my grandmother Ione, I-O-N-E [Ione Hopson Brown], and my grandpa Jinx [Jinx Brown]--and that really was his name, grew up on--they lived on the south side, with their children.  My grandmother, is from Alexandria, Minnesota.  She was a Hopson, and her father was a barber there.  They were part of a very small black community in Alexandria, and they were merchants, they ran a barber shop and did good business there.  And one of the things that we're trying to track down, as a family is where they, where they came from.  We know we have roots in Kansas, and we have recently discovered that there's a connection with the Taliaferro family, in Kansas, and we know we have roots in Louisiana.  And most of the people of color, in northern Minnesota, did have roots in Louisiana.  People would come up along the Mississippi, with wealthy families, often as domestics, and they would travel north to escape the malarial summers, in Louisiana.  Minnesota was a free state, and so it, many of the black families with--that had been in Minnesota for generations, arrived, via that path, because they could get to Minnesota, it was a free state, and they wondered, well, why would we go back?  It's cold here, but (laughter), you can live as, as a free man, as a free family.  So that's how a lot people wind up--
Speaker 1: That's curious, curious aspect of slavery that people who owned slaves, would often bring a slave north, and they actually, legally, were still under conditional servitude, even though they were in the North, but if they managed to get away from that master, they---
Speaker 2: Right, and they could establish residency--
Speaker 1: So, so you think that's the roots of some of your--
Speaker 2: We're trying, we're actually trying to figure that out.
Speaker 1: That could be. And is that generally considered the history of blacks in Minnesota in some ways?
Speaker 2: Many of them--
Speaker 1: Many of them.
Speaker 2: --in northern Minnesota, in particular, because in and around Alexandria, and Hibbing and Itasca [Itasca County, Minnesota], you know, the communities that were along--the little communities that are along the Mississippi River, that were summer destinations, because of the, you know, the clean water, and the clean air and the good fishing, they would draw families, from the South, from Louisiana, and Missouri, and all the way up to northern Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's interesting. Okay, so as far as you know on your mother's side, you don't--well, you said there may be some Kansas roots, and some Louisiana roots--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they've been in Minnesota a long time.
Speaker 2: They've been in Minnesota a long time, yes.
Story_ID: 578954
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandfather grew up in Washington State, and he--there's the--we are busy at work trying to find out much more about that side of the family also.
Speaker 2: Now this is Jinx Brown.
Speaker 1: This is Jinx Brown.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how do you spell his first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) J-I-N-X.
Speaker 2: Just like a jinx?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. He grew up in Washington State, now this is interesting. All right. Any stories about how he got to Minnesota?
Speaker 1: He grew up in a stationary boxcar, in Washington State, and this is the story that we have always been told, my cousins and I, and we don't know much more about that.  In Washington State, he worked on the railroad, and that's how he wound up traveling to Minnesota.
Speaker 2: Okay, now this is a story that I've heard before, about people growing up in a boxcar.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a boxcar that was abandoned by the railroad--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or whatever, they would make a home out of it.
Speaker 1: Right, and that was actually, well I've heard the story also, now that we're trying to, to track this down, we discovered, that it was fairly common, and it was sturdy housing, I mean, these were--they were, they were--could withstand weather, you had a strong roof over your head, and that's the way he grew up.  So we're trying to find out a little bit more about that, also.  We also, have discovered something that my [maternal] uncle, Jimmy, who's very active in the Alexandria historical society [Douglas County Historical Society, Alexandria, Minnesota], and he's the history detective on our side of the family, James Brown, who just as an aside, he's the father of Mark Brown, who is my first cousin, who many people know as Brown Mark, who's the bass player in Prince's band, also a Minneapolis [Minnesota] connection, (laughter), so, but my Uncle Jimmy is the history detective in the family and we have discovered that for a time, my grandfather, was on an exhibition baseball league, played an exhibition baseball league, and traveled to China.  And there's so much more that I, you know, am dying to learn about.
Speaker 2: So was this a Negro League team--
Speaker 1: His experiences. Yeah--
Speaker 2: --okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --and traveled on an exhibition team, and apparently spent some time in China and came back, and settled down, with my grandmother [Ione Hopson Brown].
Speaker 2: Now, and this is James Brown that did this?
Speaker 1: No. My grandfather, Jinx.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is Jinx Brown.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay I have to write this down (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: To China, okay, I've never, now this is an interesting story, I haven't heard of a Negro League team, like that, going as far as--
Speaker 1: We have been trying to--I found leagues that have gone to Asia, and that's something, and I've traveled to China recently so that's, I have a particular interest now in--I was always interested in this, but now when I moved back to the country--went to China for the first time, I'm really interested in tracking down this story.
Speaker 2: It sounds like your grandfather had an exciting life.
Speaker 1: He did, he did, he was a big man, he had big hands and he loved poetry.  When I was a child, we all used to go to their house on 3rd Avenue, and we would recite poems, or recite you know, something that our parents [Elizabeth Brown Norris and Belvin Norris, Jr.] had taught us, and they'd give us either nickels or quarters, you know, at the end.  You'd get a nickel if you did well, and I mean, if you really stood and presented and put a little bit of life into it, you might get a shiny quarter at the end of that, so we were learning how to recite poems, you know, like, 'Spell the Yukon,' ['The Spell of the Yukon,' Robert W. Service] and my mom had us reading Jack London.  Poem about 'Barbara Frietchie' [John Greenleaf Whittier], "'Who touches a hair on his gray head / Dies like a dog! March on,' he says." I still remember some of it.
Story_ID: 578955
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] have any stories of growing up in Minneapolis [Minnesota]? What it was like for her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, she grew up--she went to South High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota], she worked for a time in the garment industry, and then went to work for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], both my parents are postal workers.  And we grew up on the south side of Minneapolis, and a childhood that I cherish.  Grew up near a creek, Minnehaha Creek, and we were--and we lived in what I remember as a very integrated neighborhood of, traditional, midwestern, stucco homes, we lived in, in a Tudor.  My mother has since told my sisters [Cindy McGraw and Marguerite McGraw] and I, that when we first moved into the neighborhood, that my father [Belvin Norris, Jr.] was able to buy a very nice two story home, thanks to the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  When we first moved into the neighborhood, it was further south than many black families lived in Minneapolis at the time, and even though Minneapolis had a tradition of tolerance and was known as a very well integrated, and peaceful community, I've since discovered, that when my parents first purchased their home, they were the first black family to move in, to, it was on 48th [Street] and Oakland [Avenue], that far south, and immediately, four for sale signs went up in the neighborhood.  One of them, right next door to our home, and my mother tells this funny story that they had a difficult time selling the home, because it meant purchasing a home that was next to an African American family.  And she said that she would play a little mischief when they had someone who was--she'd make a little mischief when they had somebody who was coming to look at the house, she'd find a reason to come out and hang laundry in the backyard, or go check on our tomatoes, (laughter), to make sure that they knew what--who lived in the house, and she said she chuckled to herself about that.  And they eventually wound up selling the home, to a black family, the Gossetts, Moses [Moses Gossett (ph.)] and Mae Gossett [ph.], and they had two sons, and they became very, very, close to us and in fact, Mrs. Gossett was almost like an aunt to me, and I spent a lot of time in their house, and I spent a lot of time in our house, and bit by bit the neighborhood became more integrated, but it was one of those neighborhoods that didn't flip, it was--it sort of reached a point and it was sort of stable level of integration and I grew up in a neighborhood that had lots of white kids, and lots of black kids, and a few Native American families, and a couple of Asian families, not very many Hispanic families, because they just weren't many in Minnesota at that time.
Speaker 1: What were racial issues like when your mother was growing up?  Does she have any stories about how she was treated in school or did she go to an all-black school, or did she go to an integrated school--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, try to find an all-black school in Minnesota, (laughter).  I'm not sure that that, that exists, even today.  So she was in a neighborhood that had a large black population, and she said it was, it was difficult, she doesn't talk much about this and tracing my family history, and that side has been a little bit harder because they don't talk, as much, but I find that my father's side of the family, they're a little bit more open, about talking about their, their history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did she grow up in a neighborhood that had a settlement house, you know, I think it's named after a black woman, I think from Chicago [Illinois], I can't--
Speaker 2: Ida Wells, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ida B. Wells, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ida B. Wells. Was there--I'm not sure if there was an Ida B. Wells, settlement house in Minneapolis.
Speaker 1: Maybe there's one, there's one, there's something there they named after a black woman, I'm not really familiar with it--give me a minute, I can't think of what it was [Phyllis Wheatley Settlement House; Phyllis Wheatley Community Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  It was a real big part of--when we were in Minnesota, people talked about it all the time.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 578956
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandmother [Ione Hopson Brown] was, was very--she was a community activist and she was very, very, very, active in traveling around the city, and advocating for better housing, advocating for senior rights, there was a group a community organization called You Need Us [ph.], and she was the head of this organization, I remember as a child, she was given a key to the city.  She was very, very, well known, and was a agitator in her own way, in sort of a Minnesota way, you know, and was very active in the Sabathani Community Center, on the south side of Minneapolis [Minnesota].  I'm kind of fidgeting because there's a story that is part of our history, but I'm kind of going back and forth here because my mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] is, is--in the family they're split about whether the story really should be told, and I'm gonna share it with you because for the sake of history, and I apologize to my mother right now for doing this, because she's said tell that story when I'm gone, but I think that it's part of our history.  My grandmother, was, had a certain standing in the community, and was very much looked up to and I didn't always understand where that came from and it--I discovered, really only recently, because my family only recently started to talk about it, and again, there's my Uncle Jimmy [James Brown] who's doing all this research, just discovered a lot about this and we'll talk about this and other parts of the family, except, please don't talk about that.  My grandmother had earned a bit of a name for herself, and was able to earn money and put aside money for herself, and start a life traveling as a--she would do demonstrations, and it's--the background there is that it was several grain companies, in Minnesota, Pillsbury [Pillsbury Flour Mills Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota], General Mills [General Mills Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --she was a traveling Aunt Jemima, and she would travel throughout small towns, at a time when pancake mix, the idea of just adding water and eggs, and whipping up pancakes, was, was, new and different, and you used to, you know, you'd have to do all this by scratch, and she'd travel around and wear a kerchief on her head, and demonstrate how you could do this.  And she would do this in rooms full of people, through small towns all across Minnesota, and I think she traveled to Iowa, and the Dakotas and she became very well known, and apparently, there were other traveling Aunt Jemimas around the country who were doing this--
Speaker 2: I've heard this, this kind of story before, and it may have been in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There's somebody, who may just be related to you.  We'll talk about this after, (laughter). I'll try and think of who it is.
Speaker 1: Oh really, no, because this is--my mother hates this story.
Speaker 2: But there, there's, I heard this, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: And you know what, it's interesting, because it's--and it's not because of any kind of shame, my mother--I don't want you to think that she was ashamed of this at all, but it's very painful, because, I mean, you know the stigma associated with Aunt Jemima, but at the same time, you know, what a wonderful thing, that my grandmother was able to travel at a time when African Americans, in particular, African Americans didn't travel, and see the country, and receive a certain amount of accolade, and respect and was able to earn money, you know, doing this.  And I think it set her on a path to becoming the community leader and the wise elder that she became in the community, so that's part of our, our, story too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I've heard different stories--
Story_ID: 578957
Speaker 1: We've talked to some advertisers and some other people, and I can't you know, draw on the name right now, but there's stories about--now about that the Aunt Jemimas on the road, actually being almost the antithesis of the Aunt Jemima on the box.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, the Aunt Jemimas on the road, the Aunt Jemimas on the road--and, and, again, this is part of the family research that we're looking into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your, did your [maternal] grandmother look like the Aunt Jemima?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother was very light skinned, and most, and I'm told that most of the Aunt Jemimas, who did the traveling, were very light skinned.  My grandmother, as long as I can remember, and apparently, you know, from her youth, had extremely long hair.  And when I say long, I mean, long past her rear end, that she would braid, and she would usually coil it up on her head, so no, she didn't look like the dark skinned, large boned, sort of big woman that you come to see on the old Aunt Jemima boxes.  Aunt Jemima that's on the boxes today has pearls on and looks like she just came from Sunday, Sunday meeting or something like that, but the old Aunt Jemima, you know, who looked like the caricature, the mammy caricature, was very different than the Aunt Jemimas that they actually sent out on the road, which is, you know an interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah all, all of this, if you put it down into a cultural--just sort it out, the strain is just about to really--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it tells you a lot about America and the black experience, that you have a caricature of a woman, one, and a rather dark woman, then you put on the road a light woman--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to be able to relate better to the white people that she's probably gonna meet--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause she's not gonna meet black people. Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or to, it's been suggested also, that to make it a bit easier, for them, when they were traveling through some of these towns, because as you well know, even in Minnesota, it was difficult to find lodging, and I would love to know, how she traveled and where she was able to stay, if there were tourist hotels, you know, and that was the code, if you saw the sign in the window, and the sign said tourist, that meant, this is an establishment, a rooming house home, where people were willing to rent lodging, for African Americans at that time, Negroes, who were traveling.  Whether they be salespeople, like my grandmother, or if they were traveling musicians, you know, we've all heard stories about Negro League baseball players, who had to sleep on the bus, because they were unable to find lodging, when they travelled even in the North, even in the North.  So it may have been a cultural statement, may have been, a recognition that when you send someone on the road, they're gonna have a harder time.  You know, it is the conundrum of color, and confusion about color, that still exists, to this day.
Speaker 1: This is a book for somebody to write, even just about the Jemima tours and the racial dynamics of all that, color, race, and all that.  So, yeah, it's, it's interesting, did the grandmother have any stories about that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: You know, I only learned about it as an adult.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never, and I wish, that I had, I would love to sit at her knee, and hear her stories, and I am determined to try to find, some of these other traveling Aunt Jemimas, that are still living, and listen to their stories, because I want--I'm hoping if I can hear their stories, I'll learn something about my Grandmother Ione [Ione Hopson Brown].
Speaker 1: Or even find, or you can find the executives that were responsible for--or the ad agency, their records (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We've actually found some of the ads.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we're, we're on the, on the path, but it's, it's, it's interesting, and I, I, I'd love to learn more about it.
Story_ID: 578958
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Belvin, and that's not Melvin, that's Belvin, with a B.  B-E-L-V-I-N, Norris, Jr. [Belvin Norris, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay. No middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, eleven, twenty-five [August 11, 1925], Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: They are my Grandmother Fannie, was originally a Walker [Fannie Walker Norris], and her family originally came from Virginia.  My grandpa Belvin, Belvin Norris, Sr., his family was from Birmingham, he was one of ten.  Most of my great uncles, still live in and around Birmingham, one has moved to Detroit [Michigan], either Birmingham, Dolomite [Alabama], or Marion [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Dolomite.
Speaker 2: Dolomite.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there is a famous black hero called Dolemite, pretty popular, you know, yeah, in the '70s [1970s] (laughter).
Speaker 2: They, they lived in an area of Birmingham called Ensley, in the shadow of the steel mills and its E-N-S-L-E-Y, and I spent most of my summers until I was about eleven, going back and forth, between Minneapolis [Minnesota] and Birmingham, they would send us, all the northern cousins down to Birmingham for, for the summer, and my father, my father went to Parker High School [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], and I don't know if you--I imagine that you've probably come across Parker in all the interviews that you, you do, it was the only high school for Negroes in Birmingham, and it was the largest high school for Negroes in the country.  It was quite famous.
Speaker 1: The largest high school for black people in the country?
Speaker 2: In the country, in fact, Ebony magazine did a whole spread on Parker High School, I went back and spent some time, at Parker for a piece I did for NPR [National Public Radio] on integration then and now.
Speaker 1: About how many students?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the figure, I don't remember, it's a very large school, and it was--had several, you know, programs, apprenticeship programs, and at the time, they were quite proud that number of their teachers, had masters degrees, and Ph.D.'s and it was a time when it was very difficult to find work if you have that degree of education, so many of them would work as educators in the school system and at the time because of segregation, doctors and ditch diggers, sent their children to the same school, and so it was this, this, citadel, in the community.  Parker was also well known because, if you remember the demonstrations at Kelly Ingram Park in Birmingham, Parker is right down the street, from Kelly Ingram Park, so that Kelly Ingram Park and then you have 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] right here, and it's not that much farther down the road, you have Parker High School, and many of the students that were arrested, who were--who faced dogs and fire hoses, they were--
Speaker 1: Those are the students that James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] organized in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and they were at Parker High School, and when I went back, I sat down and I actually interviewed many of them.  And they had transistor radios in school that day, and they listened for a, a, particular sort of code word in the broadcast that day and the deejay would say, "Ooh, it's cold outside," and that was, that was the cue, that everyone left the school, in mass.  And the principal at the time, who was [HistoryMaker] Alma Powell, Colin Powell's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] wife, was Alma Powell's father, was the principal [Robert Charles Johnson], they called him Big Red.  He was a light skinned man and they called him Big Red because of that, tried to stop them, and he--there was no stopping them and they left the school, and marched down the street.
Story_ID: 578959
Speaker 1: We were talking about Birmingham [Alabama] your, or, your father's [Belvin Norris, Jr.] ancestors in Birmingham (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are, are there any stories that go all the way back to slavery days or Reconstruction, on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My, my father's grandfather, was a slave--
Speaker 1: So your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I don't, I don't know much about him.
Speaker 1: They don't have any stories about what they felt like, when slaves were freed or where they went or what they did--
Speaker 2: No, I know my father and my--he was one of six, they all one by one, moved from Birmingham to Chicago [Illinois], and they were very close, the six brothers, very, very, close and I was close to the cousins on that side, even though we lived in different places.  And I heard a lot, you know, from them about what it was like growing up.
Speaker 1: So your father moved to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, how old was he, were they when they moved?
Speaker 2: He went in the [U.S.] Navy right out of school [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], so he was eighteen, and then came back and went right to Chicago, and his older brothers had already, had already preceded him.  There was Sylvester [Sylvester Norris], Simpson [Simpson Norris], Louis [Louis Norris], Woodrow [Woodrow Norris], Belvin, and Joe [Joe Norris], and one by one they all moved to Chicago, and they all lived in Chicago, right near Midway Plaisance, on Ellis Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --near University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  They all lived in a house together, and I have wonderful pictures that they took--they would take--get all dressed up, and get pictures taken or something, and send back to my grandmother [Fannie Walker Norris] in Birmingham--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --and my father went--left Birmingham and went to work for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].
Story_ID: 578960
Speaker 1: He [Norris' father, Belvin Norris, Jr.] went to, he was in the [U.S.] Navy back, well, during the-was it like during the Korean War days, or--
Speaker 2: No, it was when wor-and, you know, I said he was eighteen--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, he was born in twenty, twenty-five [1925], so he was World War II [WWII], yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and he was on his way--he was in the Navy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was on a ship on his way to, I guess the European Theater [European Theater of Operations], when the war ended, so he never saw, saw combat, but he produce a medal which I still have.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about the Navy to share with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah he did, he worked in the kitchen.
Speaker 1: That's, that's all of the black Navy veterans, they say that, that they put you in the kitchen and that you--Dorie Miller [Doris Miller], who won the Congressional Medal of Honor [sic.], was a kitchen man.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was down in the galley, and everybody else was killed, he came up and shot the Japanese like that.
Speaker 2: Right. He worked in the kitchen.
Speaker 1: The galley, that's where-
Speaker 2: Was a pretty good cook, because of that, (laughter), he really learned his way around a kitchen, and I guess, that's where he learned.  Every other person I know, whose father was in the [U.S.] military, particularly in the Navy, learned how to make certain dishes, like the creamed chipped beef on toast, and certain things that my father would, would serve.  He, he didn't talk a lot about his service, he was proud of it, but he also did say that he wished he was given an opportunity to do more, to make more of himself in the military, and pick up skills that maybe would be more of use to him when he returned to the U.S.
Story_ID: 578961
Speaker 1: He [Norris' father, Belvin Norris, Jr.] went to Chicago [Illinois] to join his brothers I guess and, and--but how did he decide to come to Minnesota, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He met my Uncle Jimmy [James Brown], my mother's [Elizabeth Brown Norris] brother, who was in Chicago also, working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and followed Jimmy to Minnesota for a weekend.  And he and my Uncle Woody--Woodrow [Woodrow Norris], were very close, they graduated Parker [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] the same year, and they were very, very, tight, and they went to Minnesota, and they just fell in love with the city.  And they felt that it was a more tolerant community, they loved the lakes, and they decided that it was the kind of place that they could live in and raise children.  My Uncle Woodrow, married--met and married my Aunt Audrey [Audrey Norris], who was white, and decided that they would definitely live in Minnesota, you know, at that time.  Minnesota was known as a tolerance community, there were several, I grew up with several mixed race children, whose families left and went to Minnesota.  Now, you have to remember that this was the time of the Loving decision [Loving v. Virginia, 1967], when people just couldn't, you know, there were several states, there were sixteen states, where interracial marriage was still against the law.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Loving case was an integrated couple that--where were they?
Speaker 2: In Virginia--
Speaker 1: Virginia, right, yeah--
Speaker 2: --and they moved here to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and could not go home to Virginia, they were really banished from their county, and were not able to go home.  So there were several families that had moved to Minnesota, and many of them lived on the south side [Minneapolis, Minnesota], or in the south suburbs, Richfield [Minnesota] and Bloomington [Minnesota], and my Uncle Woody moved to Minnesota, and my father and Uncle Woody were so close, that my father followed behind him, and he wound up marrying Jimmy's sister, my mother, and that's how we got to Minnesota.
Story_ID: 578962
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, and talents, and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I have a bit of both of them in me.  My father [Belvin Norris, Jr.] was very zen, today we would call him very zen.  He was a quiet man, and very intellectual, read--both my parents read voraciously, voracious readers, subscribed to the Sunday New York Times, and if we didn't subscribe on Sundays, we would drive down to a place called Shinders, which was a big bookstore, on Hennepin Avenue, in downtown Minneapolis [Minnesota], and pick up The New York Times, every Sunday.  My father was funny, he loved jazz, he was devoted to his children, to me and to my sisters, his stepdaughters [Cindy McGraw and Marguerite McGraw], and he loved to cook, he loved his roses, he was a big gardener, and as I tick through some of those things, you could say the same of me.  I love my garden, although I don't grow roses, because they take--I don't grow a lot of roses, roses take too much time.  After watching him, spend so much time on those roses, I have to say, I kind of stay away from roses, but I love to cook, I love jazz, some would say, I have a bit of a retiring personality at times.  My mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] is bold, she's funny also, she speaks her mind, she speaks truth to power, she is also very, very, funny.  Quiet in her own way, but she is--she walks in a room and immediately sort of takes over, I mean, people--she just has that, that sort of big, personality, she's tall, and regal in her bearing, and the older that she gets, the more I see it happen, that she's queenly, almost, and I don't think I had that when I was younger, I hope to have that, that she just wears authority naturally.  It's in her bones, and I'm hoping that I pick up more of that as I get older, but for her it, it's just in her DNA, it's who she is.
Story_ID: 578963
Speaker 1: Is there a story that they tell about how, how they met?  I mean, we know how, through your Uncle Woody [Woodrow Norris], but is there a story about when they met?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't--I--they didn't talk a lot about that.  I don't, you know, I know, I know that they set--Jimmy set my father [Belvin Norris, Jr.] up, my Uncle Jimmy [James Brown], with my mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] on a date, and that was it.  They just--he fell in love with Minnesota, and he fell in love with a Minnesota girl and decided to make his life there.
Story_ID: 578964
Speaker 1: Did he [Norris' father, Belvin Norris, Jr.] ever complain about the cold?
Speaker 2: You know, no, (laughter), he took to the cold, he loved it, when the snow fell, he was the first one out.  We lived in a corner lot, which meant we had twice as much snow to shovel as everybody else, because we had, not just the front, but the side, and the driveway, and he refused to get, even later when they had, you know, the blowers, the snow blowers, and it was a point of pride with people in the neighborhood in the neighborhood, when they would get the blowers--not my father, he would, you know, refuse, he would shovel by hand, he would be one of the first ones out there.  I remember when we were kids--when I was a little kid, I had a little pint sized shovel, we were expected to get out there and shovel with him.  He--even in the summer when people got their--also the motorized lawn mowers, my father had a push mower, would take it out Saturday mornings, would take it to the hardware store and have the blade sharpened, you know, he kept an old push mower,  said, "It works just fine, don't need a new one."  He, he took to the cold, he liked it, he took the bus to work every day, and you know, would bundle up and bundle us, it was almost like an adventure for him.  It was so different than the heat, that he was used to, but in the end, you have to remember that Minnesota is very hot in the summer, so it's cold as it gets in the winter, and it's very hot in the summer, and because he grew up in a hot climate, we had no air conditioning.  Air conditioning, (makes sound) conditioning, you know, he would refuse to do that, said, "If I could live in Alabama without air conditioning for all my life, you could live in Minnesota without air conditioning," so, you know, fans would do.
Story_ID: 578965
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two sisters [Cindy McGraw and Marguerite McGraw], yeah.
Speaker 1: Two sisters, okay. And where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, by ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're ten and twelve years older than me.  My mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] was previously married to Donald McGraw [ph.], and my two sisters, were the product of that marriage, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right, do have, have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I don't know what my earliest childhood memory is, I have, I have several.  I, I, remember playing dress up, you know, they kept a big dress up box for us, and, well a lot of it was my sisters' cast off clothes, 'cause you know my sisters were the coolest people on earth, we had a rec room in the basement, and you know, they had the hair tape, that they would curl right here, and I used to, used to sit in the basement and watch them dance to James Brown records, and I just thought they were the coolest people in the land.
Speaker 1: What's the gap between you?
Speaker 2: Ten and twelve years.
Speaker 1: Ten and twelve years. Okay, okay, so they were like--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you know, I was an eight year old watching them--a six year old watching them, at sixteen and eighteen, and eighteen and twenty and they just, they were the personification of hip you know, to me.  I remember Halloween, my father [Belvin Norris, Jr.] was a baseball fanatic, would watch baseball on television but listen to it on the radio, and I do remember on Halloween, I remember this very clearly, I wanted so badly to be--you know, the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] catalog would come with all of the Halloween costumes, and I wanted something that had tiaras and wands and I wanted to be a fairy princess, because all the other little girls in the neighborhood, were going to be like fairy princesses, my father dressed me up as Tony Oliva, and it was this Sears costume, you know, you would get, you know, the baseball costume, that doubled as pajamas, so, you know, you'd and then, I had to wear the Tony Oliva costume for months afterward (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the great baseball player for Minnesota [Minnesota Twins] or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter), who, who is still spends time in Minnesota, 'cause, my sister and her husband, Tim [ph.], say that they went indoor to the Mall of America [Bloomington, Minnesota] to see him, at a local eatery or something, but yeah, I do, I have, distinct memories of that, and I remember going down to Birmingham [Alabama] a lot.  I remember the summers in Birmingham, and spending time with my [paternal] grandparents [Fannie Walker Norris and Belvin Norris, Sr.], and all the cousins would be down there.  I remember my grandfather, drove this gigantic car with suicide doors.  The doors that opened up like this, instead of one door opening, it would open up so that the whole of the car was, sort of open, and he would drive, after he worked in the steel mills, and he would--after he retired, and most of his sons worked in the steel mills, my father never did, he moved up to Chicago [Illinois], right out of the [U.S.] Navy--he would drive back and forth to Bruno's [Bruno's Supermarkets, LLC] which was a grocery store, a chain down there, and I do remember driving, and I would love sitting in this gigantic car with my grandfather, who was also a very big man, big hands, big shoulders, and he would drive a woman back and forth to Bruno's.  And I remember that, and we had sort of a lending system in the neighborhood, in Birmingham, and I also remember being there and they, they--and I guess that at the time, they couldn't use the library, the public library, so they had this sort of lending system, within the neighborhood in Ensley [Birmingham, Alabama], and I actually do remember, running books back and forth, and they kept a list of who had what book, and someone would want a book next, and I remember that when I was a kid also, was running the books all over. Those are some of my earliest memories.
Story_ID: 578966
Speaker 1: Okay,  now you were in Birmingham [Alabama], when you came along, you were born in '61 [1961], the real, super dramatic, days of the Civil Rights Movement, were when you were, when you were a little kid or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know even before, did you hear stories about the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I did, I had a--my cousin Juanita [ph.], was one of the first black students at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], played on the softball team, powerhouse player on the softball team, and I remember going to games to watch her play and they were just--they yelled the most awful things at her.  And she was so strong, and just unbroken by it, and she would step up to bat, and years later, I would read about Jackie Robinson, and you know, the awful things that people would yell at him, and I'd think, my goodness, I never saw that happen to Jackie Robinson, but I saw it happen to a member of my family, you know, on a baseball diamond, in women's softball, you know.  They were yelling these things at women, but she was, she was just--she was big, and she was powerful, and she had long, beautiful, hair, and she would step up and shake her hair, put her hand on her hip and just crack that bat, and you know, she was fabulous.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so would you spend that, every summer in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Almost every summer until I was about eleven, I got involved in sports up in Minnesota, and then I, I stopped going down--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so much.
Story_ID: 578967
Speaker 1: We always ask this question like this, so I better do it, what, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My parents were fantastic cooks, so there were always wonderful smells coming out of the kitchen.  My mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris] was a baker, she baked cakes for a time, she would bake homemade bread, instead of buying it at the store.  My father was a good cook, Sunday supper was always, you know, a big deal.  The roses, I always remember the smell of roses, it still makes me swoon, my father had a row of roses along the garage in the backyard.  People in the neighborhood, would walk by to see Belvin's [Belvin Norris, Jr.] roses, they were gorgeous.  And in the summer, he would cut them, and we had rose bowls, little glass bowls, and he filled them up three quarters of the way with water, and then when a rose was just ripened, you know, just about to lose its bloom, he'd only cut it then.  So, he wanted to show off, show it for as long as he could, he cut it and it'd float in the rose bowl, it would just be this wonderful smell, throughout the house.  And we also had peonies in the backyard, big, heavy, flowers, that had this almost like a sweet sap, that would roll down the stems, and ants would always march up the stems, and we weren't allowed to bring those in the house, because they were so sweet, they smelled beautiful, but you, you just invited ants into the house, so we never would bring those into the house, but I remember going in the backyard and that heavy, sweet, smell.  When I was really young in Birmingham [Alabama], when the mills were still running twenty-four hours, I remember this sort of acrid smell, that we had down in Birmingham, and the night sky would have this sort of glow, I guess the foundry would be up and running in the evening, and I still remember that.  And I remember the distinct smell of the lakes, there's a certain smell that a fresh water lake gives off, in the summer that is, is just wonderful, and it's something that I miss here in Washington [D.C.].  We don't have a lot of fresh water lakes, and in Minnesota, they're everywhere.  I grew up between Harriet [Lake Harriet], Nokomis [Lake Nokomis], and I grew up on the Minnehaha Creek, so, there was just water everywhere, and I love that smell.  Another thing I remember is grass, it's one of the reasons that I've never been able to move to New York City [New York, New York], I've always had to live in a place where, you know, I could wake up in the morning, and feel grass under my feet, that's something that I remember.  Sights, snow, I mean, my childhood, I just think a lot snow angels, sledding, when you grow up in Minnesota, cold weather and snow are just so much a part of your, your life.  And if you don't like winter sports, well I feel bad for you, because winter lasts from like October until seems like June (laughter).  But, you know, you're not really promised spring, until you're midway through May, and I just don't--and the snow, the feel of the crunch of snow under your feet, that feeling of kind of freezing, of your upper lip, you know, when you've been out for too long. Those are all memories of my childhood.
Story_ID: 578968
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], I started engineering at the University of Wisconsin-- Oh no, grade school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, grade school, most people don't ask me about grade school.  Eugene Field.
Speaker 2: Eugene Field [Eugene Field Elementary School; Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], okay.
Speaker 1: And I was there for two years.  Kindergarten and first grade, and then in second grade, I transferred to St. Joan of Arc Catholic Elementary School [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's outside Minneapolis [Minnesota].
Speaker 2: St. Joan of Arc, in third grade was it?
Speaker 1: Second grade, and stayed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Second grade, okay, now were there any other black students in class with you?
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --quite a few, quite a few, both at Eugene Field and at St. Joan of Arc.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so, what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 1: Reading, reading, I mean, I loved it, I loved to read.  My sisters [Cindy McGraw and Marguerite McGraw], used to take me down to the library, on weekends, I loved to read.  When I got to high school, I, I, gravitated towards the sciences, I loved physics and biology, tolerated math, but I really loved the science that I got out of it.
Speaker 2: What, what--was there any particular thing that got you interested in science, or?
Speaker 1: You know, it was probably a good teacher, I mean, we just had--I went to Washburn High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota], I left St. Joan of Arc, and went to the bussing experiment, and wound up at Susan B. Anthony Junior High [Susan B. Anthony Junior High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and then Ramsey, where they took all the kids from the south side in Minneapolis, and created a ninth grade center, in this integration experiment, and then wound up at Washburn, or Washburn Senior High, which is right next to Ramsey Junior High [Alexander Ramsey Junior High School; Justice Page Middle School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and had a couple of great (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. So you went to two junior high schools.
Speaker 1: No, I went to--I went to two junior high schools, yes, Susan B. Anthony, for seventh and eighth grade (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Susan B. Anthony and Ramsey, okay.
Speaker 1: And then they had all the ninth graders, from all the feeder schools, middle schools, went to one ninth grade center, all the ninth graders from the south side, and that was the way they achieved integration.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Putting us all under one roof.
Speaker 2: Then Washburn High School.
Story_ID: 578969
Speaker 1: Did you have any special teachers or mentors in grade school that--
Speaker 2: I had a teacher--I had a bit of a speech impediment when I was in elementary school, and I had a teacher named Mrs. Cress [ph.], she then married and became Mrs. Dornagan [ph.], and I should go back and find her because she, she was just fantastic.  And they put me in a pilot program for speech therapy, and I just talked too fast, and my brain would go faster than my mouth, and I would drop like every third word and she could see that I was reading above grade level, and I, you know, had what she would say, was certain gifts, and told my parents [Elizabeth Brown Norris and Belvin Norris, Jr.], "Don't let them put her in, you know, special education, 'cause it's like cement shoes, she'll be in a separate track, and make sure that that doesn't happen," and she was just so wonderful.  She was my first grade teacher [at Eugene Field Elementary School; Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]. I still remember the feeling that she gave me, the confidence that she gave me, she was fantastic.
Story_ID: 578970
Speaker 1: And I remember Roland DeLapp [Roland R. DeLapp], who was the principal at Washburn High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota], and he was a principal, I didn't have much-I mean, he wasn't a teacher of mine, but he was also very encouraging, and he would just, you could always tell me, you know, "You're going to do something special, I don't know what it is, but you're going to do something special one day," and he was also wonderful.  And my parents, had split up, when I was in junior high, and so high school, my family was, my parents were divorced, they lived down the street from each other, and they were very active in school.  They chaperoned and they did a lot in the school, but it was a little--it was a difficult time.  And there were--two of my best friends' parents, were also going through a divorce at that time, and Dr. DeLapp, somehow knew that, and just made sure, just watched out for us, you know, at a time when--schools are not very good about handling this--I have young children, I've noticed at school, they're very good about this, making sure if there's any confusion about one parent, picking up the child, as opposed to the other parent--schools, weren't so good about that back in the 1970s, when I was in school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you live with your mother [Elizabeth Brown Norris]?
Speaker 1: I lived with my father [Belvin Norris, Jr.].
Speaker 2: You lived with your father, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Dr. DeLapp just made sure there was no stigma, that, you know, nothing was made of it, he was, he really was a prince, to make sure that, you know, we had a very normal life at school, and that if we needed to find an emotional weigh station, you know, as I say if you're having a tough day, go see my secretary, and she'll make sure that you, you know, are gonna be okay.
Speaker 2: So you were how old when your parents split up?
Speaker 1: I was somewhere between eleven and twelve.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was still in junior high, but when I got to high school, he was sort of a guardian angel.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's kind of unusual that the father ends up, you know, with the kids, but, but, it was just you right--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, my sisters [Cindy McGraw and Marguerite McGraw]--
Speaker 2: --not the other two were, had been out of high school by then.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, right, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My father stayed in the house, my mother moved further down Oakland Avenue, so she was close and very much in my life.  And I stayed with Dad because I stayed--that was, there was consistency there, and I didn't have to leave the house, it was the only house that I lived in until I went to college--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so I was able to stay there.
Story_ID: 578971
Speaker 1: Washburn High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota], at--so you got interested in science at Washburn.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So who was a teacher there that made it, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I had a couple of them, I had a drafting teacher, who was really wonderful too, and I toyed with the idea of architecture--I can't remember his name now--the, the--you know, I'm having senior moments as I'm talking to you, I don't remember specifically their names, but my physics and my biology teacher, were really wonderful and I loved that.  I got--I was recruited in a program called Inroads [ph.], which it was a little engineering program and I actually would spend Saturdays at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], in an engineering program, and wound up, when I graduated, going to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], where I studied electrical engineering for three years, until I changed my major and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I know. But let me go back a little bit, talk about high school.  Did, now, were you involved in clubs in high school and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. I wrote for the student newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a column, in the student newspaper, I--
Speaker 1: What was your column about?
Speaker 2: Faces in the crowd. So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so interviews with people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would highlight people, and things that people did, got the idea from reading Sports Illustrated, you know they have their column at the front, I think it's the same name basically.
Speaker 1: And you were involved with sports too right?
Speaker 2: I--a little bit, I ran track, and didn't, didn't stay with it, I just wasn't, I, I, we had a number of girls, Star Grisby [ph.], Margie Robinson [ph.], we had some fast girls, I mean, they were--and I just couldn't keep up, and I just didn't have the speed to stay with it.  And I ran and I tried to run the 440 [440-yard dash] and the 880, and I'm aging myself, I know, because I know that they're now called the 400 and the 800, which are tough races, is a long sprint.
Speaker 1: 440?  And did you say 880?
Speaker 2: It is a hard race, it is a hard race, it is a hard race, and I just didn't see how I could stay with it.  And then I started to dance, and I enjoyed that much more, and I was a cheerleader, my last two years, for football, basketball, and hockey, where we would cheer on ice and do gymnastics on ice.
Speaker 1: It is, it's Minnesota.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's Minnesota so I had a big, giant Afro, and go out there with these gloves that allowed you to, you know, do gymnastics on ice.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I did, I ran for--and I did not win, I attempted to run for student counsel, and I did not win, and it stung, and I still remember that.  And I remember Dr. DeLapp [Roland R. DeLapp] was there saying, "You learned an important lesson in your life, you don't always get what you want, take the lesson from this, and figure out what you do to move forward.  You know, don't retreat, move forward, make sure that you're stronger because of it."
Story_ID: 578972
Speaker 1: You say your father's a avid reader, and your parents [Elizabeth Brown Norris and Belvin Norris, Jr.] both were avid readers, did you read a lot of news in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I read, I devoured The Times [The New York Times], when it came in. I thought it was fascinating, it was sort of big world, you know, outside.  We got Time magazine, we didn't get Newsweek, we always got Time magazine, it came every week. National Geographic came every week, we were not allowed to cut up National Geographic, it was, you know, it was kept in a special--these binders, that my father would get from National Geographic, and they were kept on a shelf and when you read them, you had to put them back, just so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I read that and that was also a window into another wonderful world of adventure outside, the boundaries of Minnesota.
