Story_ID: 625826
Speaker 1: Well good afternoon I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers, I will be the interviewer today, and we have Matthew Hickey, who's the videographer.  And observing we have Jo Katherine Holerman [sic. Jo Katherine Page].  And I will start by having you introduce yourself to me, or just stating your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm [HistoryMaker] Rachel Noel, do you need a middle name?
Speaker 1: Yes, please.
Speaker 2: Rachel Louise Noel, or (laughter) Rachel Bassette which is my maiden name, maybe that's better.  Rachel Bassette Noel.
Speaker 1: So can you spell out Rachel Bassette Noel for me?
Speaker 2: R-A-C-H-E-L Rachel, Bassette is my maiden name B-A-S-S-E-T-T-E, my [paternal] grandfather [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] put the E on the name because we are the black Bassettes, white Bassetts are all over Virginia, my last name is Noel N-O-E-L.
Speaker 1: And you date of birth?
Speaker 2: January 15th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Capricorn?
Speaker 2: Capricorn, right.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Hampton, Virginia, you've heard of Hampton, I know.
Speaker 1: Yes I have.  Today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't even know.
Speaker 1: It's the 22nd (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you.
Speaker 1: So it's April 22nd [2006].
Speaker 2: You thought you would throw some things at me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your occupation, I know that you're retired now but before you retired?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a teacher.  And I used to do, let me see what do we call it?  I guess social work when I was in Washington [D.C.], my first job was at Southeast Settlement House [Washington, D.C.], so I guess it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, when we get there, we'll, we'll get to it, we're gonna start before your, your professional career.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 625827
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start with five People magazine type questions for you, and very short answers and these answers will appear with your picture on our website.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, mashed white potatoes (laughter), ain't that awful.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color, I guess green.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I guess spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The mountains of Virginia (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't even know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the last thing, the one thing I forgot is the (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, heavenly days (laughter).
Speaker 1: Heavenly days?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625828
Speaker 1: And I forgot the location of this interview, as it's taking place today, where are we?
Speaker 2: We're in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: And just give me a street?
Speaker 2: It's, what is this street?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Humboldt [Street].
Speaker 2: Humboldt.
Speaker 1: Humboldt.
Speaker 2: Humboldt, okay.
Speaker 1: 1250 Humboldt.
Speaker 2: 1250 Humboldt.
Speaker 1: Thank you dear, I'm losing it (laughter).
Story_ID: 625829
Speaker 1: So we're going to start (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm so excited.
Speaker 1: And we--it's an oral history, so I will start with your family's tree, your family tree.  And we will talk about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] side of the family.  So we will start with your mother's side, if you can tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Phoebe Perry, P-E-R-R-Y [Phoebe Perry Bassette].
Speaker 1: And your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't even know.  It was, I used to know her birthday, she's been gone so long.  I'll think of it before you leave.
Speaker 1: And her place of birth?
Speaker 2: Was Wytheville [Virginia], I guess, and the reason I'm guessing because I don't know whether they lived there when she was a child or when she was born.  But she was a child there, so perhaps and that's W-Y-T-H-E-V-I-L-L-E, Wytheville, Virginia.  And it's in the mountains, the western part of Virginia.
Speaker 1: So they were mountain people?
Speaker 2: Yes, but it's not tall mountains like the mountains are here.  They're medium size, and so when I go home, I say that we have mountains here [Colorado] and we had hills (laughter), no but they're more than hills.
Speaker 1: So did you, do you, can you tell me any stories about your mother's childhood?  What did she say to you about what her childhood had been like in Wytheville, in the mountains in Virginia?
Speaker 2: You know I don't remember much about the childhood, I remember that she went away to school.  And I remember that, her mother--
Speaker 1: What was her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Rachel, I was named for her.  Rachel Victoria Perry [Rachel Gibson Perry].  And her mother's work was matron at different schools, colleges, well I guess most of them where high schools at that time, but also colleges.  So she took her children with her, and you know they went to school, at various places.  But school was always central to their existence, actually living and so she lived at many schools.  And grandma was the matron of the dormitories, so they also had living space, you know.  They took their meals and so forth at the school. So that was--so in that way, the school atmosphere was deep into the heart you know of all of their activities.  And so grandma took her children to the various schools in which she was working as matron in the dormitory.  And, but when mama got ready to go to college, I don't think that grandma was at a college.  But school was, what I'm trying to say is school was central, to everything.  And so when mama was ready to go to college, the lady who did the music department where they were, was moving onto Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So mama went to Howard and did her undergraduate work there.  And, you know, lived happily ever after, but I'm saying, kind of coincidence sort of worked into the whole picture all to their betterment.
Story_ID: 625830
Speaker 1: Now Rachel [Rachel Gibson Perry], your mother's [Phoebe Perry Bassette] mother--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --had she been born into slavery?  Was she, or was she born free (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her mother was a slave.
Speaker 1: Her mother was a--
Speaker 2: Had been a slave.
Speaker 1: What was her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her mother's name was Phoebe Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N.  And she had been a slave, but she never wanted to talk about it.  And so I never heard her say very much, what I heard was secondhand.
Speaker 1: What did you hear secondhand?
Speaker 2: Only that she had been in slavery.  And I think she worked in the master's bedroom.  And so mama was very fair and her sister, brother.
Speaker 1: How many sisters and brothers did she have?
Speaker 2: Let's see, she had one sister, I think, and the other sister died, I did not know her.  And.
Speaker 1: So then, go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She had two brothers, I think, either two or three brothers.  I knew Uncle Charles [ph.] and Uncle, can't call his name now, knew two of 'em.
Speaker 1: Were they all the master's children, all of them?
Speaker 2: I think grandma was, and her children had a father [Charles A. Perry, Sr.].  I never saw him, he had a restaurant in Wytheville, Virginia; he was a cook.
Story_ID: 625831
Speaker 1: Now was Wytheville [Virginia], like a--
Speaker 2: It's a little town, I bet you it was two thousand people, three at the most.  But it was up in the mountains of Virginia, beautiful, this scenery reminds me, only I think our mountains are more beautiful.
Speaker 1: Now what would people have done, what would they have done for a living, in Wytheville?
Speaker 2: Black people?
Speaker 1: Black people.
Speaker 2: Work for white people.  And--
Speaker 1: In fields or inside or I mean what, what was there to do I mean, in the mountains were they farmers, or--?
Speaker 2: Some farmers, I think black people worked for white people.  And I, you know, I, I went when I was a child, we would go up to see my [maternal] grandmother [Rachel Gibson Perry] in the summer.  And we didn't get around very much.  But when we did, you know, going downtown was a big thing, we walked downtown.  And going to the post office, see the mail was not delivered to your house, you had a post box.  So we went to the post office to get mail.  You had milk brought to your house.
Speaker 1: Ice?
Speaker 2: Ice, and, but it was a small town.  But, and there weren't many blacks, but there was a A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Wytheville, Virginia] and we are A.M.E.s.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that A.M.E. church?
Speaker 2: Lord I knew you were gonna ask me that.
Speaker 1: Was it Shorter or Shorter A.M.E. (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Shorter [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church] is here [Denver, Colorado].  In Wytheville, I do not remember I was a girl, and, but we are A.M.E.s and we went to Sunday school every Sunday, and church and we had to sit still and all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 625832
Speaker 1: So Rachel [Rachel Gibson Perry]--
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother.
Speaker 1: --grandmother--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --had how many children?
Speaker 2: I think she had six, three boys and three girls.
Speaker 1: And then your mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] was--?
Speaker 2: Her (unclear).
Speaker 1: Middle child?  Do you know the order in which they came?
Speaker 2: I did know, I'm getting ready to say grandma was the baby.  But no Uncle Clyde was, so she was next to the, to the baby.  The, you know, the last child was my Uncle Clyde Perry.
Speaker 1: So do you have any idea of the different names of the schools that your grandmother traveled around to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You know I don't, I can't remember, and I was trying to think of that.  Because that played a real part in their lives.  Because grandma was the matron at these colleges, you know.  She would be over the girls at, at in her dormitory.  And she could have her own family, you see they had family quarters, they also had meals at the colleges.  And I know she was at Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], before she was going to Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.].
Speaker 1: Knoxville College for Women [sic.], wasn't it called Knoxville College (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it may have, I just know Knoxville College 'cause it's co-ed now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But mama went to Knoxville and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is before she went to Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she did, she, so she started off in Knoxville [Tennessee], Knoxville College?
Speaker 2: She started off somewhere where they had the elementary school, and grandma was in the dormitory and she went.  Because as I put it together, now mama didn't say, "Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel], this is what happened, so remember."  But I put it together, that where grandma was the matron they had living quarters and also a dining room, you know, and all of that.  And then she got another job, you know, and took her children and they went to the next level.
Speaker 1: So your mother, do you have a general idea when you mother graduated Howard?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, yes I do and it's not coming to me.  Ten [1910], I think.
Speaker 1: So what did she do after she left Howard?
Speaker 2: She taught.
Speaker 1: Where did she teach?
Speaker 2: First job was in Wheeling, West Virginia.  In fact, she got the job while she was in college.  The, the school was--came to Howard to get their brightest and, so forth, student, I've forgotten the whole phrase, and mama was it.  And mama left Howard in her senior year and worked a half a year in Wheeling and came back and got her degree.
Story_ID: 625833
Speaker 1: At what point did your mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] meet your father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Okay, this is interesting because in Virginia, and maybe all the states then, he was a lawyer, he had finished Howard law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  And he was, you know, gonna take the exam in Virginia.  And they had different places in Virginia that you could take it, two or three, you know.  Where--on the coast and up in the mountains, I'm just saying as an area.  But mama's home was you know in the mountain part of Virginia, in Wytheville [Virginia].  And so Wytheville was one of the places that they're gonna give the bar exam.  And he came to Wytheville, and he was asking around, where can a black person stay here, it's a white town, few black people.  And so they told him.
Speaker 1: What did they tell him?
Speaker 2: They told him, grandma's [Rachel Gibson Perry] house, and he said everything he heard was, "When Phoebe gets home," such and such a thing.  "Phoebe gets home" that was (unclear) the conversation, he said, Phoebe must be somebody, and she was.  Most beautiful, they said she was the most beautiful girl at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  She was a pretty lady, and--
Speaker 1: Was she light skinned or dark skinned (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, she was light skinned, you can put it together.  And so--
Speaker 1: Well I want you to tell me, though (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not saying, I put it together, nobody told me (laughter).  She was fair, and beautiful actually, and you know.  We used to look at her and say, you know, how could she be our mother, we look so dumb and simple.  But anyway, seriously she was a lovely lady.
Story_ID: 625834
Speaker 1: Now when was you father born, what year?
Speaker 2: My father was born, I do not know, in Virginia in Hampton [Virginia], the family is Hampton born and bred and--
Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's history?
Speaker 2: Not too much, my father's father was a lawyer.
Speaker 1: What was your father's father's name?
Speaker 2: See Daddy was a junior, Andrew William Earnest, A. W.E. Bassette [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.], grandpa [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] put the E on because it is a zillion Bassetts in Virginia, double T, we are the black Bassettes so we have the E.
Speaker 1: Now were the white Bassetts related to you?
Speaker 2: I guess, I never really tried to find out 'cause I didn't want to know (laughter).  I know they didn't look at us as any relatives and so, you know.  So I was not looking for white relatives.
Speaker 1: So your father's father was also a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where had he gone to school?
Speaker 2: He had not gone to school, he, quote unquote, read law, so seemingly that meant that he read and worked in an office a lawyer's office, that had to be white, there were no black.  So that he worked in that office and it is my understanding, excuse me, it was my understanding that, that the people for whom he worked wanted him to be a lawyer.  And helped him to pass the bar, or made it possible for him to study and so forth, so he passed the bar in Virginia.  But now daddy went to Howard, to the law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and graduated.
Speaker 1: What year did your father graduate?
Speaker 2: I don't know, and I should, maybe I can find out.
Speaker 1: Were he and your mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time?
Speaker 2: No, they I don't think so, I they didn't know each other at Howard.
Speaker 1: So your, we're gonna get through with this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no that's all right, I'm delighted to think about it.
Speaker 1: So what did your father look like?
Speaker 2: My father was brown, not quite as dark as you, beautiful brown and tall, handsome.  And knew he was sharp (laughter), we thought he was wonderful.  And see his father practiced law, daddy's office was here, grandpa's was across the street [in Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: So Grandpa A. W.E. did because a lawyer he passed the bar?
Speaker 2: He had to in Virginia.
Speaker 1: And then he started his own practice?
Speaker 2: Well he never really practiced law like daddy did, which I am saying true law.  Grandpa had many kinds of jobs, so he was a probation officer, and what else?  I don't ever remember him going to court, where as daddy whole practice was in.  Grandpa's office was here and daddy was across the street and my uncle was a doctor, and he and daddy were in the same building.
Speaker 1: What was your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Burl Bassette, B-U-R-L, he also went to Howard, they all went to Howard.
Story_ID: 625835
Speaker 1: Your father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.], after he was staying in the house and everyone said, you know, the tag line was waiting 'til Phoebe [Phoebe Perry Bassette] gets home.
Speaker 2: What happened when Phoebe came home, he did, did they meet and it was love at first sight for them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Well I want to hear the story.
Speaker 1: It's, it's they met and lived happily ever after.  And he, he said he had never in his life seen anybody as pretty as she.  And that she was just as pretty inside as she was outside.
Speaker 2: Well when the met and married, where did they, did they stay in--?
Speaker 1: They stayed in Hampton [Virginia].  See Hampton is the, the place where the Bassettes live (laughter) and so.
Speaker 2: Both sides or just the black side?
Speaker 1: Just the, just the Bassette side.  You see mama's home is in the mountains [in Wytheville, Virginia], and the Bassettes live on the wa- in, near the water.  And, and the--I'm trying to think, the Chesapeake Bay and where we live was, it'll come to me.  We don't live on the bay, it's way out in the ocean, and I'm trying to think of what is the near area.  But we were in Hampton.  Hampton is on the water.
Story_ID: 625836
Speaker 1: How many siblings did they [sic. you] have, and can you give me the order, and include yourself in the order in which you were born?
Speaker 2: Let me see, well my sister died, Elaine [Elaine Bassette (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Was she the oldest?
Speaker 2: She was the oldest, and I was second and we have my other sister, was Ida [Ida Bassette Haddon], who was named for my grandfa- mother Bassette, she was Ida Bassette [Ida Diggs Bassette], and I was named Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] after Rachel Perry [Rachel Gibson Perry] on mama's [Phoebe Perry Bassette] side.  So, but my sister, oldest sister, was killed in an accident, automobile accident.
Speaker 1: How old was she?
Speaker 2: Baby, she ran behind the car, when my father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] was backing out of the garage.  And he did not know she was there.  And, you know, that's an awful thing to happen, I'm sure; it was not talked so much at home.  But in my years of living I thought about this so often.  I was the baby baby, and so I said that the Lord provided that they had something to concentrate on, I was just born and there I was.  And so I did not know, I knew of her, mama forever spoke of little Elaine.  And we went to her grave you know and all those things.  I did not know her, and, so I'm the second child.
Story_ID: 625837
Speaker 1: So we're gonna step back a little bit because we didn't talk about Ida [Ida Diggs Bassette], at all.
Speaker 2: Ida [Ida Bassette Haddon], my sister?
Speaker 1: No, your, who--your [paternal] grandmother, the one she was named after.
Speaker 2: Oh my sister, grand, she was daddy's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] mother, and she lived in Hampton [Virginia], you know, where he was born and grew up.
Speaker 1: What did you know about her background?
Speaker 2: She was from, Lord it went out of my mind, maybe it will come to me.  But we have area in, in--we have the York River in, in Virginia on the east side.  And across the York River, is Yorktown [Virginia] (laughter), Yorktown where you know, you hear about the, the war [Civil War].  And, so it was across there in Virginia and you drive then to the mountains and that's where grandma was.  But, you see, this is the sea shore and you drive to the west to the mountains (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did that grandmother do a living?
Speaker 2: Which grandmother?
Speaker 1: Ida.
Speaker 2: Ida, she was a housewife, grandpa [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] didn't want her to work.
Speaker 1: Because grandpa was the lawyer so he could afford to have her not work?
Speaker 2: And he also taught, he had his school.
Speaker 1: What kind of school?
Speaker 2: An elementary school named for him, still is one named for him, Bassette School [A.W.E. Bassette Elementary School, Hampton, Virginia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it one room school, did it start up a one room school?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know, I think it's like a three room school.  I'm saying what I thought, I bet I've been in the building, I don't remember having been.  But it was on the outskirts of, right on the edge of Denv- of Denver--of Hampton [Virginia].  And say his school was here, here was the city, and here's where he lived, which at that time was two miles out of Hampton.  And we thought it was fifty miles 'cause it was so far, you--to walk (laughter).
Story_ID: 625838
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are your earliest memories of growing up in Hampton [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Nothing but happy days.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were a close family every Sunday we went out to Grandma's [Ida Diggs Bassette] and visited, had to be quiet.  And, in the summer you know we sat on the porch and it was screened in because you were--mosquitoes loved us.  And they had a field and they had, they raised vegetables and so forth.  And they always had a young man that they brought from the country somewhere.  Maybe they, the man came and heard about, the Bassettes will take you in, they'll help you, they'll see that you go to school, that went everywhere.  So it was always somebody living with them, to go to school.  Hampton was well known, you know Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] now, Hampton that is a college and so.  People walked to get to Hampton, even when I was in college, one of my classmates had walked from somewhere on the other side of St. Louis [Missouri].  Now, that's not close, and so he had walked a many a mile, but he finished in my class.  And I used to just--say his name like this, I have to sleep on it and remember.  But everybody knew him, and knew that he had walked to Hampton and did well.  And I think he's in Detroit [Michigan] now doing well.  And when we have, you know, alumni get-togethers, coming back and so forth, he's the class leader.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about growing up in Hampton [Virginia], what, what was the, your daily life like?  Waking up in the morning, going to bed at night, what did you do in between?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Whatever, and it was always at my memories are happy days. 'Course I had work to do and.
Speaker 1: What work did you have to do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear) the house cleaning on different things, helping with dinner, and I knew how to make--Mama [Phoebe Perry Bassette] had to taught us how to make hot rolls.  I used to make really good hot rolls, I can't do anything now.
Story_ID: 625839
Speaker 1: Do you remember going to school, first grade [at Whittier School, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your experiences in first grade.
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher was love, and she lived in Hampton [Virginia].  And her husband had the, the drugstore that was you know in the bottom part of daddy's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] and Uncle Burl's [Burl Bassette] building.  Really, was grandpa's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] first building, so it was in our building.  And it's just a small town, you know, you--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that teacher though and your experiences in first grade?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was all of the, us in that class loved her to pieces.  She was just so gentle and knowing and encouraging and we just sat there and, Lord is she wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now was it a one room school?
Speaker 2: No, it was connected with Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], don't forget I didn't say this, but Hampton Institute is located in Hampton of course.  And this school was the, what to do you call it, where the teachers are trained, this is the--I can't think of the word, Lord, Lordie, when you get old you're in bad shape, anyway it was that kind of school.  But it was run by Hampton Institute and that's where the teachers did their practice teaching, training.  And so if it was run by Hampton Institute, it was at the highest level, there's no half-ass stuff.  And so I have been indoctrinated, embraced and all those things at the highest level not being satisfied with just getting by, or passing.  And they encouraged that kind of study introduction, it was very good for all of us.
Story_ID: 625840
Speaker 1: Were there members, members of your family who passed for white just because they were so light skinned?
Speaker 2: They didn't pass, my mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] was one, she did not pass.  And don't tell her that she was light enough to pass.  She gave you the look (laughter), you didn't want to get the look.  No, she was proud to be who she was.  And daddy [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] was brown, he's brown like you, or browner, and wonderful.
Story_ID: 625841
Speaker 1: Did you understand that you were lighter skinned, and had people talked about different classes of, of, you know, classes of black people being lighter or darker?  Did you have any understanding of, of what your skin tone meant?
Speaker 2: Not really because in our house you see with mama [Phoebe Perry Bassette] as fair as she was, and my father's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] as brown as you, beautiful.  And we didn't, we he thought he was wonderful (laughter), and we thought mama was equally so.  It was up quite a while before it dawned on me what, what that was, you know.  And different ones would call us yellow.  And I said, I certainly am not yellow.  And that used burn me up you know, and "You yellow girl," or something like that.  So nobody could say that to me, nor to my sister [Ida Bassette Haddon].  I don't know about my brothers [Andrew W.E. Bassette, III and Charles Bassette], but they certainly couldn't say it to me.  But see I'm the oldest, as I said, my sister [Elaine Bassette (ph.)] was killed in an accident, so that made me the oldest.  But, no, we realized that we were fair because mama was so fair, but daddy was your color or darker and beautiful (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you realize, did you realize that you were so fair perhaps because there at some point had been white people in your, your family's history?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't, I didn't, I don't know whether I didn't know it or didn't accept it, but I was in high school [Whittier School, Hampton, Virginia] when that thing hit me, this is it, this is what that is, high school.
Speaker 1: And when you, when it hit you what how did it hit you?
Speaker 2: I just wondered why I hadn't thought of that before (laughter).  To under- you know, why was it, why did anybody think that was unusual, they had, that was in my family.  It wasn't, we weren't we didn't see it as usual.  But, you know, looking back and understanding better, by and by (laughter) but a lot of things are clearer then.  But we were seeing, and then I think sometimes, I remember people--students, children saying to us, "Yellow," not yellow, but yellow, yellow, "You're yellow."  And which I didn't understand, it didn't look yellow to me, it looked more brown (laughter) than anything else.
Story_ID: 625842
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Whittier lab school [Whittier School, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now the emphasis there was on doing your best, making very good grades, and when I was in the seventh grade they pulled out, I think it was thirteen of us.  And it called it 7-A and we had a special teacher assigned to really pace it to, to do at the top level, whatever.  And there were thirteen of us in that class.  And we worked at whatever level like little beavers, so actually I think we could have easily have gone into sophomore or junior high school, so then you drag your feet.  When you go back to this school, routine, regular routine.  And so that next year, I had done all of that, so really wasted a whole time, but finally finished.  But I went through eleven grades, and I guess they had started twelve grades at some places, but not in Hampton [Virginia].  And the next year I graduate you had to go to the twelfth grade.  So I had gone eleven, and I went to college with eleven grades.  And in all of my classes the people had, had twelve years of elementary school.
Speaker 1: Was it just an understanding that you would continue and go to college, even though you were a woman or a girl at the time?
Speaker 2: No, nothing different, I mean, nothing to keep you from going that was understood.  And Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] was right there, it's now Hampton University, you know, so it was right there in Hampton.  I went my first year, I walked across the bridge, just like I had walked across the bridge for elementary school.  That was the school that Hampton had for its teacher to you know as a learning area.  And so just walked across the bridge.  So, I went two years like that, and said heck that's just like going to high school.  And talked to my father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.], well my sister [Ida Bassette Haddon] was in my class, she was really smart, and so he had two students in the same class, you know, to pay for, so we both got scholarships and--
Speaker 1: To--?
Speaker 2: We did, right on to Hampton, so then we lived on the campus, well that's like in another territory (laughter) it was happy times, you know.
Story_ID: 625843
Speaker 1: What was your college life years--what were your, your college experience?
Speaker 2: Well, see, Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] encourages you academically to work at your highest level, so that was the kind of, it wasn't pressure so as much as understanding, that you were to, to get your lessons (unclear), make high grades.  Well that's the same thing that with my family, you know, had instilled in us.
Speaker 1: Can you recall some of the teachers that taught you at Hampton?
Speaker 2: Not now, I really can't, I thought about that.
Speaker 1: Well let me ask, let me phrase it this way.  Who were your role models at that time?  Who did you look up to and want to be like?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there were teachers (laughter) my mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] was the one you know.  And see we always had mama's friends and daddy's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] friends coming by.  We lived in Hampton [Virginia], and so were right there at the, at the college.
Story_ID: 625844
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about the neighborhood that you lived in, can you remember the street you lived on in Hampton [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: King Street and the main street was Queen Street, so the secondary street to cross Queen was King, so we lived practically downtown.  And but it was a little town, when I grew up six thousand people.  As I think about that, we ought to have known all the neighbors (laughter).
Speaker 1: How many of those people were African Americans?
Speaker 2: If there were six thousand maybe two thousand.
Speaker 1: So continue to tell me about, if you can just flesh out for me King Street and Queen Street.  What were on those streets (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) King, King Street had the courthouse, and so my father's [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] office was here and here's the courthouse.  So every day he passed our house ten times going to the courthouse coming back to his office.  And the courthouse was one block from Queen Street, which was the main street downtown, so you see, we are practically downtown and my fa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was downtown, go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say, my father's office and his brother was a doctor, so they had offices together.  That was in the next block, they were there, here's our house, here's the courthouse on the corner.  And here's another block and that's the main street of Hampton, which was Queen Street.
Speaker 1: Now was Queen Street a segregated street?
Speaker 2: It had white stores, it's a little town.  We had very few stores, a five and ten (laughter).  And a couple of stores that sold clothes and materials.  'Cause we grew up sewing, making our own clothes, and so we you know knew those stores.  And, but a small town six thousand people.
Speaker 1: But during--those six thousand, did they keep, did you have a, the equivalent of Queen Street in the black neighborhood of, a street that where the black businesses were.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that street?
Speaker 2: Queen Street it was the other end.  See here's downtown and here's the black quote unquote downtown.
Speaker 1: What was the dividing line for the white section of town and the black section of town?
Speaker 2: I don't know if that was the dividing line, but it would have to be 'cause you didn't live in the white section.  You lived in the black section 'cause we lived on King Street.  And in our block, there was the lady across the street who was white, and maybe a couple of houses, and a big white church, which was almost to Queen Street.  But I don't know how, see grandpa [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] had land there and had his office and across the street he owned the land where daddy and Uncle Burl's [Burl Bassette] a doctor, and they had their offices.  And next to it was an insurance, black insurance agency.  And then there was a black church, a big black Baptist church, so you see we're in black territory there.  And just crossing the street we were there, our house, but on down is the courthouse.  So you see you know it's very interesting as I'm telling you, I don't know how that happened.
Story_ID: 625845
Speaker 1: So do you remember when you were going up, and in the black part of town, how often you went church?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday.
Speaker 1: How big was religion in--for your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big (laughter), great big.
Speaker 1: So tell me about--
Speaker 2: Grandpa [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Sr.] was big in his church [First Baptist Church, Hampton, Virginia], he was the Baptist.  Mama [Phoebe Perry Bassette] was a Methodist, so went to the Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Why was Grandpa Baptist and mother a Methodist?
Speaker 2: See mother came from another part [Wytheville, Virginia] of the state, remember, she came from the mountain part.  And a lot, most of the blacks were going to the churches there was, was Methodist.
Speaker 1: Now in the mountains were you a middle class family, working class family or poor family?
Speaker 2: Middle class.
Speaker 1: Middle class.  So did religion have anything to do with the, the class of the black people, were Baptists more working class than the Methodists?
Speaker 2: I think it was you know across the board for both.  As far as I could tell, we, we had (laughter) friends in the Baptist church, and, so we went to the Methodist (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did Grandpa (unclear)--
Speaker 2: See mama was a Methodist.
Speaker 1: Did Grandpa have a church?
Speaker 2: You mean did he go to church?
Speaker 1: I mean no, did he have a church that would, he wasn't a pastor of his church (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, no, no, he was a, a lawyer.  He was a lawyer, Grandpa.
Speaker 1: Okay but did he--was h- his relationship to the church, was he a deacon or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the deacon.  Right there.
Speaker 1: What about your father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.], what was his relationship to his church?
Speaker 2: He was a member of that church (laughter), and I don't think he ever went.  But every New Year's he went to our church with mama.  She had gotten him to say that he'd go on New Year's Sunday.  And so he came to our church, we had a fit, we were so glad to see him.
Speaker 1: Was your mother a Sunday school teacher?
Speaker 2: Mama was in the church, she had us there every Sunday.  Mama taught music, and I was playing the piano, and I was just barely up on the seat.  And I was playing for the Sunday school.  I had two hymns that I could play, so.  Then I got three and so then I got four and they could sing some different songs (laughter).  But mama had me right there playing.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother into this society aspects of Hampton [Virginia]?  I mean were you, did you go, I mean did you have a like a coming out, so to speak or a cotillion ball or--?
Speaker 2: We didn't have that then, but.
Speaker 1: What sort of clubs did you have then?
Speaker 2: They had reading clubs you know, book clubs.  Mama was active in that and that's an outgrowth of being right there at Hampton Institute [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  It was a part of that.  But by and large there weren't any clubs like coming out and stuff like that no.  I didn't come out.
Speaker 1: So you were--we were talking about, just to wrap up, was there anything stands out for you about your participation in church, you talked about your playing the (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh that I had to play, yeah I played for Sunday school.  And when I got older I taught Sunday school.  When I moved here I taught Sunday school (laughter), I went in the church, child (laughter) and still you know, even though I can't drive so I don't get there much now.  But I'm very much a part of my church.  And have been all the time and that's the way we were.
Story_ID: 625846
Speaker 1: So let's just move back forward to where we were before you were at Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And you were in school [Whittier School, Hampton, Virginia] and you'd gotten a scholarship.  What career options were open to you at the time?
Speaker 2: Nothing but teaching, Hampton is a school that, you know, teaching is its best known (unclear) product.  All over the South, if you finish Hampton Institute, they expected nothing but the best.  All we had to do is to notify a school that you were (unclear), and you would be sorry (laughter).  It had wonderful, wonderful, wonderful anything that anybody said about Hampton was at the best.  And that's what the school said to you in every way possible when you leave here you representing Hampton Institute, at its highest level.  No kind of half-ass stuff and that was the standard.  Now I'm sure nobody's telling it like it is there now, you're saying this to them now.  But I say that that said to you when you left that you were representing your school and the school expected the best of you.  And even today (laughter), not to mention, you know, when I moved here [Denver, Colorado], when I worked in Washington [D.C.].  I didn't expect anybody to say Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] is not doing her best.  What did you all do to her?  Here Rachel would be doing her best.
Speaker 1: What year did you leave, complete Hampton University?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938].
Speaker 1: Where did you go after 1938 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to Washington.
Speaker 1: Why did you go to--
Speaker 2: No, no I went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] for my graduate work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Washington.
Story_ID: 625847
Speaker 1: At Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], any teachers stand out for you, any important people at Fisk?
Speaker 2: You see, I went to Fisk because of Dr. Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson].  And he was a dear friend of my uncle's [Burl Bassette], they were in school at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] together.  And so when I didn't get a job and I finished first in my class, I told you, at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I did not get a job that fall.  And my uncle came down, he worked in Richmond [Virginia], he was a dentist there.  He came in and he said, I was sitting at the kitchen table.  And he said, "What are you doing home? You don't have a job?"  No, he didn't say, do you have a job--I said, "I don't have a job," (laughter).  "I don't got anything to do." Went right and picked up the phone and called Dr. Johnson, who had been to school with him at Virginia Union.  And he said, he said, "My niece is around here," what did he say I was?  I got a long face that's what he said, and, "She hadn't got a job," and he didn't tell him that I finished first in class at Hampton, he told him that later.  Dr. Johnson said, "Send her to me," I haven't looked back.  I've not look back even now (laughter).  Think to myself, if Dr. Johnson were living, you know, what else would be available?  What would he--because he, he not only encouraged you, but he expected you to do well.  And he had all kinds of things going, studies, work opportunities and if he recommended you, I don't know a person, black or white that hadn't heard of him and his work at that time.  That it wouldn't make a difference, I just put it on my reference as Dr. Charles S. Johnson, head of the sociology department at Fisk University, doors opened.  And we ought to have more of that, you know.  I think in, in our people you make a mark and you help young people, you know, coming along.  And so I have grown up, and I hope I've taught my children, to do your best.  Don't say, I'm gonna do it tomorrow, do it now.  'Cause that's the way I was, not only taught but expected to perform.  I don't know if I always did, but I, I wanted to and I tried.
Story_ID: 625848
Speaker 1: So what happened in your life after you left Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]?  What, what were some of the first doors to open for you after leaving Fisk?  You went to Washington [D.C.] to work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a job and so I went to, to Washington to work, but most of all I had met my husband.
Speaker 1: Where did, how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: He was at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. How many of us at Fisk know that Meharry, I mean, how many of us not going to Fisk, know that Meharry's across the street (laughter).  And it's, it's a wonderful opportunity to meet young men.
Speaker 1: They were all becoming doctors?
Speaker 2: They were all becoming doctors, but they have to work hard, you know, it's not, it's not a given.
Speaker 1: What was your husband's name?
Speaker 2: Edmond, E-D-M-O-N-D, Noel [Edmond F. Noel], and I met him soon after I got there.
Speaker 1: Well let's take this opportunity for you to tell as much as you can about your husband's history.
Speaker 2: I know that's he's from Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: He's from Jackson, Mississippi, and he came from a family that expected you to do well.
Speaker 2: Did he come from a legacy of doctors, or was he the first (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he was the first one.  But he always wanted to be a doctor from the time he was a child, so his mother told me.  He admitted it was true, but he didn't want you to tell him every day (laughter).  But, anyway, he was, you know, just brilliant.  He finished first in his class and always, you know, did well, had high expectations.  And tried to live in that level, at that level.  And he did his hospital work in St. Louis [Missouri] at Homer Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital].  And then we came here [Denver, Colorado], oh, after the war [World War II, WWII] we came here.
Speaker 2: So what year did you marry?
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Because you, you finished Fisk in 1940, your master's degree in sociology?
Speaker 1: What year did I marry, '40--I don't even remember isn't this terrible--'6 [1946] I think (laughter).
Speaker 2: Why did your husband not go off to the war?
Speaker 1: He did.
Speaker 2: Oh he did?
Speaker 1: He was gone, what four years.
Story_ID: 625849
Speaker 1: So while he [Noel's husband, Edmond F. Noel] was away, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I worked at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], you see, Dr. Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] help me again (laughter).  So I worked there.
Speaker 1: So you went to Washington [D.C.], and then came back to Fisk?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So where did you work in Washington?
Speaker 2: At Southeast House [Southeast Settlement House, Washington, D.C.], it's a settlement house.
Speaker 1: What did you do at the settlement house?
Speaker 2: Oh, really social work, and you're working with families and they need everything.  And the house was a sort of a refuge anybody who needed work; they didn't know where to go, they came there and we knew where to send them.
Speaker 1: Washington had a, had a large black population?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but I was in Southeast Washington, which didn't have as a large a black population as south--as Northwest Washington.  That was really the home of most, most of the blacks.  And I think, and that's where Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was located.  And I think the opportunities for work were at a higher level than in Southeast.  And more--poorer people living in Southeast.  And so I, I used to get off of work at nine o'clock and the other workers there, we would catch that bus and be in Northwest Washington, where all the black people were living (laughter).  And, you know, going to the show and night clubs and stuff like that.  Riding the street car, you know.
Story_ID: 625850
Speaker 1: So you went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] thinking that you were going to be a teacher, but you come out a social worker?
Speaker 2: Well when I went to Fisk, I knew that there was a possibility I would be getting another area.  Because of Dr. Johnson's [Charles S. Johnson] work and his influence, and see I lived with him, lived with their family.  And so that was a true blessing 'cause you see, I just see him in the morning, he'd be looking to see if I'd gotten my work done (laughter).  When I went in his classes I (unclear) not only do well, but do very well.  Things like that 'cause I figured he'd be talking to my uncle [Burl Bassette] or mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] or my father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] (laughter), something like that.  It was a great thing on my back, but you know I have a strong back.
Story_ID: 625851
Speaker 1: When your husband [Edmond F. Noel] came back from World War II [WWII], why did you decide to move out to Den- why did you decide to move out west?  You were already in the South, in Tennessee, I'm sure you could have gotten work in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: I don't know, that's not the point, everybody was looking at that area.  And so we took a chance and came out here.  He had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you take a chance on this particular part of the country?
Speaker 2: He had kind of looked into different aspects here, and remember Homer Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] is in St. Louis [Missouri].  And so, there were contacts from St. Louis, there were people who recommended that this might be a good place.  And helped us make the decision.  You know, how black people can help each other, really they can and they did.  So we came out here.
Speaker 1: Who did you know when you came (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a soul.  We came out here and we thought, what do you do next (laughter)?  And we did.
Speaker 1: Where did he get work?
Speaker 2: He opened his office right there on Welton [Welton Street, Denver, Colorado], and he had come out before I did.  And kind of scouted the town, talked to different people.
Speaker 1: Welton was that a black, was that black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a black, black business area?
Speaker 1: Was that the Five Points [Denver, Colorado] area?
Speaker 2: That's the Five Points area.  And (unclear), she can tell you more about Welton than I can, but.
Speaker 1: But I want your first hand (unclear).
Speaker 2: He, (unclear) there's a black, there's a black pharmacy [Radio Drugstore, Denver, Colorado], two black pharmacist where there, pharmacists where there.  And they had an office that was vacant right over the, the drugstore.  So that's where he opened his office and those two druggists were like big brothers.  Nobody came in that drugstore that didn't say, "Go upstairs and look at the new doctor."  And, "We have a black doctor now, and he's right upstairs here.  So when you leave go up there and shake his hand, and tell him that I sent you."  You know, all those things that are helpful.
Speaker 1: Now was he the first black doctor in town?
Speaker 2: No he wasn't the first; there was a black woman doctor [Justina Ford].
Speaker 1: A black woman doctor?
Speaker 2: You hear me, isn't that right Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Page]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That's true.
Speaker 2: What's her name, what was her name?
Speaker 1: What was her name, Jo?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That's where the black museum [Black American West Museum, Denver, Colorado] was.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I can't think of her name right now, I didn't know her.  I don't whether she was gone when I got here.  But she had made an indelible impression, and, and reputation here.  She must have been a wonderful, wonderful person, but I never got to meet her.  Had she died would you say?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No.
Speaker 1: When I, uh-huh, but everybody was talking about her all the time.  And so, she had done good things.
Speaker 2: So your, when your husband was upstairs setting--you know, his business was growing what were you doing with yourself had you started to have children at the time?
Speaker 1: Oh, I had one.
Speaker 2: You had one already.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, Buddy [Edmond F. "Buddy" Noel, Jr.].
Speaker 2: When did you have Buddy?
Speaker 1: Buddy was born in '46 [1946] (laughter), 1946.  He was let see born, no he was born in St. Louis.  We were in St. Louis then.  He, my husband did his residency in St. Louis [at Homer G. Phillips Hospital].  After he came back from the war so, that was four years out of his life before he, you know, got into medicine.
Speaker 2: So when you, out here you, were you working or you, just Buddy--you were you a housewife for a number of years?
Speaker 1: Let's see, I didn't work I don't think did I, but do you remember my working before?  I was doing all kinds of PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of Colorado] and whatever.
Story_ID: 625852
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of Colorado], and you worked for them, and I said to you off camera that, why were you so interested in helping the Girl Scouts because you didn't have any girls?  And you said to me--
Speaker 2: What did I say to you?
Speaker 1: You'd always wanted to be a Girl Scout--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the South, so tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, in the South, there were no black Girl Scouts when I was growing up.  And one of the things I did you know once I got on the board and found out things about the Girl Scouts was we don't have one in, in Virginia.  And I, I didn't do it because I wasn't living there, but I talked to some who were and got Girl Scouts started, you know, in Virginia.  I think it was in Newport News [Virginia], which was what, seven miles from Hampton [Virginia], not in Hampton, but the people who picked up and ran with the ball were Newport News.
Speaker 1: What did you do with Girl Scouts organization here in Denver [Colorado]?  Were there any black Girl Scouts here?
Speaker 2: Let me see, what did I do, I had a troop, well, first of all, I was asked to be on the board, now I don't know how that happened.  And I'm wondering if that didn't come from New York [New York], you know, since I had been working with them [national office, Girl Scouts of the United States of America].
Speaker 1: How had you been working with them?
Speaker 2: I had been--how did I?  I was serving on the board of Girl Scouts.
Speaker 1: But how did the, how did a black woman get on the board of Girl Scouts (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know I'm trying to put it together.  Let me see, it'll, it will come to my (unclear) mind.  I was on the national board and--
Speaker 1: Was it because your husband [Edmond F. Noel] was a doctor?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Might have been, I don't know, you know that has strange trails, you know, that go.  Because he was on the board of the hospitals, and then he was the only black.  And so people he hung out with even played golf with, by, you know played a lot of golf with the white doctors.  'Cause they had never seen a black man hit a ball like he did (laughter), he could play golf.  But anyway make a long story short, that's, that's probably where it came from.
Speaker 1: So what contributions did you make for black Girl Scouts, on the board of the Denver Girl Scouts [sic. Girl Scouts of Colorado]?
Speaker 2: It made them realize that we lived, were interested in scouting, it wasn't off the wall.  And I don't think that they had ever worked with any black people.
Speaker 1: How did you go about raising the money to start a black troop?
Speaker 2: You don't have to do it that way.  You, you get the girls together with their parents and, you know, it's kind of growing pains and--
Speaker 1: But I read that you did a lot of Girl Scout fundraisers selling cookies and--?
Speaker 2: That's standard, every Girl Scout troop sells cookies.  They hadn't had Girl Scout troop, so we had, what is that word?  You know, you don't have any people working against you, you got the field to yourself.  We had the whole black community to sell cookies to.  At my church [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church, Denver, Colorado], I sold so many cookies, you know, they had not included us, you know.  And until this day our girls do well, you know in scouting activities and so forth.
Speaker 1: Why did you think Girl Scouts were so important for the black community?
Speaker 2: I just thought it was a, it's an activity that I wished that I could have been a part of when I was a girl, always wanted to be a Girl Scout.  Seemed to be what, neat (laughter), and there was no pro- no possibility.
Story_ID: 625853
Speaker 1: What were you doing with your son at the time, was he in school or was he--?
Speaker 2: You see, Buddy [Edmond F. "Buddy" Noel, Jr.] was the third child, let's see wait a minute, Buddy was the second, I had my, you know girl first, and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you have your girl?  You had Buddy in 1946, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what did--when was Angie [Angela Noel] born?  No Angie's younger than Buddy, what am I saying?  See when you get old and dotty, you get everything mixed up.
Speaker 1: So that's okay, but it was Buddy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Buddy was the oldest child.
Speaker 1: And then it was, what were the other?
Speaker 2: Angela, I just had two children.
Speaker 1: Two children?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625854
Speaker 1: When did you become involved in the educational system, or the school board [Denver Board of Education] here in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Now how did I do that?  How did I, I'm just--
Speaker 1: Well you'd always known that you had teaching in you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You'd taking this path from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] into becoming a social worker (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but teacher was foundation, it's a foundation and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, foundation yeah.
Speaker 2: How did I do that?
Speaker 1: Where did you teach first?
Speaker 2: In the Sunday school, that's where I did my first teaching, but I--
Speaker 1: What was the name, go ahead I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Let me see, but I taught in the college, let me see, Metropolitan State College [Metropolitan State College of Denver; Metropolitan State University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], that's where I taught.  You'd think I would never forget that.  Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Page], I'm over here, I can't even remember what college I taught when I was at Metro.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Oh (unclear) Metro.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) yeah, uh-huh.  That was my first job.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear) Metro Community College [sic. Community College of Denver, Denver, Colorado] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Now, well I was in the four-year college, but they have a community college there.  I don't, I can't remember now I have to give you that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you remember what you taught, what were you teaching?
Speaker 2: Sociology.
Speaker 1: Sociology.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  That's my field, see, you know Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson], you've heard of him.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: And that's where I did my work under him at Fisk.  Lived at his house 'cause he was a friend of my uncle's [Burl Bassette] and that I didn't have any place to stay.
Speaker 1: So you also said you taught at, you were a Sunday school teacher, was that at the Shorter Community A.M.E. Church [Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where is Shorter Community Church located?
Speaker 2: Jo Katherine where it?  And, you know, I know this as well as I know my name, drive there every Sunday.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  It's all right, it's, it's originally on Washington [Street] and Park Avenue.  But it's now moved out on Martin Luther King Boulevard [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) King Boulevard, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --and Richard Allen Place [sic. Richard Allen Court]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --right off Colorado Boulevard.  And it's now a--the old one is the home of [HistoryMaker] Cleo Parker Robinson--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --the dance (unclear) studio.
Story_ID: 625855
Speaker 1: So the--I--just to get the name of that doctor and her name was Justina Ford (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right, that's right, you know.  What is, what is my name, I don't even know it?
Speaker 1: Justina Ford, now that I have her name, can you, that--jog your memory about any stories about her?
Speaker 2: You know that she was a wonderful doctor and that there wasn't anybody that she wouldn't help.  Not anybody that--she would, you know, go to the ends of the earth to help people.  And that she was a good doctor and she had her office and I think she did, didn't she do surgery at her office (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Simultaneous) She was a pediatrician.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a pediatrician.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  The Black western museum [Black American West Museum, Denver, Colorado] is housed in her house (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I never met her, I've just heard about her and I wished I had met her.
Story_ID: 625856
Speaker 1: So you are teaching at the Metropolitan College [Metropolitan State College of Denver; Metropolitan State University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: State College.
Speaker 1: State College and how involved, how, how do you get from teaching there to the Denver public school system [Denver Public Schools]?
Speaker 2: I ran for the school board [Denver Board of Education] because they didn't have any blacks and they haven't had any since, well since Omar [Omar D. Blair], there have been two black people.
Speaker 1: What made you think you could be elected if there were hadn't any black people before you, to be elected?
Speaker 2: Simple (laughter), I just thought I could.  And ran and campaigned went to the churches, ministers all helped me; I got to the door and they said, "Mrs. Noel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] is here."  Interrupt the service, let me come to the front and talk.
Speaker 1: What would you say?
Speaker 2: Vote for me, (laughter) no, I said we don't have any black voices, you know, and our voice must be heard, things like that.
Speaker 1: Now tell me the things these are important for me to hear what you were say, what you were saying to people that you wanted to contribute to the Denver school board (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I said, that's what I said that we needed a voice.  We didn't, we don't have any representative, decisions are made that we don't even know about.  We need to be sitting at the table, I believe that.  I sat at the table, and I helped to integrate the schools, she can tell you.
Speaker 1: But, so the schools in Denver [Colorado] were segregated?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: All the black people went to black schools, simple as that.  Maybe some who lived in, might on the west side, or near some school went to it, it wasn't said that you can't go, just didn't go.
Speaker 1: Well how did you help to integrate the schools?
Speaker 2: I made a motion at the school, I got elected to the school board, first thing I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was after (unclear) the Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had happened in 1954?
Speaker 2: So?
Speaker 1: You were elected to the school board in 1965, eleven years later.
Speaker 2: So, so see what that tells you.  How far out we here in Denver, it was, a brand new idea, not brand new (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I've been told by other people, that people came out to Denver because it was so liberal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you probably heard that, we, we came out because of that.  I was most surprised that (laughter) the schools were as segregated as they were 'cause that was the way it was at home [Hampton, Virginia].
Story_ID: 625857
Speaker 1: So 1965, you were elected to the board of--Denver's [Denver, Colorado] public school board, the Board of Education [Denver Board of Education].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did you help to end segregation, how did that come about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I made the motion [Resolution 1490].
Speaker 1: Tell me about (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And I got the second (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: I got my second before I made the motion.  And so when I made the motion, I had the second and we also had my four votes.
Speaker 1: Can you just talk about the process step by step?
Speaker 2: To get a motion a passed you have to have a second, to get it passed you have to the votes, it's as simple as that.  I had the second, John Amesse [John H. Amesse] was my second, and he got elected to the board the same time I did.  And we got to be very friendly, so I didn't have to worry about my second.  So then all we had to do, was to get four votes.  Well, we had mine, Mr. Benton [A. Edgar Benton] was two, we had to get John, I have to count him, so we had to get the fourth vote.  So we put the screws on, I won't go into details; we got the fourth vote.  So when I made the motion I had my votes, didn't have to worry.  You have to do that that way or else somebody screws it before you can do it, so we got it passed.
Speaker 1: Now you don't want to go into details because you can't remember 'em or feel you can't reveal to me what (unclear).
Speaker 2: No I can't remember, really.  But I did what I had to do--
Speaker 1: So tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which is to talk to people and convince them.  That this is what we should do, we are not to be back in the dark ages.
Speaker 1: So how many people were on the board?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven.  Okay, so you had your two, you had your second motion, who was the black gentleman.
Speaker 2: No, nobody, I'm an only black.
Speaker 1: You're the only black, so the second person you said, that seconded it right away.  Who was he?
Speaker 2: Mr. Benton.
Speaker 1: Mr. Benton?
Speaker 2: He's white.
Speaker 1: He's white.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he's quote unquote liberal white.
Speaker 1: So you knew that Mr. Benton was on your side right away?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: John, you said, was the third vote.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you get John's vote?
Speaker 2: John and I ran at the same time for the board.  So I got to know him, in traveling around speaking before I got elected.  And he said, he didn't know anything about black people (laughter).  That he learned everything from me, he asked me dumb questions all the time, but I answered, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For example, what was?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything right now, but I'll tell you, down the way.
Speaker 1: So you had, so you had John and you had Mr. Bennett and yourself?
Speaker 2: Mr. Benton.
Speaker 1: Mr. Benton--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --so you had those three.  How did you work on this fourth gentlemen?
Speaker 2: John worked on him, and it was a lady, a white lady.  And he got her to say she would vote.  And she never hardly talked to me very much.  But she voted, that was my fourth vote.
Speaker 1: Did the other three people vote against it?
Speaker 2: They sure did.  So it was four to three.  So you have to have your votes, you know.
Speaker 1: Well what kind of tension did that set up on the board, if they--three people voted against integrating the schools?
Speaker 2: Not really tension so much as they, they it, it was something that was ta- was now the, the rule.  And so they may not have agreed, but they didn't fight it.
Story_ID: 625858
Speaker 1: So once the ruling came down [passing Resolution 1490], what was your next step in actually getting black children into integrating to--how did you do it, how did you get black children in white schools [in Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: How did I do it Jo, Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Page]?  I don't know, I did what was necessary; I did not intend to lose.  And I'll think about it tonight, what did I do.  I can tell you, I didn't sleep well.  I worried about it, and I didn't want to screw it up.  You know how you can get out in something, and you look around ain't nobody there but you.
Speaker 1: I can remember James Meredith--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Meredith  (unclear), was it that sort of situation, where you had one smart kid that you were going use him as your sort of guinea pig to get him into a white school?
Speaker 2: No (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, wasn't like that.
Speaker 2: We [members of the Denver Board of Education] were really working with the school not, not student by student.  It was a--all, I started to say all or nothing, but it wasn't, it was just all.  We were doing that, I really didn't have serious hard, hard stuff.  But there was an undercurrent of, of resistance, but not on top.
Speaker 1: Well it, I know this you'll remember, how did you feel once that, you, you achieve, once you once you won that vote?  Four to three how did you feel?
Speaker 2: Wonderful, I really did, I couldn't believe it.
Speaker 1: So I've been told that they did some busing also.  Do you remember that to deseg- to help with integration (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, not-- I didn't work very much on that.  My, my emphasis was at the policy level.  And once you get that in, in motion, and I, who told me all of that, I guess Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson], people like that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: See you get that set, you're carrying out really what is, has been agreed to, and it's the law (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you let the ground troops do the ground work and you set the policy (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you set the policy and that's what boards do.  And that's something that you learn, once you get into this business.  That you're not supposed to knock on doors, you're supposed to set the policy.  And if it takes knocking on doors, you get enough people to knock, but you get it done.
Story_ID: 625859
Speaker 1: I want to know because you said that there were, you, you'd campaigned with the idea that there are no black voices at in the, in this board room, this Board of Education [Denver Board of Education] (unclear).  What other, what else did your voice bring, to this, to the (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Beside the black voice?
Speaker 1: No, not beside the black voice, but I mean what else, you know, you achieved the desegregationist policy.  What other areas were, did needed work for black people that you said, here's what my voice is needed?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it's to be sure we had black teachers, black what's the next level Jo [Jo Katherine Page]?
Speaker 1: Administrators?
Speaker 2: Administrators.
Speaker 1: The superintendent, was there a black superintendent?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, not a black superintendent then, but there were plenty spots (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Principals?
Speaker 2: Yes, principals, there were plenty spots that we were not in that we could be in.  And I didn't have to say that, so much as I'm sitting on the board.  And when names come in I went down looking for black names.  Every day that I was--sat there the Lord as my witness, when the list came I, I didn't even read, I did this, where is a black person.  Ain't no blacks here (laughter), so then I say, well you don't even have a black representative, they're not putting any blacks there.  So I would try to know people so I could say, well, Ms. Jones, can you do this, right at the table where decisions were made.  That's why you have to be there, you can't send somebody, you have to be there to hear the conversation.
Speaker 1: You also had to be privy to who was doing what in the black community.  Because the names didn't say white, white, white, white, black, black, you would have to know that?
Speaker 2: That's right I did.
Speaker 1: And the community was such that you would know the--all the black people.
Speaker 2: The way it happened is, the churches that was my strength.  There wasn't a church, there weren't a minister that I couldn't go to and the Ministerial Alliance [Greater Metro Denver Ministerial Alliance] at that time, remember Jo, Jo Katherine, they were strong, they had regular meetings.  And so--
Speaker 1: Did you go to those meetings, did you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that much, but I talked to them (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: How were you so connected to the ministers?
Speaker 2: My own minister was behind me a hundred percent.  And this is--who else was, who else, Jo Katherine, at that time?
Speaker 1: What was your minister's name?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of it right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Reverend Odom [L. Sylvester Odom].
Speaker 2: No not Odom, unh-uh, he was--it was before, he was after that.
Speaker 1: Was this at Shorter [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church, Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: This was at Shorter, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Shorter A.M.E.?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Reverend Miggin's [ph.] at (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Reverend Miggin's--
Speaker 2: Will you sit back a little bit?
Speaker 1: Oh excuse me, I forgot, Reverend Miggin's always helped.  But I'm thinking my minister at that time, I can't even think of his name.  I'm gonna have to talk to somebody and get these names right.  'Cause I'm getting older and dotty.
Speaker 2: Oh that's okay you have the essence of it, and that's good.
Speaker 1: But my church oh Reverend, it came to me, my church was behind me a hundred percent.  And then other ministers that I knew I could talk to and they were behind me.  So I could easily say the black ministers are supportive.  And they could talk to any black minister, and they would say they were.  It was just that open and shut.
Story_ID: 625860
Speaker 1: So how much time did you spend on the Denver public school board of ed [Denver Board of Education]?
Speaker 2: The time that was necessary, a lot of time it took.  And I had my own car so I drove all over the place.
Speaker 1: Was your family--did you ever fear for your life?
Speaker 2: Well, at some points, I would hear things and I went every by, every place by myself, I had my own car.  And at one point, well John Amesse [John H. Amesse] who ran, at the same time I time I ran, he was white, he followed me home different times.  We'd come out of the school board meeting, and he said, "I always follow you home," we didn't have to discuss it.  I just figured somebody must have said something.  And once or twice a brother would come up and say, "I'm following you home tonight."  I didn't ask him why 'cause I knew what he was doing.  That didn't last long time.  I think that was kind of sprits of negatives in the community, in the white community [of Denver, Colorado].  I was for integration, as simple as that.
Story_ID: 625861
Speaker 1: So to continue with your career, then the governor, Governor Richard Lamm appointed you to the Board of Regents of Colorado [University of Colorado Board of Regents]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did that appointment come about?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess he was trying to--you think he was, Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Page], trying to put a black person on?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You were qualified, that's why Dick did that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he did.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  --you were the best.
Speaker 2: Can just I have to stay in the light, though (unclear) sitting?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I sorry, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No not you.
Speaker 2: But if you slide over here it will be better because she can.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I'm sorry, (unclear) I'm trying to stay out of the light.  No but, oh.  Is it all right if we talk?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean.
Speaker 1: I'm so glad here because I haven't thought about these things for so long, it's kind of nice to bounce it off of her, too.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear) Governor Lamm was very liberal and George Brown [HistoryMaker George L. Brown].
Speaker 1: Yeah, George helped me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear) lieutenant governor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And there hasn't been anyone since, at the Board of Regents.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So at the Board of Regents would, would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But see, I ran for the Board of Regents; I was elected and, and--
Speaker 2: So the way I, the way I, you tell me which is correct.  I read that he appointed you the first time, and then you ran for the second term.
Speaker 1: Ran, that's it, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He appointed me for a partial, you know, a short term, what's the word?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear) you were filling a term.
Speaker 1: I was filling out a term, and then I ran for full, for the full period.
Story_ID: 625862
Speaker 1: At that time in the country, you, we had discovered what people was referring to as black power.  I mean people, it was a more in your face as opposed to the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you, how did that attitude work with you?
Speaker 2: Well see, I taught black studies, and so I could talk on either side (laughter).  Because speaking a, I started to say authority, but you know, speaking as a person who was versed on both of these things, and so I used each, when necessary.
Speaker 1: Where did you teach black studies?
Speaker 2: At Metro State College [Metropolitan State College of Denver; Metropolitan State University of Denver, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: So that's where--in that department in sociology, you were teaching black studies?
Speaker 2: Not no, black studies was not in--well was it in the sociology?  I don't think so.  Maybe, you know it's been a long time and I'm not certain, we could check that.  Maybe it was.
Speaker 1: So you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was a bastard child anyway.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Nobody wanted it (laughter).  Black studies was not a, not like--what--psychology, you know.  And well it's something you thought up, thought it was a good college course.
Speaker 1: Well you could talk on both sides, which side did you believe in?
Speaker 2: The one that I was working in, I believed in it.
Speaker 1: Which side was that?
Speaker 2: That it should be a course--full endorsed by the college course.
Speaker 1: I understand that, but you said that you could speak on either side, as a basically a Malcolm X side, or the Martin Luther King side, either, by any means necessary (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was it, any one that was necessary I picked out ten authors and the other kind of crowd I thought that they would react, I throw the other one at out.  You have to get it done.
Speaker 1: You have to get it done. Which did you personally believe in?
Speaker 2: Both, both of them, use 'em, you have to use what's necessary, to help our people.
Story_ID: 625863
Speaker 1: So in this section I want to talk a little about your philosophy and not so much about the chronological order in which things occurred.  I want to know why you felt so compelled to, to work on black issues.
Speaker 2: I think it's my background.
Speaker 1: What in your background has compelled you to?
Speaker 2: My father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] and my mother [Phoebe Perry Bassette] worked to get blacks to vote, so we could make a difference in Virginia.  And they had a group called the citizenship--oh I can't think of the name that met every Sunday at four o'clock.  And they wanted blacks to vote, to register first to vote.  And so they worked with you to tell you how to answer the questions when you went down to register, where you go to register.  And they practiced with you, and they had a meeting on Sundays at four o'clock and worked with our people and gradually they went, you know.  Our people take their time, but gradually they got on the books.  And one time, didn't need but one, they had twenty votes that was the difference.  And my father sat at the table and counted the black people, and he said, "There they are."  We had, we rejoiced that morning, but they won.  And since then it hasn't been, as I think, this is Rachel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] speaking, it has been as powerful (laughter).  You know, once you make the breakthrough, everybody just accepts it, and you go on with business and increase interests and so forth.  But seriously that's what happened, that was a time.  Daddy counted the votes and I think it was twenty, but I could be, I'm an old lady now, wasn't that many, he knew the people and he said this is who made the difference.  They voted and he had, he and Mama had made meetings on Sunday afternoon at four o'clock.  In one of the halls of the, I don't know, one of the--can't even think now, any way, they had the meeting in the community [in Hampton, Virginia].  And went over what you did, if you went down to register, what the questions might be asked and so forth.  And there's a book, you know, that the state puts out, and they went over that.  And had school (laughter), so when you went down to register, you were supposed to get registered you weren't supposed to come back, you know, you're ready.
Story_ID: 625864
Speaker 1: I hope (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well so you were saying some interesting things about your parents [Phoebe Perry Bassette and Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.].  About, about the voting and the reasons you felt that you, your background has led to your work as a, I'm gonna say black activist.  Did you see yourself as an activist?
Speaker 1: No, I saw myself only doing what you should do.  And I think that plenty people are not, you know they don't even want to hear it that way.  And so they would, you know say well you know she's over there saying this and that, but I said I'm saying it 'cause you're not saying it.  Somebody has to say it.
Story_ID: 625865
Speaker 1: So seeing how that you were so instrumental in desegregation here in Denver [Colorado] and, and recently Denver has repealed desegregation--or busing.  How do you feel about what you've achieved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I didn't, I didn't talk about busing, I put it on a higher level.  We're talking about educating students, giving them the same opportunities as, no matter what the color of your skin is.  And that's the, I kept it up, I kept it there, don't talk to me about the bus--the bus is just an instrument.
Speaker 1: But seeing how now that they have--Denver has gone back to some of its old ways, how does that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Sad, I would, I would have hoped I would hope that we had learned the sad lesson of segregation.  And that we wouldn't try to resort to some of those same tactics.  Just seems that we have not moved very far.  And I hate that we have to bring that up, so that we can change, we don't need to be going backwards.  Which has been my stand, we don't need, we've done all that, we're moving forward.  And what we need to concentration on, is better, not worse.  Better things for our children, no matter what color they are, but not making a difference because you're black.  'Cause we got some smart black people in my view, you're keeping them out.  'Cause I know their smart, you'll learn if you give 'em a chance.  They are smart, smarter than white people is what I want to say, but I don't say that, I say they're smart.  And they are, I really believe that, give 'em the opportunity they can do.
Story_ID: 625866
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what you were able to do with your own children?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Your son [Edmond F. "Buddy" Noel, Jr.], he went to--where did he go to school?
Speaker 2: For college?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: We went to, where did he go, Jo Katherine [Jo Katherine Page]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].
Speaker 2: Dartmouth (laughter), see he ought to be here, he would say, "Mama."  He went to Dartmouth and my daughter [Angela Noel] went to, where did she go?  Look my mind is closing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).  Your son became a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he has his own practice, here in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What type of law does he practice?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I don't know either (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's technical.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Did she go to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]?
Speaker 2: Angie, no, no.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  I don't remember.
Story_ID: 625867
Speaker 1: I'm gonna just talk about some of the awards you received.  Some of the bigger awards that, that I want to talk about.  And one of them was the Martin Luther King Jr. Humanitarian Award that you received in 1990?  Do you remember receiving that award?
Speaker 2: You know I wasn't even here 'cause my daughter [Angela Noel] was having a baby, and I had gone to California to be with her.  And so, you know, I received the award in that sense, yeah.  But--
Speaker 1: You were also inducted into the Colorado Women's Hall of Fame?
Speaker 2: Yes, but you know that's--they choose whatever the group is, chooses people.  I don't even know how it happened (laughter), I guess that wanted to have a black face.
Speaker 1: What do you feel you contributions have been to this society here in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: I just feel I've been a voice, for black people.  And that I've been fortunate that it has made a difference sometimes, especially for equality of, in the schools.  Because they were certainly, treating us like a, I don't know what.
Speaker 1: What difference do you think you've made?
Speaker 2: I hope to see black people, as people.  With hopes and dreams, and, and accomplishments, like anybody else.  And don't see that they've made they're lifting us up or anything give us the, the door is open and we can do.
Story_ID: 625868
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Phoebe Perry Bassette and Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] live long enough to see some of your achievements?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, they were gone.  But I got it from them.  Because they worked in Hampton [Virginia], where it was, you know, segregation now and forever, that's Virginia.  But my father stood tall, never wavered, and that's where I got it.  I may change my mind, but you're not changing it for me I tell you that.  When you change and say she said this, you better say it just as I said it, I'm gonna be standing up, that's not what I said (laughter), I said this.
Speaker 1: So do you remember when you, at what point in your life that you realized that black people were discriminated against and, and that your parents were doing something about it.  And that you wanted to grow up and do something about it?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I, I could say that I felt that because of my parents at, you know.  I think I saw it, I was able to put the words together later.  Other than that I was just drifting into it, that's what I knew.  And that's what I had seen.
Speaker 1: You said you put it together later, when did you put it together in your life?
Speaker 2: I think when I was working for equal schools, equal opportunity in schools here [Denver, Colorado].  And I think it was a carry-over, really, from what Mama and Daddy had been doing.
Story_ID: 625869
Speaker 1: So could you see that the schools [Denver Public Schools] were not equal?
Speaker 2: Easily, (laughter) how about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you see, what did you see?
Speaker 2: All you did was to go to the one school and look at it.  Look at the outside (laughter), the yard, the lawns, were different, the--just say, easy things.  But then I, I was on the committee, at one point, where we visited schools [in Denver, Colorado], and it just so obvious, that there was a difference.  And it just makes you angry because you're saying, can't you see this? Why is it I have to point it out to you, or why haven't you done something about it?  You don't need black people to come and tell you that you're not treating black people right, or something like that.  That's--I've always felt that, shouldn't have to tell you.  If you in a position of authority you're not working for one person, you're working for all of us.  Nobody ought to have to tell you, did you see this or this or this?  That was what I said, I, I hate to have to tell you, you ought to have seen that, but since you haven't I'm glad to point it out to you.
Story_ID: 625870
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the black community?
Speaker 2: Here in Denver [Colorado]?  That we won't lose sight of who we are.  And what we can accomplish and what we can contribute to make this city a better city.  I've always felt that, why you are ask, while you are asking for change you can help to be the change agent that brings about change and I've always said that.  You can't sit down and say we ought to have this you get up off your B-U-T-T, help change it.  So that's where I am, and I think I probably got up off mine too often (laughter).
Story_ID: 625871
Speaker 1: What did your husband think about what you were doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My husband was just so supportive, and he was busy.  He, he was a doctor and I think if he had come to some of the meetings, he might have murdered some of the people (laughter), but.  He didn't come, he said he was busy, you know.  But he was part and parcel of--and I knew I had his complete support.  And all I had to say was, "Edmond [Edmond F. Noel], I need you," and he would have put everything down and help me.  But he said he wasn't gonna get into it, he might have to kill somebody (laughter).  And he didn't want to have to go to the electric chair--that was our secret joke (laughter).  I don't want to have to go to the electric chair, in fact, my father [Andrew W.E. Bassette, Jr.] used to say that.  And my sister [Ida Bassette Haddon] and I would say, "Oh Daddy, we don't want you to go to the electric chair so, we gonna be good," you know, but that was funny he used to say to us.
Story_ID: 625872
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I hope that the things that I advocated for change will stay.  Those that we were, the small things that we were able to do they take and grow.  But more than that I hope that our people will not lose sight that we are part of this community.  We don't have to wait for somebody to do something for us, we can do it.  We can bring them into help us.  That would be what would be the optimum thing.  But we are part of this, we have a voice.
Story_ID: 625873
Speaker 1: What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That I tried (laughter), you know. Like people have said, I tried.  But more than that I hope that I made a difference, to help and help to our people mostly the children for another generation.  And that it will be better for them than it was for me, growing up, making a difference.
Story_ID: 625874
Speaker 1: Why do you feel history is important?  Why do you feel what you've shared with me today will, is important?
Speaker 2: I hope it will be important.  I don't think that--I think I'm one of many you know. What has happened to move things for our people, is that other people have done their share.  And that we ought to remember that, you can't do it by yourself.  I could not, I had my church [Shorter Community A.M.E. Church, Denver, Colorado] behind me and all the black people in Denver [Colorado] (laughter) behind me, she [Jo Katherine Page] knows.  You know they would say, I'd be out there saying it, but I look around sometimes I didn't see anybody, when I would say, you all, you all left me out there standing (laughter).  But anyway, I had the support.
Story_ID: 625875
Speaker 1: So what, as you look back over your career, what is it that you are most proud of?
Speaker 2: I'm glad the schools [Denver Public Schools] got integrated.  They were really moving toward even more separation, you know.  And that seemed to be acceptable--not by our people, but as a, a way of doing things.  You could make a case for it if you wanted to do it, but it was negative in it wasn't what we wanted.  But I hope that I helped to make a difference.  Sometimes I wonder 'cause I see things happening that used to happen anyway before.  But, by and large, I'm glad that I was able to do what I could at the time I wished I could have done more.  But a lot of times you're out there, you're saying this and you look back and you don't see nobody behind you, and I was never in that position.  But I'd been in the position where there were few people (laughter).  And so and I you know, so when I came to the end my term [on the Denver Board of Education], you know, I just felt I've, I've done the best I can, and I'm getting old and dotty.
Story_ID: 625876
Speaker 1: Your crowning effort is that a school [Rachel B. Noel Middle School, Denver, Colorado] has been named after you?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right and the young lady who's the principal is a jewel.  That is the best thing I ever.  I, you know that I tell her all the time, she gets tired, I say, "I'm so happy you're the principal over here."  Because she wants to do these things, she wants the school to be great.  And for the kids to achieve 'cause she has a high standard, I'm proud of her.  So when I go, I just sit there (laughter).
Speaker 1: How does it make you feel to have a school named after you?
Speaker 2: Happy (laughter), proud, but most of all, see, she's doing it.  They have, they have been selected this principal who is out of sight.  She's not, what's the word, pushy, she's not screaming; she has that school under her control.  And she don't take any stuff and I'm saying, "Fine, fine, fine," whenever I go out there.  She's, she's really, in her way, strong and beautiful.
Story_ID: 625877
Speaker 1: So are there any black people on the Board of Education [Denver Board of Education] here now?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Patterson [Kevin Patterson].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, Kevin 'cause you know I talk to him regularly.  I keep telling him, you know, whatever I don't think he--that he fusses as much as I would.  And but I tell him all the time, you know, just call me up, if you, if you need me.  But I may be old and dotty, but I haven't given up and so you can count on me.  And every now and then you know, we visit and talk about things.  But he doesn't have the kind of things face him that I had so.  I kind of say, that I can't get into his business as much because it's different today than it was for me.  I was in fighting times, and so I had to put on my gloves and fight, had to wash my nails (laughter).  But he has it, he has it, it's different, but he has to watch it, you know, things are not 100 percent perfect.  So you have to be on the ball, that's what I tell him.
Story_ID: 625878
Speaker 1: So I'm going to ask you, as a last question, which is actually more of a statement.  But I'm going to ask you to speak to the children that are coming up the generations that will see this, these--this tape.  A message you would like to give to children that will see this tape.  What words would you like to leave with generations of children that are coming up today?
Speaker 2: I would say to them--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what I'm gonna, yeah, look I want you just look at me and say it so they can see your eyes.
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say to them, each of us is given opportunities to do well, to use them.  I was brought up to believe that we as black people had a mission to do well.  Because so many people thought we could not because we were black.  That we were not as good as, was the way it was put.  But that we are, we are and that we must do what we can, at a high level not just to get by.  Make a contribution, if we can.  And that we must because of the children who coming behind us, we want them to see, yes you too can make a difference.  You can be governor and even president.  You know better than the one we have just between you and me, truly.  That's what I would tell 'em you can be president.  But certainly you can help in your community, you can help in your church, you can help in your school.  Do your best and it will be better for all of us.  End of story.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 625879
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband, Edmond Forrest Noel, N-O-E-L [Edmond F. Noel].  And he was a physician and surgeon and we can, we moved here [Denver, Colorado] after the war, World War II [WWII] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Simultaneous) Okay, can you tell us the circumstances of the photograph, (unclear) this occasion?
Speaker 1: This is--we got married, that's my married, marriage picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, thank you, okay.
Speaker 1: My husband belonged to the Owl Club [Owl Club of Denver, Denver, Colorado], it's a men's club and this was a picture taken at one of their dances.  And we were all dressed up.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay and that looks like February 14th, 1959, so that was Valentine's Day.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Can you tell us where you are in that photograph?
Speaker 1: I think I'm at the back somewhere.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  That's you.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Right here, that's you?
Speaker 1: Let's see lady with glasses, see I'm standing, I'm there with my legs crossed, that's a terrible picture (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  What is it a picture of?
Speaker 1: Me, right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Right, what is the group?
Speaker 1: Oh that's, that's the Owl's dance, I think.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, I'm gonna get closer, right here?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, that side, see and I got my legs like this, just like I have them now. I think this is at my office.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Do you know which office?
Speaker 1: Oh, let me see, can't think of name of it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You can turn, okay, you can turn the (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Do I have anything written on the back?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  No ma'am.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I think that's at my office.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  This is another picture of you working?
Speaker 1: Working on community relations, for the City of Denver [Colorado], so that's my office, it's a cubby hole.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, commission on human--
Speaker 1: Community relations, City and County of Denver.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the--my pew has the name of my family on it.  And you can see the little thing.  I don't know what it says though.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in a wedding, Dr. Charles Johnson's [Charles S. Johnson] daughter [Patricia Johnson Clifford], and that was my dress, I made the dress.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Wow, fantastic.
Speaker 1: My Easter outfit, I don't know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, Easter when?
Speaker 1: I was sixteen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, Easter so that was in Hampton [Virginia]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was in my backyard.  I thought I was sharp.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  You were, yeah.
Speaker 1: But my legs are sad (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Could you tell us about it?
Speaker 1: Not really, I've forgotten what that was.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Where were you?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I can't remember, what.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, tell us about it please?
Speaker 1: Could you see, I just say that's a.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Sorority?
Speaker 1: Yes, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And here's the last one for the day.
Speaker 1: That's my sister, my dear sister, who is gone to heaven.
Speaker 2: But today's her birthday?
Speaker 1: Her day is her birthday, that's right, I said that.  That's my dear sister.
Speaker 2: But can you give us her full name and--
Speaker 1: Her name is Ida, I-D-A, Beatrice B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 2: And can you tell us--
Speaker 1: Haddon, her last name was Haddon H-A-D-D-O-N [Ida Bassette Haddon].
Speaker 2: And can you tell us the circumstances around this photograph.  Why was it taken, what were the two of you doing?
Speaker 1: Where were we?  I don't know, I went home, I think and we went to something, but I don't know, I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 1: It wasn't here I know that, I think we were in, I went home.  She lived in New Jersey, you know, living way out here, but our home is Virginia and often we would, if one was going home the other came, too.  See I just had one sister, two brothers [Andrew W.E. Bassette, III and Charles Bassette], but one sister.
