Story_ID: 110895
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea, the videographer, and we're with The History Makers.  So if you'll state your name and spell it out for me?
Speaker 2: My name is a Lynn Nottage and it's spelled L-Y-N-N, N-O-T-T-A-G-E.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Is November--oh, I'm sorry.  Is (laughter) December 5, 2005.  Should we go again?
Speaker 1: No, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is it, it's December 5th?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, December 5, 2005, Monday.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're being interviewed at my home at 230 Dean Street in Brooklyn [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a playwright.
Story_ID: 110896
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chocolate.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think it's September.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Barbados.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Oh, boy?  (laughter) good.
Story_ID: 110897
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're gonna start by talking about your ancestry.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And we'll start and we'll talk about them separately.  We'll talk about your mother's side of the family and then your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So what was your mother's name, where was she born and, and what year was she born?
Speaker 2: My, my mother's maiden name or my mother's married name?
Speaker 1: Well, start with her maiden name.
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Ruby Newton or Ruby Jeannette Newton [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] and she was born in Brooklyn in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: And what, what's her birth date?
Speaker 2: 10-10-34 [October 10, 1934].
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your earliest memories of your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember my mother, my mother in my opinion was a very beautiful woman and so what I, I remember most about her was her smile and her touch and her voice.  I was very recently sort of sitting up stairs and thinking about my mother's voice and how--because she's now gone, how it's retreated from me and sort of missing that most of all.
Speaker 1: So do you remember what she, what sort of foods she cooked when you were young what, what was she like as a mother?  What, what were some of the things she did for you?
Speaker 2: My--she was a wonderful mother.  My, my mom was an educator, so she really was, was deeply involved in how to bring up a child particularly an African American child.  And one of the things I remember specifically about her when I was very young is that she used to color in all of the pictures, all of the white pictures and make them brown and I still have some of those books (laughter).  So when I go back through, because she was really, she, she was really careful about shaping my ego and she wanted me to be a very proud African American child.  And she felt like there weren't enough images of us, positive images of us, and I remember her crafting that early on.
Speaker 1: So did your mother have any siblings?
Speaker 2: No, she was an only child.  Though, as an adult she had a brother.  So she was raised as an only child, my grandfather remarried and had a, a son.  Which, yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you remember, I know you didn't have an opportunity to meet your mother's mother, but--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: You, you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother--
Speaker 2: My grandmother's still alive.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So your grandmother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was your, your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Waple.
Speaker 1: And her last name is?
Speaker 2: Newton.
Speaker 1: And can you spell that first name for me?
Speaker 2: W-A-P-L-E.
Speaker 1: Waple.
Speaker 2: Waple.
Speaker 1: Now, was she born in Brooklyn as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born in Brooklyn as well.
Speaker 1: Do you know, or was it Bed-Stuy?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where she was born but I assume it was probably Bed-Stuy or thereabouts.
Speaker 1: And now what is your grandmother like, then?
Speaker 2: Well my, my grandmother who now has senile dementia, but was, she was a very, vivacious woman and extraordinary storyteller.  She was a people magnet.  I mean still people tell me stories about my grandmother.  She was, she was pretty extraordinary.
Speaker 1: What did your grandmother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She began as a domestic and eventually she began working for the war effort in, in Vietnam.  She worked at the Brooklyn Navy Yard sort of packing goods that were shipped over to soldiers.
Story_ID: 110898
Speaker 1: So it was, I guess, it was your great-grandmother that I was thinking of that at, that at some point you were pulling out stuff (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.  That was my great-grandmother who was born in Barbados.
Speaker 1: So your great-grandmother was born in Barbados?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Ethel Boyce Armstrong.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about her--what, what, what have you been able to uncover?
Speaker 2: I know relatively little about her because she was dead by the time I was born and my family was extremely reticent and I know that she was deeply loved by my grandmother [Waple Newton] but beyond that I know very little.  She was a seamstress.  She came to this country by herself.  She was the eldest of eight sisters.  And she subsequently brought all of her eight sisters over one by one, which I think is quite an (laughter) extraordinary thing for a woman who arrived here when she was eighteen years old.  But I, you know, it's one of my great regrets that I know so little about my family history.
Speaker 1: So can you tell me the story about finding, when you were unpacking some of your grandmother's stuff and you found and, and the book her--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  Several years ago my grandmother was beginning to show signs of senile dementia and she was living in a brownstone which she had bought in the mid-1950s.  And we decided, we made the decision to sell it and have her move in with my brother.  And I had the, the charge of going through all of the items, it was fifty years of stuff.  And my grandmother was a pack rat.  I mean she saved every magazine she ever looked at.  She clipped recipes and, and articles.  And she also was, became very paranoid in her old age and so she began hiding things throughout the apartment.  And one of the--she used the magazines to hide photographs.  And so I couldn't just scoop up all of the magazines and throw 'em up.  I literally have to go through every single page of thousands of magazines and in between the pages of one magazine I found a photograph of my grandmother when she was a child and her sister and a woman who I assumed and now know was my great-grandmother, Ethel Boyce, and for me it was sort of a striking moment because I had lived my entire life without ever having seen an image of this woman.  And I became very curious about who was she and why was so much of that history lost and why did my grandmother not deem it important enough to sort of pass it down to me.
Speaker 1: And what were you able to uncover about your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, what I discovered was that she was a seamstress and she made intimate apparel which I thought was really quite wonderful.  She came to this country via Ellis Island [New York City, New York] in, I believe, 1911.  And she, she married a man [George Armstrong] who she began corresponding with over at the Panama Canal.  He came over, I think, several years later.  He died fairly young after sort of providing the seeds for my grandmother and her, her sister and one other boy, Samtaki [ph.] was his name (laughter) who died very, very young.
Speaker 1: So your grandmother was, had two other siblings?
Speaker 2: She had two other, she had Eurita, and--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name for me?
Speaker 2: E-U--actually it was Iselma Eurita. I-S-E-L-M-A and Eurita, E-U-R-I-T-A.  And a brother named Samtaki [ph.].
Speaker 1: So they--
Speaker 2: So they were very creative namers (laughter).
Speaker 1: They were.  So they'd come over from Barbados?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they came to--do you know why they chose New York City [New York]?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know why they chose New York City other than I imagine it, it was the destination for many Caribbean people at the time.  I mean, it was the, sort of the beginning of the Industrial Age and there were jobs and there was opportunity.  And so I think they were attracted to the prospect of, of employment, the same way, you know, European immigrants were attracted to the United States.
Speaker 1: So she arrives in Brooklyn, she had your mother [sic, grandmother] in the, in the 1930s.  So she'd actually lived through The Depression and they were able to do pretty well.
Speaker 2: They, they were able to do pretty well.  And I think one of the reasons and my, well, my mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] who was born just after the, The Depression, and my grandmother had my mother when she was very young, but the, the father of, my grandmother's biological father was a bootlegger.  And there's one industry that sort of never goes into recession (laughter) and that's the liquor industry.  And so throughout the, The Depression they always had what my grandmother said was meat because he would bring it by.  And my grandmother and my mother always had clothing to wear because of my mother's grandfather.
Story_ID: 110899
Speaker 1: So your, your mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] was born.  She--at what point did she, let's talk about her education.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was, she was in Brooklyn [New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she went to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She went to elementary where she later became the principal.
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: Which was P.S. 93 [William H. Prescott School] in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant] on New York Avenue.  And my grandmother [Waple Newton] also went to P.S. 93.  And sort of an extraordinary circle is that my mother eventually became principal of that school.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever talk about her life as a child going to elementary school in New York?  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: She, she didn't talk that much about being a child going to elementary school.  I mean the things that she sort of talked about, talked about, which I imagine is true of most children, is the vacations that she took down South to see her family (laughter)--
Speaker 1: And what did she say (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --in North Carolina.  You know, and just how when she went down to North Carolina there was this huge warm, country family that embraced her and fed her and nurtured her in a way that was very different from her lifestyle up in New York where my grandmother had to work very hard and my, my great-grandmother [Ethel Boyce Armstrong] had to work very hard to provide for them.
Speaker 1: Now, who were the people that had, that moved, that had moved South?  Because everyone had come over from Barbados (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, not, not my, my, my mother's biological father's family was from North Carolina.
Story_ID: 110900
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's, let's take this moment then to talk about your father's side a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name, he's still alive.
Speaker 1: Still alive, okay.
Speaker 2: Is Wallace Nottage. D, well, W-A-L-L-A-C-E.  And he grew up in Harlem [New York City, New York].  And his mother's name was Dorothy Nottage.  She also grew up in Harlem.
Speaker 1: And what year was your father born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had come--then his family had come from the South to Harlem?
Speaker 2: Right.  They came at the turn of the century from, from Virginia and Florida to Harlem.
Speaker 1: And what was your father's occupation?
Speaker 2: My father was a social worker.
Speaker 1: And he'd moved to New York in the late--
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Your father, he moved--
Speaker 2: My father grew up in New York.
Speaker 1: So your father--
Speaker 2: He grew up in Harlem.
Story_ID: 110901
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I'm trying to get like which part of the family was in the South that your mom [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] would go and visit?
Speaker 2: Her, my, my mother's father.
Speaker 1: Your--oh, okay.  Your mother's father?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's father.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) so your mother's father is the one.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was from, well my mother's biological father was from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what his name?
Speaker 2: His name was William "Buck" Wynne [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you know about his--what do you know about him and, and that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know very, very little about that side of the family just because my mother was adopted by Earl Newton who I know as my grandfather.  And pretty much all of that side of the family history, was, was erased.  I think by design.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but they were bootleggers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 110902
Speaker 1: So your mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] had the opportunity then to go to college as well?
Speaker 2: My mother went to the University of Bridgeport [Bridgeport, Connecticut] and the University of Oslo [Oslo, Norway].
Speaker 1: Did she talk about as a child was it her dream to become a teacher?
Speaker 2: I think, I think she had two dreams.  I think one was to become a teacher and the other was to go into the, the diplomatic corps which never quite worked out because she had become fluent in German, in Hebrew, and in Norwegian.
Speaker 1: And what year did she meet and marry your father [Wallace Nottage]?
Speaker 2: In 1960.
Speaker 1: So she--and that was here in New York [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: That was here in New York, in Harlem.
Story_ID: 110903
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then what are some of your earliest memories of your own childhood growing up here in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, when I grew in Brooklyn, this is Boerum Hill, it was not, (laughter) not the greatest of neighborhoods.  It's gone through a tremendous (laughter) amount of, of transition.  And I, I remember it being an extremely multicultural and wonderful, though dangerous neighborhood to grow up in and I feel very blessed that I did.  It was economically diverse.  It was ethnically diverse.  You know, it was one of the, the first gay neighborhoods in New York City outside of the Village [Greenwich Village, New York].  And so I, I felt like it was kind of a microcosm of the world.  And my earliest memories of playing outside on, in front of our house because our, our yard was, was the center of activity for the block for Dean Street and for Bergen Street.  And so all of the kids would come and we'd play, you know, we'd play stoopball, we'd play skelsy, you know, we'd play--
Speaker 1: What's skelsy?
Speaker 2: You know, it's the where you, with the bottle caps where you, it's you draw a board and you shoot with the bottle caps.  You know, it was sort of like a transitional.  I felt like we had one foot in the old New York (laughter) and new New York.  It was a very, very lively and vibrant street culture.
Speaker 1: What are the, some of the other games you played?
Speaker 2: We used to play ringolevio.  We played kick the can.  We used to slide down the stoop in, in refrigerator boxes.  When we'd go to schoolyard a lot and just hang out and, and play Double Dutch and jump rope.
Speaker 1: So what is, what are, what was the, how would you describe like the, the community leaders at that time?  Who were the people in the neighborhood that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Who as, as a child?
Speaker 1: As a child.  Were there people in neighborhood that you, you know how hear the stories about oh well, it was a village and if you did something somebody else's mom would tell your mom?
Speaker 2: Well my mom [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] was, certainly, and my dad [Wallace Nottage], well my dad still feels very much like the, the mayor of the block (laughter).  And my mother was extremely politically active and was always sort of a community organizer.  So she, I felt like was at the epicenter of a lot of what went on, on in this community.  And it's strange to have, for me to say that that was the person, but that's what it felt like.  It felt as though as my mother was the person that people looked up to.
Story_ID: 110904
Speaker 1: So you said you, your mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] was politically active.  What are some of the things you saw her working on as, that you understood as a child that your mom was active and involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew, I knew from the time my mother was a, a young woman, I mean she, she went down South in nineteen cities, in the 1960s and rode the Freedom Buses and she taught.  She was in Haiti doing early education in the, in the late 1950s.  Here she was very active in the, in the Feminist Movement and the Black Power, Power Movement.  One of the things that she started around the corner on Nevins, on the corner of Nevins and Dean [Boerum Hill, New York City, New York] was something called The Black School with Betty Shabazz and, and Eugenia Clarke who's the wife of, of, of John Henrik Clarke.  And The Black School was, was designed to teach all of us African American children who were sort of going to either predominately white schools or who were living in, in neighborhoods that weren't predominately black, traditionally black crafts, so that we were sort of entrenched in our culture.
Speaker 1: What's a traditionally black craft?  What crafts?
Speaker 2: Tie-dye.  I mean back then it was tie-dying.  It was learning songs.  It was--sort of you remember Kwanzaa just sort of coming about.  So it was, you know, it was just teaching us about African culture, something that had sort of gotten away from my mother's generation.  And in part it was for her to rediscover her roots as well.
Speaker 1: So did you, did you, do you remember, like in 1968, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] being assassinated?
Speaker 2: I, I do.  I mean I have a very faint memory.  I do remember all of the blinds being closed and I remember my parents [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage and Wallace Nottage] sort of being extremely still and somber but not understanding the great impact because certainly I mean when you're four years old--
Speaker 1: Four, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I remember the weight of that day but I don't remember why (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when your mother was doing stuff like the freedom marches and you were a child--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Did she--
Speaker 2: Well, she no, it was before I was child.
Speaker 1: Before a child.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before I was born.
Speaker 1: Before you were born.  Well, when she had the opportunity to reflect back on those things--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --did she give you reasons as to why she was doing this?  Did she ever sit you down and say I'm doing this to, because this to change this or this country is this way and I, did she ever explain at all what she was doing?
Speaker 2: No, she never explained it.  I mean, I think her explanation was by participating, you know.  And she always--what she taught me is that one must always remain active and one must always strive for a better society.  And I think that I understood even as a child that we were living in a fundamentally flawed society and that it needed to be changed.
Story_ID: 110905
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about first grade?
Speaker 2: I remember my teacher's name which is really unusual, Mrs. Marshall.  And I remember two very specific things about first grade.  I remember there being a chart on the wall with the tallest buildings in the world and they said the next tallest buildings are gonna be the World Trade Centers and us being in awe that they were gonna be here [New York City, New York].  And the other thing that I remember is, is they had these exhibits that the I think it was the Museum of Natural History [American Museum of Natural History in New York City, New York] or the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York City, New York] used to bring around to classes.  And one of the things they had were these little tiny shoes that Chinese princesses used to wear when their feet were bound.  And I remember them explaining, and I don't know why I remember this, but I remember them explaining that they bound these princesses feet so they would never be able to walk and then they were forced to wear these tiny shoes.  And that, that, that's stuck with me.  And I thought, well, I never wanna be a princess (laughter) 'cause I always wanna be able to walk on my own two feet (laughter).
Speaker 1: So in first grade, did you have any dreams about what you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be an archeologist.
Speaker 1: And an archeologist because?
Speaker 2: Because I had, I had seen some, some dinosaur bones and, because I, and I think in part because of these museum exhibits that were brought around in which we looked at artifacts.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And we looked at the artifacts and I just became very interested in sort of in, in ancient and prehistoric history.
Speaker 1: So, what year did you, do you remember what year you entered first grade?
Speaker 2: I think in the 1970 or 1971.
Speaker 1: In '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: In second grade, anything stands out for you in second grade?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I got skipped from first to third grade.  And so I remember being the very shortest kid (laughter) in the class and feeling a bit overwhelmed is my feeling of, of sort of third grade.
Speaker 1: And why were you skipped from first to third?
Speaker 2: You know, I have no idea.  At that age you don't know why but I assumed that I must have been a tad bit precocious.
Speaker 1: So I'm moving forward.  What's--
Speaker 2: But then I got, I did third grade twice (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: So I just wanna qualify that.
Story_ID: 110906
Speaker 1: So what sort of sights, sounds, and smells remind you of, of your early childhood here in Brooklyn [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, for me, I think salsa music and jazz and drums because one of the things that I really remember, because this, there was lot of ambient sound in the neighborhood.  And it was a black and Latino neighborhood.  And I remember the, the, there was a boarding house maybe three doors down and there were guys that would always sit on the front stoop and they'd play the conga drums.  And you--they'd play late into night, so I'd be up in bed and hear (making sounds) (laughter).  But now it's like a, a feeling of comfort when I hear that sound and salsa music. And my father [Wallace Nottage] played jazz and so I, I think of home when I hear jazz music.
Speaker 1: What did your father play?
Speaker 2: You know, he played classic jazz.  I mean he was very much into the bebop era music, into [John] Coltrane, into [Charles] Mingus, and, and Miles Davis.
Story_ID: 110907
Speaker 1: So when you entered junior high school--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What, what, what were your ambitions?  What were your dreams?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I don't even remember it.  So interesting that I remember early on (laughter) and I don't remember in junior high school what it is I wanted to--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --to do other than to get through.
Speaker 1: Well, what type of student would you describe yourself as being?
Speaker 2: I, I was, I was a very diligent student.  I did my homework.  I was very focused.  I read a great deal from the time I was really young, so I always did extremely well in school.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in, in the drama department?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in, in junior high school.
Speaker 1: What extracurricular activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: I, I, I played the piano.  Yeah, I played the--I think that's pretty much it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, what was--
Speaker 2: I didn't do a lot of extracurricular activities unfortunately.
Speaker 1: What made you decide then to leave Brooklyn and, and to go to Harlem [New York City, New York] to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, because--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) of Music and Art [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York] (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --because I was interested in music and because I, I had been studying piano for a number of years.  And I wanted to leave the, the high school which I went to which was Saint Ann's [School in New York City, New York] which was a predominately white, very small school.  I wanted to have a much more expansive experience.  And the school that I had always wanted to go to was Music and Art.  And so I took the test and then found myself making this long trip north.
Story_ID: 110908
Speaker 1: So Lynn, what were, when you were like, when you were in high school [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York]--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --what did you think about race relations here in this country, in New York City [New York]?  Did you have any feelings about it whatsoever?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I did.  I mean it's interesting sort of living through that age because I, I felt very aware of being a young, black woman.  I felt the absence of, of sort of positive images in the media.  I think part of the, the reason I wanted to leave Saint Ann's [School in New York City, New York] to go to Music and Art is that I felt very isolated at Saint Ann's and I felt that difference very abundantly.  Whereas when I got to Music and Art, suddenly, you know, everyone looked like me (laughter).  You know, all of my friends were like me.  Oh, and it, it just for me was a tremendous relief.  Tremendous relief.
Speaker 1: Well, when, when you--
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And, and I can still remember just growing up because I grew up skiing.  And I always loved skiing but it remained until recently, I guess, even now a very white sport.  And I can, can remember from the time I was five years old the reaction to me and my brother when we'd go to the ski lodge.  You know, and being called you know the N word or having people as you're, you're, as you're skiing down the slope throw things at you from the ski lift or, you know, the kind of hush and silence that would brush over the lodge when you'd walk in with your ski boots like (making sounds) (laughter).
Speaker 1: So why do you think, why do you think that you, why do you think seeing, skiing was introduced to your life?  Where did that come from (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I, I know specifically why it was introduced.  My, my, one of my father's [Wallace Nottage's] very good friends and our neighbors who, he was Japanese and American and he loved to ski.  And he had a daughter who is my age and he thought well can I bring your daughter skiing with my daughter and then my brother, and my brother who's three years younger said can we bring him as, as well.  And we just began going every, every year.  And then we began taking ski trips up to Canada with him every year.  And we'd go skiing.
Speaker 1: So were you shocked at that age that there were no other blacks people skiing or (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I mean that just seemed the way--
Speaker 1: Seemed logical.
Speaker 2: --it seemed the way it, way it was, you know.  It didn't shock me but certainly there were shocking, I remember there was a mountain called Hidden Valley in New Jersey which was a private mountain and George Furiya [ph.] was his name.  He decided that he wanted to integrate the mountain (laughter) and join the club.  And so he, you know, he paid his dues and he decided well, okay I'm gonna go.  It's gonna be me, his daughter, Signy Furiya [ph.], my, my, my brother and so the four, four of us show up at the mountain (laughter) and he's like we're gonna ski this mountain and no one's gonna tell us otherwise.  But it was such a horrific day for us and so traumatic by the end, he's like, "You know what?  I don't wanna be a part of this club.  We'll find another."
Speaker 1: And why was it horrific?
Speaker 2: You know, just people were extremely cold and rude to us.  You know, you, you felt the chill.  You felt the chill.  But he thought it was really important for us to experience it and do that.
Story_ID: 110909
Speaker 1: Now you said before that before you'd gone to Harlem [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York] that you really didn't see images that you particularly liked seeing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of African American women.  What were you watching on TV?  What were you reading?  What, where were you getting the images you were receiving at?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I watched what all the other kids.  I watched "The Brady Bunch," "The Partridge Family," "Sanford and Son," "Love Boat," (laughter)  What else was on (laughter) about that--
Speaker 1: "Good Times."
Speaker 2: Good, "Good Times."  And those, those were, those were the images and the magazines that I read were, were Right On!  magazine and still it was sort of predominately black male images and not so many of, of teenage girls.  I mean, I just didn't see teenage girls represented, black teenage girls represented in the media.
Speaker 1: So as a, as a, a high school student in Harlem--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --that had changed somewhat.  What effect did that have on you being in Harlem and being around--
Speaker 2: Well, my, because my family was in Harlem, in some ways it just felt like I was going home and I had always spent a lot of time in Harlem so it wasn't as though I had suddenly got on the train and went up to Harlem and had this, this sort of awakening.  It just was another sort of step in my development.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And so Harlem always felt very much like home.
Story_ID: 110910
Speaker 1: At this point did you, in, in Harlem as a high school student [at The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York], did you take up writing for the, did you take--
Speaker 2: I did.  I began writing short stories and some, some theater.  I wrote my first play (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first play.
Speaker 2: My first play was called "The Darker Side of Verona" which was about an--
Speaker 1: "The Darker Side of Verona?"
Speaker 2: Of Verona.  An all black Shakespeare group (laughter) that was touring America.  It was very ambitious for a teenager (laughter)--
Story_ID: 110072
Speaker 1: You were telling me the story about that was your first play ["The Darker Side of Verona"].
Speaker 2: That was my very first play.
Speaker 1: What's, what, what led to writing a play?
Speaker 2: I, I in high school [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York] I took an elective, English elective which was dramatic writing and dramatic writing in theater.  And I just became interested in writing plays.  I had always grown up going to the theater, going to Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company], going to see Broadway [New York City, New York] shows.  My parents [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage and Wallace Nottage] were not artists but they were people as you can look around the room who, who believed the arts were essential part of, of life.
Speaker 1: Now do you know why they felt that?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't and I probably should ask my father that question (laughter) before he goes, because it's an important question.  But I feel as though deep down in their souls they were artists but they just didn't have the means to express themselves.  I mean among my father's good friends were Romare Bearden, Ernest Crichlow and Norman Lewis.  You can see some of their paintings on the walls.  And Julius Hemphill, and I thought for a man and a woman who were sort of elementary school teacher and a social worker they seemed to know some of the greatest black artists in, in, you know, in this, in the past century.  My parents were introduced by Paule Marshall who's a novelist.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: But that's no, and it's all, all the say-- but so I think that I was kind of raised to be an artist (laughter) indirectly.
Speaker 1: So tell me about going to like the Negro Ensemble and going to plays in which there were African Americans.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it, it, it's, it's interesting because when I grew up that seemed the norm.  That's what theater was.  That's the theater I saw.  And so it, it was wonder, it was a wonderful time, that was, there was so many amazing writers.  There was Charles Fuller, who was, who was writing and, you know, I remember seeing "Soldiers Play" ["A Soldier's Play"] and I remember seeing "Brownsville Raid" ["The Brownsville Raid"] and even though I was very young (laughter).  Particularly for "Brownsville Raid," I remember seeing "Zooman and the Sign" which had a very profound effect on me as a dramatist and I think is part of the reasons, one of the reasons I do write plays is because I was so excited by what that, that play did to me and how it made me feel.  I went back to see it twice which is unusual for a young person.
Story_ID: 110073
Speaker 1: So we were also, off-camera we were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --talking about what New York City [New York] was like for you--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --as, as a teenager and being in high school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then you said you didn't date.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You sort of went out and in, in groups.
Speaker 2: You know, we went out groups.  We hung out together and I, I, I think it's just because of the design of Music and Art [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York] that we all lived in geographically diverse places and there was great distances to get to see each other and so high school was where we met.  And then if we went out, we sort of went out together because it was, it was sort of dangerous to travel as individuals.  You know, we couldn't just go jump in the car and go, you know, we had to get on the subway and ride all the way up to South Bronx [New York City, New York] to see my best friend.
Story_ID: 110074
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about New York in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember, I mean, in, in, in the '80s [1980s] I remember the introduction of, of crack and how that transformed the city.  I remember the first time that I went to a night club and I heard hip hop music and what that did for my, my spirit and how I felt.
Speaker 1: What did it do?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt for the first time here is this music that speaks to my generation that was very different from the R and B that my parents [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage and Wallace Nottage] were listen, listening too.  And, and from the disco music that was sort of predominate at the time.  You know, here are these young people you sort of bragging about who they are, full of confidence and braggadocio and I felt, and that's how I felt, (laughter) you know.  I felt like there was an expression of what was going on inside.  And it felt very separate from the kind of music that my parents were making.  And I remember bringing it in to my, to my parents' house and he's like, "What is that?"  You know, it's (laughter) that's not jazz.  You know, it was the very first music that my, my father had that reaction too, that he just couldn't penetrate and understand.  And so I remember going to night clubs a lot and listening and music and hanging out.  Just feeling the, the city was so, so vibrant and alive and I felt like we were differentiating ourselves from the previous generation.
Speaker 1: How so though?  How did you see yourself versus the way the parents had seen themselves?
Speaker 2: I, I can tell you I, I think that part of it was that my parents had made such an effort to instill pride in me that I grew up differently because it's like I grew up feeling extremely proud to be African American.  I grew up enjoying being African American (laughter) in a way that I felt they did not.  I felt like they were burdened by being African American and I was never burdened by it.  And I, and I feel like rap music is a reflection of a generation that felt entitled to celebrate themselves (laughter).
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the music today just to move forward, before we go back (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it, it feels very different to me.  It, it feels very sort of manufactured and, and studio-processed and sort of distant from where it began.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the stories that they're telling today?  Do you think there reflective of the experiences that they're living
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I think they're reflective of what--well, yes, I mean perhaps they're reflective of, of what, what a superstar (laughter) goes through, you know, drinking champagne and driving a Rolls Royce and, you know, experiencing multiple sex partners but I think gone is what Public Enemy was doing or KRS-One [Lawrence "Krisna" Parker] or even Grandmaster Flash [Joseph Saddler] and the Kurtis Blow [Kurtis Walker].  I mean gone was that self-celebration.
Speaker 1: Kool Moe Dee [HM Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" DeWese] (laughter).
Speaker 2: And Kool Moe Dee (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, actually we're doing him tomorrow.
Speaker 2: Oh, are you doing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But I mean, I, I just feel like they, it's, it's, it's got--.  It's moved away from being sort of a purely storytelling celebration of, of or a reflection of what was going on in the African American culture to kind of and I hate to use this word but sort of kind of gangsta minstrelsy where it's no longer an accurate reflection of the community but a commercial reflection of the community.  It's sort of taken in, processed, and shot back out.
Story_ID: 110075
Speaker 1: So when you, when you're, when you went to Broadway [New York City, New York] and you saw something like Charles Fuller's "Soldiers Play" ["A Soldier's Play"]--
Speaker 2: Well, that's wasn't on Broadway.  That was at the Negro Ensemble [Negro Ensemble Company].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).  When you saw that play--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what, what effect did that have on you and sort of that this African American had written this wonderful play?
Speaker 2: Well, because, because Charles Fuller had written a play, I felt well I can write a play.  I can be there.  It's accessible to me.  And I, I just wanted, I wanted to be part of that.  I felt like instantly when I walked into the theater this is comfortable.  That there's something about the way in which the story's being told that I relate to and wanna be part of.  And I, I think that I went from being the--because the theater's very communal, I went from sort of sitting in the audience, to moving on to the stage and reflecting back but I always loved that aspect of it.  And I loved that the theater was constantly changing and that it was dynamic and that when I went to see "Zooman and the Sign" [by Charles Fuller] the first time, it was very different than I saw it the second time, even though it was the same actors and cast but the audience had shifted.  You know, the laughs were at different places.  And I, and I, and I loved that that could happen and that it could be alive and evolving.
Story_ID: 110076
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school [The High School of Music and Art, now Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, in New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: In 1986.
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: No '82 [1982], '82 [1982] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: 1982.
Speaker 1: Before you graduated high school, talk to me about your college process.  How did you come to Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], as opposed to let's say some place like Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, interesting because I had gone on tour of a lot of the traditionally black colleges when I was looking at schools.  And I also went and looked at all of the Ivy League schools.  And it, its sometimes you just step on to a campus and you think, ah, this feels right (laughter).  And when I stepped on to Brown's campus, it felt like it was the best fit for me in particular.  The people who greeted me were extremely warm and I liked that it was an open curriculum.  And I think that's what attracted me most was that, that they had just evolved from a grade system to an open system (laughter).  And, and that it was a university but it was a very small university.  And so it meant, it meant that it had a fantastic library.  I mean it's for all the reasons you choose a college.
Speaker 1: I read, and you can tell me if this is true--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or not.  That you encountered a counselor that says no you'd be better suited at a state university.
Speaker 2: I, I did.
Speaker 1: How, how, how did that come about?  Tell me that story?
Speaker 2: Well, my guidance counselor and you know, you know, I graduated from my school, Music and Art, in the fifth percentile which, you know, it means it was like, I think I was number twelve in my class.  And when I went to my guidance counselor she said I was better off applying to one of the state schools or to city college [City Colleges of New York in New York City, New York] and that I'd fare well, that she didn't feel that I would do well in one of those Ivy League schools.  And I felt well why not?  And if I had listened to her, I would not have applied to Brown University and I almost feel like I applied to Brown University early to spite her (laughter).  And say you know what, my journey's gonna be very different from the journey that a lot of the other African American students take here, because I'm not gonna listen to you.  And I feel like, you know, there--many people just like me who choose not to apply to the schools because they got bad advice.
Speaker 1: So you applied?
Speaker 2: I applied.
Speaker 1: You got in.
Speaker 2: Got in.
Story_ID: 110077
Speaker 1: What was your freshman year [at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island] like?
Speaker 2: Well, my freshman year, I got in on a scholarship to be pre-med because I was very good in sciences.  And so my freshman year was, spent a lot of time--because I think I was taking four science courses and one English elective, so it was hitting those books and doing what people do when they're not hitting the books (laughter).
Speaker 1: You experienced theater for the first time--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --at Brown University.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't experience theater.
Speaker 1: I mean well writing.  I mean you'd written a play ["The Darker Side of Verona"] in high school.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Well, I was introduced to a professor I think in my second semester my freshman year I had took a--
Speaker 1: What was his name again?
Speaker 2: George [Houston] Bass.
Speaker 1: George Bass.
Speaker 2: I took a playwriting course with George Bass and he just made it the most delightful experience I had ever had and I thought I love this.  And I loved him and I loved his energy.  And so I continued to study with him at least once a sem--, once a, yeah, once a year.  And in many ways he became sort of my mentor at Brown.
Speaker 1: Now did you start to, I mean, in this class you were given an opportunity to write plays.  Did you start at this point to consider a professional career as a playwright?
Speaker 2: No, I never considered a professional career I think until--
Speaker 1: After "Poof!" [1993]?
Speaker 2: --after "Poof!"  I think that when I graduated from college [1986] I didn't know what it was I wanted to do.  I applied to journalism school.  I knew I wanted to write but I sort of was approaching the world with a lot of fear.  And I thought I'm not ready to go out into the world and I had gotten into Yale and someone said, "Well you must go, you got in."  So I spent another three years at Yale [Yale School of Drama in New Haven, Connecticut] wondering have I made the right choice.  I'm investing in, (laughter) in playwriting.  Will I ever be able to make some money?
Speaker 1: Why were you investing in playwriting though?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, at the, at the time it seemed like a random choice but now in retrospect it seemed as though that's what my journey was meant to be.  I mean if you sort of believe in karma, is that I took this path because I was meant to be a playwright and it's what I naturally gravitated toward.  You know, and it, it was, in some ways it was the path of least resistance.  And I think it was the path of least resistance because it was the right path.
Story_ID: 110078
Speaker 1: So did you--once you started on that path--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --did you, were there other role models that--I mean, I'm speaking specifically to African American female playwrights at the time?
Speaker 2: There weren't because there, there, I mean, there were people--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You had Lorraine Hansberry?
Speaker 2: --the people who I respected like Ntozake Shange but there weren't that many African American women who achieved a great deal in theater who I could sort of look up to, but my role models were, of course, you know it was Toni Morrison, it was Alice Walker.  Certainly when I was in college, I mean, these women were in their prime.  And I was reading those novels and I was soaking all of that, that in and sort of feeling envious that I didn't grow up in the South (laughter).  And I didn't have, you know, that rich bluesy experience to write about.  And so I didn't feel like there was absence of, of, of African American women writers for me, they just weren't in the theater but they were there.
Speaker 1: What did you think about Lorraine Hansberry and "Raisin in the Sun" (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You know, at the time the only play I knew was, was "A Raisin in the Sun."  And I was first introduced to "Raisin in the Sun" through the movie with Sidney Poitier, who when I was growing up, I mean, he was the hero.  It was, you know, the gorgeous Sidney Poitier (laughter).  And I didn't know her as a playwright until many years later.
Story_ID: 110079
Speaker 1: So you at, you're at Yale University [School of Drama in New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and you're studying.   Who were your, I mean, you've, you've left Mr. [George Houston] Bass.  Who, did you have any mentors at Yale University?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean, for Yale it was very difficult for me.  And I felt, first of all I was only the second African American woman since 1930 to come through the program as a playwright.  And the first, the first one was still there when I was there and they were trying to put her out (laughter).  And so it was not an environment, it was not a nurturing environment.  I felt like every day that I was there it was battle to stay there.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I think in part that for many years playwriting was considered the domain of white males.  And then white and black males.  And in some ways I do still think that it's an uphill battle for women to get recognized as writers.  I mean, granted, you know, we'll get in articles but we don't get the big feature articles, we don't get the, the cover stories in The New York Times Magazine, you know, even if we do accomplish the same things.  And so I, I still think there was some bias built into the system, you know, conscious or unconscious.
Speaker 1: So it was a struggle being there--
Speaker 2: With being there.
Speaker 1: --how did you, how did you, how did you achieve what you achieved?  How did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Well, I think because I had a really wonderful support system outside of the, the drama school.  I made good friends with people in comp lit [comparative literature] and history department.  We--and while I was there we formed the African American Graduate Student Network, which still exists to this day, because we thought we know we have all of these African American graduate students that are scattered throughout the campus and there are so few of us, how can we find each other.  And we began just meeting.  It began with just six of us and we'd throw parties and then we formed this film society.  I think those are the people who pulled me through.  You know, and it was also, I mean, a very vibrant time at Yale.  I mean Cornel West was there, bell hooks was there, Skip Gates [HM Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] was there.  And so I could go outside of the unive--, outside of the drama school to get enriched.
Story_ID: 110080
Speaker 1: So you, you graduated Yale University [School of Drama in New Haven, Connecticut] in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: In '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: And what happens in your life after that in that period, in '89 [1989] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '89 [1989] I, you know, I graduated.  I was twenty-four years old.  My parents [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage and Wallace Nottage] effectively said well you're not coming home (laughter).  You must go out into the world and get a job.  And I was also confronted with, with this massive debt becau- that you come out of graduate school.  I did get some scholarship money but still we're talking about cost of living loans that you have to take out and they want them paid back almost immediately.  You know, after six months you have to begin.  And I was also feeling quite conflicted about going into playwriting.  I thought you know is this really what I want to do?  I sort of rushed into it when I was very, very young.  I think I need time to live my life and have a different experience and, and I had always written over the summers, worked over the summers as a journalist.  And I had that background and a job opened up at Amnesty International and I decided that I was going to apply for it and lo and behold I mysteriously got it (laughter).  And so I found myself as a national press officer for Amnesty International for the next four years, which in some, some ways became the most important, formative experience I ever had.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Well, one, I was thrusht--thrust into a massive job which, with a tremendous learning curve and I had to hit the ground running.  I mean, number one, you're--I was dealing with a language which was completely alien to me which was the language of human rights in which you're dealing constantly with lots of acronyms.  I was thrust into the reality of the world (laughter) which I didn't know.  I mean, I sort of understood what was going on in the United States but I had no idea of sort of the geopolitical world beyond, beyond, you know, beyond the borders of the United States.  And, and so, I mean, that's, that's basically what, what I was confronted with.
Story_ID: 110081
Speaker 1: And how did that job prepare you for or did that--what are some of the other things that job did to prepare you for "Poof!" which--
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, "Poof!" came out of my, my work at Amnesty International and also my frustration at Amnesty International because at the time we had a very narrow mandate which was looking at prisoners of conscience, the death penalty, and torture issues.  And there wasn't a tremendous amount of focus on women's issues or gender specific human rights abuses.  And when I was working there, as part of, I was part of a committee that was trying to transform the organization to begin to look at women's rights as human rights.  And I remember a women had brought in some images from a women's shelter that she had taken in.  Really sort of striking--
Speaker 1: Of?
Speaker 2: --disturbing of, of battered women.  She--images of battered women.  And I said, "You know, I wish I could do something for you but I can't."  And, and when she left those images continued to haunt me and that's when I sat down and wrote "Poof!" which is a battered woman who is being abused by her husband and she damns him to hell one day and he goes and the play is about what she does after he's turned to a pile of ash (laughter).
Speaker 1: What year was "Poof!"?  19--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: 1993.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But some of really amazing things that about the "Poof!" it's your first play but it goes all the way to Louisville [Kentucky] which is--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --well, I submitted it to the Ten-Minute Play Competition [National Ten-Minute Play Contest of the Actors Theatre of Louisville in Louisville, Kentucky] and it won.  It was produced, and then for a long period of time it became one of their most produced Ten-Minute Plays.  And it's--of my plays it still has had the longest journey.  I mean it's been translated into Japanese, into Chinese, into, into German.  It's done--
Speaker 1: To Welsh.
Speaker 2: --a lot in Latin America and into Welsh.  You know, because it's universal.  And when I had written it for African American women and sort of shocked when I saw the, the photo stills from the Japanese production (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what did that say to you about the power of theater?
Speaker 2: Well, for me I think it gave me in some ways permission to leave Amnesty International because I realized oh, I'm squandering a talent that I have.  Because I had worked tremendously hard as a publicist trying to raise awareness and I thought, you know, what I can do it equally well as an artist.  And in some ways I can do it better as an artist because as a publicist I found myself constantly having to go to artists to ask them to get our message out there.  And I thought well why can't I do both things?
Story_ID: 110082
Speaker 1: So after "Poof!" what happens for you?  You, you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: After "Poof!" I--
Speaker 1: And you're still at Amnesty [International]?
Speaker 2: I'm still at Amnesty.  I left my, my job because I couldn't do both.  And I--
Speaker 1: But you give over to yourself.  At this point you say I'm gonna, I'm going to pursue playwriting.
Speaker 2: I actually, I free fell.  You know, it's like I took off the parachute and I'm like I'm gone fall.  I have no money.  I'm going to cash in my pension plan and I'm gonna figure out a way to write.  And I temped for years.  You know, doing sort of menial jobs or word processing just to get my plays written.
Story_ID: 110083
Speaker 1: You were married [to Tony Gerber] in 19--
Speaker 2: I was married in 1995.
Speaker 1: So that gives us some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- where to go.  So which play came--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --after--
Speaker 2: Well, after I left Amnesty International the, the first thing that came was a monologue that I had written called the "Ida Mae Cole Takes a Stance."  Which was something really quick and sweet but it was, it was invited to be part of an evening of theater at Second Stage [Second Stage Theatre in New York City, New York] called, "A... My Name is Still Alice" and that became the most popular monologue in the piece.  And from there I was invited to write a play by Carole Rothman who's the artistic director of Second Stage.  And the--it was a commission through Lila Wallace specifically to write multigenerational theater.  Which I had never before but I was very excited to get any money to write a play.  And out of that came "Crumbs from the Table of Joy" which is a play that has a, an African American teenager as, as its protagonist.
Speaker 1: And you said that you were trying to, that, that that was about multigenerational so that--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, it was written as a multigenerational theater.  So it was--the challenge is to write a play that appeals to both teenagers and adults.  And, and basically a family drama (laughter).
Speaker 1: And if I remember that, those two teenagers were, what were, they were going through, it was them and their father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, the plot of the play it's about two African American teenagers who are moved from Florida in 1950s to New York City [New York] after their mother has died.  The father is devoutly religious and devoted to Father Divine.  And they have a communist aunt who comes to live with them because the, she doesn't believe that two girls, two teenage girls should be living alone with their father.  But the, the father and the aunt are like oil and water.  Is it oil and water (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Oil and water.
Speaker 2: Oil and water.  And the father feeling threatened, feeling challenged, disappears for three days and when he returns, he's married to a German woman.
Speaker 1: Which brings in integration (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Which it brings integration.  What I want to explore is just, for me it's an allegory.  It's about the journey of the African American from, from the South to the North.  It's the confrontation of, of politics, of politics that were very different, of integration, (laughter) of religious, of, of sort of religious sensibilities because you have a clash between sort of politics and religion.
Speaker 1: So what was happening?  I mean, where do your plays sort of come from?  Does that come from what's happening, something you're discovering about yourself or something you're interested in yourself at the moment?  Or stuff you've seen in the past, how did that particular play come about?
Speaker 2: Well, for me it was just wanting to better understand the era in which my parents [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage and Wallace Nottage] grew up.  And knowing very little about the 1950s and what I did know was through movies and they were sort of this Hollywood films which glossed over all of the, the, the themes that I was interested in.  And usually for me, my plays begin with curiosity.  It's wanting to find myself within a history that already exists but has excluded me.  And so it's, it's about finding myself.
Story_ID: 110084
Speaker 1: So from "Crumbs" ["Crumbs from the Table of Joy"] what was your next step as a playwright?
Speaker 2: From "Crumbs" I, I joined the collective of, of writers, of multicultural writers and, and it was predominately Asian (laughter).  Which was really interesting.  It was Asian, Latino, I think I was the only African American and we specifically wanted to write plays that addressed politics in America from our specific point of views.  And I wrote "Por'Knockers" which is about a group of, of political idealists, of African American political idealists who are trying to figure out well what is it that we want today.  And they can't agree on what they want but this comes out of them committing an unthinkable act which is blowing up an FBI building and inadvertently killing some children.  It was written before Oklahoma [Oklahoma City bombing on April 19, 1995] and but I still believe that it was incredibly prescient.  It was what I was feeling is that there was this frustration that was building up in a radical community that had lost the ability to express themselves.  And I think that it was part of what the government had done in the 1970s with the COINTELPRO program which was to squelch radical voices in the United States and the voice of dissent which continues until today and that's why we see terrorism.  And so that play at the time was exploring that impulse and, and what frustration leads people to do and once they've done it, how they justify the act.
Story_ID: 110085
Speaker 1: Is there a--you talked about the collective.  Does--was that collective that the, that you were a part of all women?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was open to-- (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was open.  It was, I think, and I think the collective included one Japanese woman, one Korean man, one Dominican man, one Dominican woman, one Filipino man, myself.
Speaker 1: So is there a, is there a common thread for playwrights that are outside of what I'll just call the mainstream?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  I mean our common thread is that we're feeling very marginalized by the mainstream.  And particularly in, in theater back when in the '90s [1990s], we didn't have access to main stages.  And we were trying to figure out why don't we have access and why are the things that we wanna say not being embraced by the mainstream.  And we felt that we were more powerful as a collective than as individuals.  And we also wanted to have that discussion amongst ourselves, you know, and, you know, just some, sometimes there's comfort in--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.  There's comfort in--
Speaker 2: You know, there, there's comfort in, in, in sort of the separation.  It's like some people describe, you know, what did segregation in America give birth to.  It gave birth to jazz.  It gave birth to all of the lively arts that we know because we had the opportunity to sort of discuss and create amongst ourselves.
Story_ID: 110086
Speaker 1: So in 19--and you may have to correct these dates.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: These are the dates I found.  In 1999, I have "Mud, River, and Stone" [sic, "Mud, River, Stone"]
Speaker 2: No, that was 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that specifically because the production coincided with my mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] dying and my baby [Ruby Gerber] being born.  So that's a date I will never forget.
Speaker 1: And you, and I also read that those two things happened for you at that time and they sort of, it, it--you were able to explore emotionally in a way that you had not been able to before.
Speaker 2: Before yeah, I mean I think that, that, you're transformed by the death of your mother and the birth of your child.  It's like I, I date my life before that moment (laughter) and after that moment.  And--
Speaker 1: And then, so that play for you represents--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, it's, it's interesting because I had written the play before, so the play itself doesn't represent that but the time in which I was printing up the play does, so I don't feel like that play reflects that transformation.  I feel like "Intimate Apparel" is the first play that was produced that reflects that transformation in me.  And I think as a result, it's a much more deeply emotional portrait of a woman than I had painted before.
Speaker 1: So what year was "Intimate Apparel?"
Speaker 2: "Intimate Apparel" was 2003.  So it took me a really long time to get back in the saddle.
Speaker 1: But "Intimate Apparel" went on to become extremely, critically acclaimed--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and the Roundabout Theatre [Roundabout Theatre Company in New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: And yeah.  And well it began at the Center Stage [Baltimore, Maryland] and South Coast Rep [South Coast Repertory in Costa Mesa, California] which had, had commissioned the play.  And then after successful runs at both of those theaters, Roundabout Theatre saw it and said, "Well can we bring the production to New York and we'd love for Viola Davis to play the role."  And it, which is amazing because I had always imagined Viola Davis when I was writing the play, (laughter) you know, she was the actress.  And I usually don't do that when I'm writing but I always had her voice in my head when I was writing my central character, Esther.
Speaker 1: And what was the experience--talk to me about your experience with the Roundabout Theatre because that's one of New York City's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --premier theaters, companies.
Speaker 2: Well, it was an interesting experience because we were going into their Laura--
Speaker 1: Let me just also throw this in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for this interview--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for people years from now, is that the Roundabout Theatre, to my knowledge, hasn't done that many African American playwrights.
Speaker 2: No, I think it was the second African American play.  You know, that's my, my--I'm always the second.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I think that's my goal.  Not my goal, that's, that's who I am, I'm the second (laughter).  I'm number two (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how did--so they contact you--
Speaker 2: Never the first.
Speaker 1: --or your agent with this.
Speaker 2: Well, what they said and what they said to me is they came out to see the production Center Stage then at South Coast Rep and they liked the play a lot.  There were some things that they still wanted me to work on.  And they said we're interested in the play.  And then I didn't hear from them forever and I said okay.  It's not gonna happen.  I'll just move on with my life.  I'll continue to write my plays.  And then one day they're like it's, it's gonna go.  And then everything moved very quickly.  We called Viola Davis, she said yes she'll do it.  Dan Sullivan [Daniel Sullivan] who's, you know, this very famous Broadway director said he loved the play and he wanted to do it, and so everything just seemed to fall into place.  But the one caveat is that we were going into Laura Pels Theatre which was a brand new theater which used to be the round a--American Place Theatre which the Roundabout--
Story_ID: 110087
Speaker 1: And why don't you just talk me through the process.  You said things started to move really fast through the Roundabout Theatre [Roundabout Theatre Company in New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: With the--yeah, things began moving very quickly with the Roundabout Theatre.  And we were going to be the first play to open up the new Laura Pels Theatre which was, used to be the American Place Theatre but there's always the difficulty (laughter) of being the first show into a new theater which we didn't realize.  We had tons of technical problems.  We ended up previewing a much longer period than you normally would, not because we weren't ready but because the theater wasn't ready (laughter).  But it all, it all worked out.  And I was sort of surprised by how well the play connected with the audience.  And I was extremely nervous because the play is set in New York City [New York] and I thought oh, it's one thing for it work in Center Stage in Baltimore [Maryland] or in South Coast Rep [South Coast Repertory] in Costa Mesa, California where people don't know New York.  It's another thing to do a play about New York in New York.  And so I was very pleased that audiences both African American and white embraced the play as much as they did.  And I think it's because at its core, it's, it's a universal story about a woman, a lonely woman in search of love (laughter) and which everyone can relate to.
Speaker 1: Which was almost like, which was kind of like your great-grandmother [Ethel Boyce Armstrong] in the sense that she was corresponding with gentleman--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: With--.
Speaker 1: --from Panama.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then he came over and they--and she was making intimate apparels and men's suits.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So for, for me once again the play was about finding myself in history.  And in this case I went to a much more personal place which was to my, my family history for inspiration.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you, when we talked about the Roundabout in that it being predominately a white theater--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --predominately white audiences--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --what was your experience with the theatergoers, the people that were coming to see "Intimate Apparel" [2003]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, once again what shocked me was just how engaged they were.  And particularly since it's a, it's a, by and large elderly (laughter) theater going audience, you don't expect them to be up for the entire play but I'd sit in the back and I was shocked by how still they were and how engaged and focused they were on what was going on, on that stage.  Which, which, told me that there's something that's being said, that's getting across to them.  And I don't know why or how but I do think that it has--it goes back to the transformation that took place in me after my mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage] died and my daughter [Ruby Gerber] was born 'cause I, I think that it allowed me as a writer to go deeper into who I am and not be afraid to, to go to that emotional place because I think there was that resistance before, some embarrassment about becoming overly emotional.
Story_ID: 110088
Speaker 1: So moving forward, "Intimate Apparel" [2003] was your last produced play or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or was it not?  Which--after that one.
Speaker 2: I had after that in the same year, in '97 [1997] at the Roundabout [Roundabout Theatre Company in New York City, New York]--
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  This was "Intimate Apparel" was 2003 I thought you said.
Speaker 2: That's when it was first produced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was Center Stage but it was done 2004 at the Roundabout, 2004-2005 season.  So the seasons were, when I say (laughter) it's the season I--  And then "Fabulation" ["Fabulation, or the Re-Education of Undine"] was done in 20--
Speaker 1: That's right, "Fabulation."
Speaker 2: --2004-2005 season.
Speaker 1: And the plot of "Fabulation."
Speaker 2: "Fabulation" which was, which is the companion piece to "Intimate Apparel" because I was writing the plays at the very same time, its imagining Esther a hundred years later, because Esther is a woman at the turn of the century.  It's imagining an African American woman who's had the full benefits of the Civil Rights Movement, of the Feminist Movement, who's become fully empowered, (laughter) and who has squandered that power.  And finds herself with a very powerful public relations firm, a husband who's just left her but now she's pregnant, and, and broke and is forced to go home to the projects.
Speaker 1: To her father?
Speaker 2: And to her parents, yeah.
Speaker 1: The parents, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's sort of like she tumbles down the rabbit hole and very funny things happen.
Speaker 1: Like "Alice in Wonderland" you've described it--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --as once, yes.
Story_ID: 110089
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, talking, seeing yourself as a playwright--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And an African American playwright--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What's the community that you are surrounded by?  Who are the other African American playwrights that you are able to converse with?
Speaker 2: Well, well, the--because I'm a member of the New Dramatists which is the playwright's membership organization, there are number of African American playwrights who are a part of that, who I see quite often or who I've met through that, who have become friends like Kia Corthron, Dael Orlandersmith, Eisa Davis, Zakiyyah Alexander, and Dominic Taylor, who incidentally I went to college [Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island] with and put him in his first play (laughter).  And so we've known each other for, for a number of years.  And over the course of, of this journey as a playwright, there have been times when I've sort of sought out community.  In the early to mid-'90s [1990s] I was part of the African American Playwrights Unit at Playwrights Horizons [New York City, New York] and some of the playwrights who were a part of that were Carlyle Brown, Michael Henry Brown, Kia, yeah, I'm, I'm blanking now but there were, there were lots of--
Speaker 1: So one, when you're, when you're around, when you're within that community--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What sorts of things are you talking about as playwrights?  What are the issues?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we talk about what playwrights do, is why aren't we getting produced (laughter)?  How can we get produced?  Why is there a dearth of African American plays represented on the stage?  What is that we wanna say?  How do we wanna say it?
Speaker 1: And, and give me some of those answers that you give to each other.  Why aren't you being produced?
Speaker 2: Why aren't we being produced?  Because African American--the mainstream theaters at the time I think were afraid that there wouldn't be an audience for the work, you know, and sort of catch-22 situation.  It's like well if there's not an audience for the work, then we won't make money.  And so I think it was fear prevented them from putting those stages up and I think that that was transformed by August Wilson.  You know, I think that he really gave us a tremendous opportunity, that he was writing these gorgeous epic plays that were playing in African American theaters and then playing equally well in mainstream theaters and both black and white audience members were going to see that.  And that opened the door for us because mainstream theaters thought, oh, there is an audience.  We can try out some of these new writers.  But it was very slow going.  You know, some of the other things that we were just talking about is how do we continue to survive when we're not getting produced?  How do we continue to, to, to get up in the morning and remain excited about playwriting if, if no one's excited about it but us.
Speaker 1: Now how do you do that?
Speaker 2: And, and I think that's fundamentally comes down to the journey of the artist, is that when you make this choice to be an artist you're deciding that you're going to do it for better or for worse.  And like we were discussing earlier, I think it's a battle of attrition that if you stay in it long enough you will be rewarded.  And I think the difference between people who are successful and not are there are some people give up sooner.  And I had invested far too much in taking this journey to sort of give up prematurely.  And I also believed in, in what I had to say was unique.  And I wanted to see the kind of plays that I was writing.  And I thought if I don't do it, who's going to do it?
Story_ID: 110090
Speaker 1: So just to go back and cover some of the stuff that we were talking about, the community of playwrights--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and some of the issues you face--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And just to recant [sic, repeat] some of the that stuff without the--
Speaker 2: Without the--
Speaker 1: --without the drill in the background.
Speaker 2: I was--being in a community of playwrights I think that what bounded us to, to, together was the fact that we're trying to struggle to get produced against tremendous obstacles.  In one, you're looking at African Americans theaters that were in the decline and closing one by one, you know, from Crossroads [Theatre in New Brunswick, New Jersey] (laughter).  Negro Ensemble [Company in New York City, New York] was one of the first to shut its doors and, cross, Crossroads, now Freedom Theatre.  And having to turn to mainstream theaters to get produced and not feeling very welcome and one of the things that we were discussing and should I go back and talk about it?
Speaker 1: Sure, yes.
Speaker 2: Was just the difference that someone like August Wilson made for our careers is that he was embraced by both the African American theaters and the mainstream theaters.  And they saw his commercial viability and that viability led them to take more chances on playwrights, like myself.  They thought oh, there is an audience.  And it's an audience that's, that's multicultural.  And that these are universal themes that have resonance beyond just the African American community.  But still I mean he opened that crack and it was really narrow and I, I'd say, say only a few of us were able to like squeeze through it, it was a really tight squeeze.
Story_ID: 110091
Speaker 1: So, once you're in, I mean once you do something like at the Roundabout Theatre [Roundabout Theatre Company in New York City, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is that, is that door become much more open for you?
Speaker 2: Well, for me it certainly has, you know.  But I have to say the irony is so much of my identity, and I think this is a true for a lot of African Americans, is the struggle.  And once the struggle is taken away, you think oh, now I, I have access.  Now I am getting produced.  What is that I wanna say and who am I as an artist?  And it becomes a different kind of struggle for, for me.  I, I do feel like I have the opportunities.  I have the commissions.  I feel like for the next couple of years I'll being able to live as a playwright without having to go back to temp.
Speaker 1: And so then the struggle becomes who are you as an artist?  Have you--
Speaker 2: As an artist because so much of who I am has been based upon my relationship to struggling with identity.
Speaker 1: And by that you mean?
Speaker 2: I mean just feeling like the marginalized African American artist who's working in opposition to this system but what happens once that system pulls you in which I think is becoming part of the struggle for the middle class and upper class black community as a whole.  It's like what is our identity now, now that we're no longer solely identified with the struggle.
Speaker 1: So once--so, so then what do you think, what, what is becoming your identity?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, well that's part of the joy of being an artist is I get to explore that.  And, you know, I get to write about it.  I get to figure out well, well, and I get to, what do I wanna say about being an artist who's sort of straddled two worlds.  And once again I have history to return to because I still feel like there are all these stories about my mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage], about my grandmother [Waple Newton], about my great-grandmother [Ethel Boyce Armstrong], that have not found their way on to the stage or on to the screen.  And I, I feel like I have a lifetime of things to write about without growing fatigued.
Speaker 1: So you have a lifetime of things to write about but do you, do you have a mission as an artist?  Do you, is there something that--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I, I don't have anything sort of as grandiose as sort of August Wilson's attempt to write a play for every decade but I think that what my mission is, is to create really complete multigenerational African American women for the stage and to continue to explore that, you know, until I get tired (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And I feel like I won't get tired.
Story_ID: 110092
Speaker 1: You talked about that kitchen table in your basement or that table--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that these women were always around, your mother [Jeannette Ruby Newton Nottage]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --your mother's friends.  What were those conversations and will you, will those conversations now become a part of you, of the work that you created?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the conversations that occurred, because my mother had lots of friends who were artists, lots of friends who, who were politicians or activists, or feminists who were always about, well, how can we change the community and what can we do.  And a lot of the conversations were just about who are we and how can we celebrate ourselves.  And they did a lot of celebrating, (laughter) a lot of drinking of wine, a lot of letting going of steam and having fun.  So it was both things and that's what made it such a dynamic table that the conversation could move from something very sort of banal and simple to something quite weighty and, and, you know, and deep.  And I feel like as an, an artist that's the tension that I have in my work.  And that's the tension exists between a play like "Fabulation" ["Fabulation, or the Re-Education of Undine"] and "Intimate Apparel" is, you know, between the banal (laughter) and the profound.
Story_ID: 110093
Speaker 1: So what, what are you can you share with us what you're working on now?
Speaker 2: I, I'm working on two things.  One of the plays [2008's "Ruined"] which I've been in the process of researching for the last two years had begun as a modern adaptation of [Bertolt] Brecht's "Mother Courage" set in the Congo.  And so last year I had gone to Uganda to interview refugee women from the, the Congo and what I found when I got there, is that the stories they were telling were singular and that the play didn't--that the place demanded a story of its own.  That I didn't need the framework of Bertolt Brecht to tell a story about war and survival.  That there's an, an indigenous story that could rise out of the experience of these women.  And I went back, I got a Guggenheim grant [Guggenheim Fellowship] last, this year to go back and I did more interviews with refugee women in, in Kenya and in Uganda.
Speaker 1: I did read something about you saying that the--just the, the geographics of the Congo, it's in the middle of the rain forest, that there's this war, and, you know, it's Africa--
Speaker 2: Its--
Speaker 1: --the brutality.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, I mean the--you think about the history of the Congo and, and it's one it began as a geographically isolated country or if you can call it a country.  A region because of this dense, thick, dense rain forest and was exploited by King Leopold [Leopold II of Belgium] in the most atrocious kind of way, you know, the kind of atrocities that he, he committed there.  But out of that, you have this legacy of repression that's continues to perpetuate itself.  And even now you have a war that's going on that has claimed 3 million people since 1997 and yet receives relatively little coverage.  But the real victims of this war are the women and children who were pretty much helpless and who didn't start this war, who don't fight the war but find themselves bearing the brunt of it.  And one of the things that I went to look at in the Congo are the kind of gender specific human rights abuses that women suffer.  And what we're seeing is that rape has become one of the primary tools of war used against both men and women but because rape is a tool, a tool of war, there are certain kind of medical problems that arise, a lot of the women end up gang raped and being "ruined," which is going to be the title of my play.  And once they're ruined, they're driven out from their villages and they're forced to wander.  So now you have this class of women who are homeless.  And, and because you have these wandering women you lose a generation of mothers who are not raising sons, those sons get sucked back into the war so the cycle continues.  And so I, I've been spending (laughter) a lot of time contemplating this and trying to figure out a way of dramatizing it but I don't wanna dramatize it in the typical way, in which you, you its documentary style in which these women become talking heads. I wanna find a way of, of telling a universal story, much in the way that Bertolt Brecht did with "Mother Courage."  That's accessible, that's human, that has some humor (laughter) and that lives beyond the crisis.
Story_ID: 110094
Speaker 1: You said you were working on a second piece as well?
Speaker 2: And the second piece [2011's "By the Way, Meet Vera Stark"] which, I talk about the tension (laughter) in my work because, you know, that's, that requires a specific part of the brain, is I'm writing a much lighter, funny piece about an African American maid in 1930s who's, who's working for a white starlet and there's a movie like "Gone in the Wind" [sic, "Gone With The Wind"] that's coming up and she desperately wants to play the maid in the movie, (laughter) and she'll do everything in her, her power, to get that role (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's funny.  That sounds good (laughter).  That sounds very funny.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 110095
Speaker 1: And is there anything that is specific--I mean how does your daughter [Ruby Gerber] embrace you as a playwright?  What, how does she see you?
Speaker 2: My, my daughter she told me really recently because she's been struggling with learning to, to read, and she said, "You know, Mommy, when I'm able to read fully I'm gonna read all of your plays, just so I know what it is that you're doing."  (Laughter) but she loves the, the theater.  I mean she loves going and seeing children's plays.  She loves going backstage even though she doesn't get to see my plays because she's not quite ready to see them and, you know, but I, I don't want her to be an actress.
Story_ID: 110096
Speaker 1: So when you think about history in itself, like the history of theater--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --the history of blacks in theater, what do you feel it is, what is it about all of it, that, that you can put in a nutshell that is important to live on?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a, it's a really big question.  Well, what is about theater or about the--
Speaker 1: The, I guess African Americans place in theater that, what is it about what you're doing or people before you have done.
Speaker 2: Well I think, I mean for one I think that there's a really rich legacy, theatrical legacy within the African American community.  And I think that African Americans have made a tremendous contribution to what we know as modern theater like the musical, like vaudeville.  And so I just, I'm, I'm part of a continuum.  I'm part of this, this community that found that somehow this genre expresses what we wanna say most fully.  And, and I feel very proud to be part of that community.  And you just we look back, you know, you look back to, to, to, Scott Joplin and Bert Williams and Ira Aldridge and Rosalind Rush-- Rosalind Cash and Paul Robeson and Ethel Waters.  It's just, you know, I, I when I'm feeling frustrated and when I feel like I want to not do this, I just revisit these great people.  I revisit the words, words that they've written.  I revisit some of the images that they've created and understand that it's one of the few lively arts that's continues to be communal and continues to be dynamic.
Story_ID: 110097
Speaker 1: What is it you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I know you're very young (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not very--  Well, you know, one of the things that I, I want to do is, I want to create that indelible role for an African American woman that when the actress is born she thinks I'm not complete until I have played them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Awesome.
Speaker 2: You know, and I, I feel like that, that would be my gift.
Story_ID: 110098
Speaker 1: So the last couple of questions is why did you agree to become a part of The HistoryMakers' project?
Speaker 2: Because history is very important to me and I'm hyperaware of how my ancestors have not been included in the public record.  And I feel it's very important for African American women to have a voice and I think it's important for our voice to be heard.
Story_ID: 110099
Speaker 1: Last thing.  Is there anything you'd like to add of anything we've touched on in looking back over, I mean although you're just getting started, your career is very young, looking back over your career, are there things, highlights, or things that stands out, specifically things you wanted, anything you wanted to add--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --that you didn't have an opportunity to?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I feel I'm at the very beginning--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think you're at the very beginning.
Speaker 2: --of, of my journeys.  So it's --
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I do too.
Speaker 2: --you know, it's like I don't feel like--
Speaker 1: I do to.
Speaker 2: --I don't feel like, I mean I feel--
Speaker 1: I agree with you, yeah.
Speaker 2: --like this, you know, think about it, it's like August Wilson his career began when he was forty.  And it's true for a lot of writers that, you know, they sort of don't come into their maturity until they hit that age.  So I feel like I'm just beginning to figure out who I am as a writer.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much and we look forward to all you have to put out.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) thank you.
