Story_ID: 668089
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is--I'm blocking--Isaac Feldman.
Speaker 2: Isaac Feldman?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Observing is Scott Stearns.
Speaker 2: Scott Stearn?
Speaker 1: Stearns, and Josh Monday [ph.].
Speaker 2: Oh Josh, my man, my man (gesture).
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir would you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes it's Art, A-R-T, Norman N-O-R-M-A-N [HistoryMaker Art Norman] and I've been at NBC for thirty-three years going on thirty-four.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well no middle name?
Speaker 2: Oh yes there is a C for Columbus and A-R-T is the shortened name but it's, my real name is Arthur, I don't like that name.  One of them weird things.  They called me Arthur on TV and I said, "Why you got to call me Arthur?"  They really made me mad and said, "Well Artie come on over here."  I said, "Whoa that ain't my name either," (laughter).  Artie goes across the grain like something is wrong with me.  So I said no.  No Art is what I use and C is Columbus and I'm named after several people who helped my dad [James Norman].  Myself and my brother, we have all the middle names.  Our first names and our middle names are the people--my dad was hurt--he was a Seabee [U.S. Naval Construction Battalions] in the [U.S.] Navy and he was carried to safety by--a bomb went off--grenade near his back and it paralyzed him on impact and so he actually named his children after the people who helped carry him to safety and the Seabees in the Navy.  So I'm Arthur Columbus Norman and my brother's name is Lionel Galen Norman [Lionel Norman], Lionel Galen and Arthur Columbus and as strange as it may sound and one of my cameramen here at NBC, strange, his name is Dwight Samuelson.  So he was like--he said, "Oh my dad was in Seabees," and I said, "For real?"  So he shows me a picture of his dad and he is standing next to my father.  He says--how many other--he says--the only Arthur in the group.  I said, "Oh my gosh, I'm named after your dad."  He said, "Yeah they are very close."  My father used to do emcee work for the USO [United Service Organizations] shows and stuff like that.  He was basically a cook, and--but he could talk (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: That's a hell of a story.
Speaker 1: Let me get your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Nine, six, forty-seven, September 6, 1947, that's--
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: In Harlem--Harlem Hospital, New York City [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay Harlem Hospital right on 135th [Street] right?
Speaker 2: Right, 135th and Lexington Avenue or some might say Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] but anyway in the valley.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation here at NBC is a--I'm a re- I'm a journalist that's all, keep it simple I'm a journalist and I write stories and I go out on stories.  I'm going out on a story tomorrow and it's one of those things that during special occasions I'll be on the anchor desk doing some things.  When we're doing the coat drives for the homeless kids who need something--a shot in the arm.  When we got ready to go back to school, I was on the anchor desk doing reports asking people to come by the station in the morning and drop off some books and some supplies for kids.  A lot of our kids live on public aid and they can't afford a book bag and so we did that on the air.  So those kinds of things I do.  The stories that I tell are positive stories, it's too--and I found my niche that's what I do.  We have a segment (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay I'm going to ask you about all that as we get towards it but what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October--is that a trick question?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's the 10th--the 21st, October 21st.
Speaker 1: Twenty--2014, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh you're doing the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're slating, slating.
Speaker 2: --slating.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: October 21, 2014, Chicago, Illinois inside the NBC Tower.
Speaker 1: Okay that's good, that's good.
Story_ID: 668090
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do have a favorite food and my favorite food is--I love green vegetables so I like string bean casserole, I love that green string bean casserole, just love that, and sweet potatoes, candied yams.  It's like that--collard greens especially if they have been seasoned nicely with some--either some turkey or some hog maws, yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, I don't know why I love blue, blue it is my favorite color of all time and lately--later in life it became purple which is the color my tie is.  You notice that?  Because you know the streets in heaven are purple and gold.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  How's he know that?
Speaker 1: All right should I ask you how you know that--how do you know that?
Speaker 2: Because I pledged in a fraternity called Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  That's one of the--1969 and most of the kids in Chicago [Illinois] there are members of Omega and say, "I'm pledging--I'm an old man and I pledged in 1974, I pledged in '78 [1978], I pledged in '81 [1981].  When did you pledge Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman]?  In '69 [1969], hell you're old," (laughter) and we have fun with it. Go to frat meetings, it's a lot of fun, a lot of fun, a lot of Panhellenic fun, you know, okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year for beauty is fall.  The autumn leaves and--but, you know my body--at the beginning of September I'm allergic to dust, ragweed, and pollen.  That is my, my nemesis, I can't stand it.  It's kind of like I sneeze a lot, and my eyes turn red so I take an allergy inhaler every morning during those parts of the year.  It's a beautiful time, it's not too hot, it's not too cold, it's perfect but at the beginning of that season it's like an albatross inside my nose exploding, I say achoo, achoo, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Jamaica.  I've been there several times.  I've--my wife [Terri Diggs Norman] used to go there a lot because she used to meet with the education minister there.  My wife was in charge of transitional education for Jamaican students and the City of Evanston [Illinois] which is per capita, there are more Jamaican students in the city of Evanston than anywhere else.  So my wife wanted to know why did a first grade student from Jamaica excel better than any of the other students at that grade level, she wanted to know why.  So she went to Jamaica and met with the education minister and found out they are so regimented in the way they formulate their education.  If you could take patois out of a child's dialect, he or she can learn at a very rapid rate.  So every year I go to Jamaica two or three times a year.  The worst part about going to Jamaica is going to Kingston [Jamaica]; the best part is going to Montego Bay [Jamaica] (laughter) you know, that's vacation.  But when you go to Kingston it's all business.  We have a trade delegation going to Jamaica next month.  I'm going with the commerce secretary down there trying to stir up some businesses and I'm going down there representing the journalistic community as a former president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].  So I'm going down there with Congressman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] trying to open up some doors for black businesses to get started in developing entrepreneurial skills in the country of Jamaica.  Penny Pritzker is going to be down there with us.  She's the commerce secretary appointed by Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  So I'm a part of that delegation.  So I love Jamaica, very nice place.
Story_ID: 668091
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is--and it's one that--it's, precious Lord take my hand, and you're probably saying why is precious Lord take my hand?  Well that's a song written by Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey]--the great Thomas Dorsey and it was one of those phrases that he wrote that song when his wife [Nettie Harper Dorsey] died in childbirth.  His child died in childbirth during that time and he was in Atlanta [Georgia] trying to figure out what--and so he wrote-sat down and wrote that song.  That song has been translated in over three to four hundred different languages and just last Sunday, I saw 'The Good Time Gospel Hour' [sic. 'The Old Time Gospel Hour'] which is the show originally aired by Jerry Falwell, his choir was singing that song.  I saw that song being performed in Hawaii as well as New Zealand, the same song and it's a song that's indigenous to our community, 'Precious Lord, Take My Hand' [sic. 'Take My Hand, Precious Lord'].  It's one of those things that--and I had breakfast one day several years ago with Ben Branch who was the founder of a beverage company [Doctor Branch Products, Inc.] but he played the saxophone for years at Rainbow PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and before that Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket].  But at the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was leaning over the balcony and he said--he was talking to Ben Branch, Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and everybody is around and he said, "Ben I want you to play that song for me--that Dorsey song for me.  It's a nice rally, 'Precious Lord, Take My Hand'."  A nanosecond later a bullet ripped out his throat and killed him.  But those were the last words on the lips of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, precious lord, take my hand and then it was all over.  Ben Branch telling the story to Rainbow PUSH and I sat there and said, "Wow such a powerful song," and Thomas Dorsey, Lena McLin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Lena McLin]--Thomas Dorsey and Lena Mclin and Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King grew up together and she called him Michael and he'd change his name later in life, I didn't know that.  So they were kids together and he always admired Thomas Dorsey because McLin at Kenwood Academy [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was the music teacher for generations.  But that particular song has so much double, triple meanings.  I said 'Precious Lord, Take My Hand.'
Speaker 1: So that's a powerful phrase with a long history.
Speaker 2: Long history, long history and it's one of those things that when you think about it Thomas Dorsey, Mahalia Jackson and Sallie Martin in the 1930s were run out of churches in Chicago [Illinois] because they were accused--you see back then they call it spiritual music in the black community.  Today they call it gospel music, who coined that phrase, Thomas Dorsey.  They used to run those three out of churches in Chicago because they were accused of bringing this up tempo blues melody into the church.  He called it gospel music as something to be festive about.  But it wasn't easy bringing up tempo music into the black church in the 1930s and '40s [1940s].  But Mahalia Jackson--they are legends by today's standards but it wasn't easy for them, 'Precious Lord, Take My Hand.'
Story_ID: 668092
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mary--Mary Lee Ball [Mary Ball Norman] was her maiden name and she married my father, James Norman, but the Ball family--indigenous to Bessemer, Alabama.  Our family was part of the Tuskegee experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male].  My mother's mother and father--my mother's father--they infected with gonorrhea and syphilis to see how it affected them in life, and my mother was born with syphilis.  She has a hole in her chest from that syphilis stain and I was the first in my family not to be born with syphilis.  So is it, it's one of those things we got an apology from the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration when that all happened but when I was a little boy, and we all know about it, I was ashamed of it.  Said, "Where are you (unclear) about your family," and I said, "No I ain't going to tell nobody my family was infected with syphilis and we're pretty intelligent."  I mean my dad--my grandfather had a third grade education but he worked in the steel mill down there and they wanted him to be a part of an experiment, the government paid him money.  We didn't know they were going to infect him and try to hurt him.
Speaker 1: Now I didn't know it ranged that far from Tuskegee [Alabama].  I know Bessemer is up by Birmingham [Alabama], steel town.
Speaker 2: Yes steel town, steel town, and one of those things.  So it's--our family got an apology from the president of the United States.  It meant a lot to my mother and it means a lot to all of us but the point is we're part of that experiment and if you look, there are hundreds of people who were part of that, we're all ashamed to talk about it especially when I was in high school [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York], I didn't talk about it.  They'd say, "Where is your family?"  "Alabama."  Where?"  "I don't know just Alabama."  I didn't want to go into too--too much detail because it was such a negative thing but as we grow older and become more educated, I say, "What the heck I'll talk about it now."
Speaker 1: Yeah the story really wasn't revealed to the general public--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --until the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: But we all knew about it.  As a boy and my mother still has that little hole right there in between her breasts and it's from that--the burn from being born with syphilis.  So it's one of those things that's--my mom is ninety-two now, doing well and she's doing very well.  She talks to me about politics and everything.  She said, "What's wrong with Alison Lundergan Grimes; she won't say who she voted for."  I said, "Ma you're watching that news," and she said, "Yeah what's wrong with her?"  My mom retired from the church, we came out of Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and one of the things that I remember we used to tease my mom, I said, "Mom what are you doing, no one wears nurses' outfits anymore."  She'd have on the nurses' hat, white stockings, white shoes.  She was on the usher board. If you got too happy in church my mom would walk up to them and say, "Calm down," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or fan you or something.
Speaker 2: Or fan you or something like that if she knows anything about you she would say, "Now you were drinking last Friday night and making all that cursing noise in the street, now you need to get up out here and stop making all this noise like you're saved."  She would call people out like that, tough.  My mother was in charge of concessions at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] so we got a chance to see a lot of people.  I used to walk around with trays of eggs and trays at the Apollo Theater and be serving things.  I remember Bobby--talking to Bobby Darin and Louis Armstrong.  (Unclear) Louis Armstrong used to say "What you want to be when you grow up boy?" (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668093
Speaker 1: Now I want to get back to all of this, cause I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: --'cause I'm afraid we're going to get it out of order--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --if we don't get back to a format, but let me ask--
Speaker 2: See you're--that's why you're the producer, you've got to put it all together.  Hard job.
Speaker 1: Yeah so let me ask you this, this is--how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family and were they always in Bessemer [Alabama] or is there some other place in Alabama they were before they got to Bessemer?
Speaker 2: Well see my brother--my twin brother who is now in heaven did our lineage.  He traced our lineage back to Africa and he was doing--and he was a historian.  He went to school at Bishop College, Dallas, Texas and he was a stickler for details as far as history.
Speaker 1: What was your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Lionel, Lionel Norman and he was a scholar, he was an engineer, we were both engineers and worked in television stations in Charlotte, North Carolina.  But he was a stickler for detail, he knew his lineage and he would say, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman]," and I'd say, "What is it," and he would say, "Did you know that we're part Jewish?"  I said, "Get out." He said, "No man I went all the way back to Ethiopia, we're part of that lost tribe."  I said, "No," and he says, "Have you ever been to a synagogue?"  I said, "No, I'm still going to the Baptist church."  But he would do all of that and a lot of the things that we--I know about Al Sampson [HistoryMaker Reverend Albert Richard Sampson] did a thing--a test where he took part of your blood and that also came out that I came from that part of the continent.  But it's one of those things that you learn about.  The technology is so advanced now so that's--my brother traced it back that far and I know my mom was a Rosie the Riveter and my dad [James Norman] was in the Seabees [U.S. Naval Construction Battalions] of the [U.S.] Navy and my mom was building ships at the Brooklyn Navy Yard in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay now I'm not going to go--get your dad yet but did you know your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes I knew my grandmo- I met my grandmother.  Her husband was the one that passed away and then I was there when she died in Alabama.
Speaker 1: What did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a laborer and my mom was a riveter then she became a laborer where she would--my brother and I used to go with her to different homes in Central Park West and things like that.  And we'd go into people's houses and clean it up and there would be fifty-eight dollars on the table that was for us.  So we would go from house to house cleaning, my brother and my mother and I.  We would do that on Saturdays.
Speaker 1: Now I realize you were born in Harlem [New York, New York] but I want to illustrate at some point the transition of how your family got there.  Did your mother meet your father and get married before she moved to Harlem or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No they got married and they met in Alabama and so--
Speaker 1: So I want to make sure that I talk about how your mother grew up in Alabama, where she went to school and then how she met your father.
Speaker 2: They--they met in Alabama and they got married.  He was a handsome Navy man and, and they--
Speaker 1: And she had been a riveter during the war [World War II, WWII]--
Speaker 2: No she went to New York to learn, to follow him and became a riveter.
Speaker 1: Okay so they met prior to that.
Speaker 2: They met prior to that.
Speaker 1: He was already in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah so she went there.  So he said, "Mary [Mary Ball Norman] what are you going to do?"  She says, "I'm--a lot of the girls are going over there to the Brooklyn Navy Yard to see if they can get a job."  They went over there and she was up there passing those--swinging those hot coals around and they were--rivets around then so building ships from there while my dad was in the Navy.  Well when--that grenade blew up near him and he lost three fingers on his left hand and it was one of those things.  And then he had--he became a paraplegic after that and they had to eventually sever his spine because the spasm attacks got so bad.  But the point is that he served his country well and thanks to him is the reason I got to go to college [at Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] almost on a free ride through the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] through the Disabled American Veterans scholarship fund [Disabled American Veterans Charities Scholarship].  So college for me was very easy financially.
Speaker 1: Well I don't want to get you to college yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But let me get to your--so your mother during the war went to New York to be trained as a riveter.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See a lot of the, it was like--
Speaker 1: Now your father is in the Navy and I'm going to ask about him in a minute but I just want to make sure that--now did she--
Speaker 2: They moved together from, from Alabama to New York City.
Story_ID: 668094
Speaker 1: Okay so they moved together (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They moved together to--Alabama to New York City [New York, New York].  They found a little apartment in Harlem [New York, New York].  That's when he, and he was there with his brothers--
Speaker 1: This is prior to the war [World War II, WWII] then?
Speaker 2: Prior to the war and then they--'cause they thought the new mecca for so called middle class--oh am I just driving you crazy, thank you leave it there.  They said the mecca for upwardly mobile people came through Harlem.  It was kind of like those from Mississippi who came to Chicago [Illinois].  So that was one of those transitional times.  When he went to the [U.S.] Navy, she was with a group of ladies they all had some commonality with Alabama but she had a lot of friends.  So my mother went to cosmetology school and she used to fix hair and she sold liquor on Sundays 'cause you can't buy liquor in New York City on Sunday but my mother could sell you some.  So a lot of the entertainers came to the Apollo, they would always say, "Where is Ms. Mary [Mary Ball Norman], is Ms. Mary around here?"
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how she got the job at the Apollo?
Speaker 2: No, as far as I know she was at the right place at the right time.  She was working for somebody else there.  I don't remember all of the details but you know when you're coming out of the church, you're always available.  She did a lot of hair for people.  She would, you know, she would--every Saturday and Sunday there would be so many people at the house waiting to get their hair done.  She didn't have a beauty parlor but our house was lined with women to get their hair done all of the time.
Speaker 1: So she networked with these people.
Speaker 2: Networked--she was good at networking.  So she got that and--but she was a hard working lady--always hard working.  So that's one of the things I learned from her in that sense.  But they treat everybody the same, they treated everybody the same, it's one of those things.
Speaker 1: Now did she work for the Apollo a long time?
Speaker 2: She worked for the Apollo for a while and she'd seen a couple of management changes then she wanted to go into her own business and starting cosmetology--she would rent a chair sometimes at different beauty parlors to augment what she was doing financially.  But see every time the--they had--several different people ran the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and management so you'd have to be in line with that.  So I think the person who ran the Apollo Theater had something to do with Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] or something to that effect.  So she was inside and, you know, being on the usher board at the church at the time, you get to know things that most people don't know, being on the inside there like that.
Story_ID: 668095
Speaker 1: Now she was at Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] during the days when Adam Clayton Powell--
Speaker 2: Oh that was my man.
Speaker 1: --junior was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And senior.
Speaker 1: And senior, okay, senior.
Speaker 2: That's right so, and, you know, Adam Clayton Powell and--junior [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and senior [Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.], got to know them, talk to them almost every day and one of those things that there were times when I go to church and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would be there or we'd all go down to the Armory--369th Armory [369th Regiment Armory, New York, New York] to watch Dr. King speak.  I was with a group in New York City [New York, New York] called Minisink [New York City Mission Society].  And it was an after school program because my mom [Mary Ball Norman] just wanted us to do something.  My mom used to take this can and she say, "If I put the spray can on the outside of the window that means your butt better be inside the house," and I would say, "Okay, okay."  So everybody, you know, would be hanging--it was like six o'clock, and it's starting to get dark and I see the can come out there so I tried to pretend like I didn't see it, (laughter) come downstairs and shake me up (laughter).  But everybody knew so, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], Arthur the can is in the window."  I would say, "Ah man that sucks," one of those things.
Speaker 1: I guess that's better than yelling out, "Art."
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--and, you know, growing up in New York City and there are certain things that are--Erroll Garner's son was one of my playmates.  He lived right across the street from me, the great jazz musician.  I remember two blocks away there was George Stevens [Moore's character, George "Kingfish" Stevens].  He used to play the Amos and Andy character on TV but I saw him near the end of his reign he was--
Speaker 1: Tim Moore right?
Speaker 2: Tim Moore that's his name and he--good memory.  And we saw him a couple of times but he didn't--he wasn't the Tim Moore of the Amos and Andy show ['Amos 'n' Andy'], he was near the latter part--kind of like I remember when I first came to Chicago [Illinois] in 1981, I got to meet and talk to Stepin Fetchit.  I saw him at the Bud Billiken Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic] and he was a shell of what he once was but the point is that is one of those things that you see and I remember--and the super in my building in New York City--his name is George Mitchell [ph.] and his father's son and the guy who used to babysit me all the time was [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, the great ballet guy.  Arthur Mitchell and Laura Mitchell--Laura Mae Mitchell and PeeWee Mitchell [ph.], the whole Mitchell family they were the superintendents of our building.  So Laura Mae and I know he came in town and he says, "Arthur Norman, how you doing."  He stood there in amusement and I was teasing him and he said, "I used to babysit this man."  It's kind of like it's a small world but those, those are the networkings that--that you see and my mother knew them all, 'cause she--
Speaker 1: That's remarkable.
Speaker 2: That's a remarkable guy.
Story_ID: 668096
Speaker 1: Let me get to your father and--I just want to like talk about how he grew up and then get him to where he met your mother [Mary Ball Norman] then we'll, we'll talk about you growing up and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --kind of--we try to keep it in chronological order but--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --but can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James Lewis Norman, James Lewis Norman [James Norman].
Speaker 1: How do you spell the Lewis?
Speaker 2: L-E-W-I-S, James Lewis Norman, and--
Speaker 1: What is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's is August 8th, his is in that same month, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: The same year as my mom, '22 [1922].  So we were at--
Speaker 1: And, okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Alabama as well, born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Near Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I think he was in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well his, his family is--they were very organized and entrepreneurial.  In the mechanical industry they worked at the steel mill and a lot of the people in his family were supervisors in the steel mill in Birmingham, Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem Steel Corporation] and so they're very organized.  I remember his sister St. Claire [ph.] was at--the first black general manager of a General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] plant in Michigan.  I mean she would go around the country starting--she was a pillar in the General Motors community and she always drove a Cadillac.  She was like--and then my dad had a--my dad and my mom had a separation.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your parents separated?
Speaker 2: When they separated I must have been eight or nine years old.  So that's when I spent most of my time inside the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause--to have a positive male influence.
Speaker 1: So this would be about 1954?
Speaker 2: Something, '54 [1954] right at that time, 1954.
Speaker 1: And you talked about--let's try to go over some of the--so, did your father finish high school in Birmingham or did he--
Speaker 2: My father went as far in school as the fifth grade.  My mom went as far in school as the eighth grade.  But you know it's one of those things that they had a lot of common sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a lot of common sense.
Speaker 1: But he went on to the [U.S.] Navy, he joined the Navy.
Speaker 2: He joined the Navy and the--
Speaker 1: Now this is--I don't know what he told you about the Navy but you can tell us but I've heard that the Navy is the toughest branch for black men in those days because they didn't allow any movement.  Once again if you were a cook and that's--
Speaker 2: That was it.  They would let him do--he would emcee some of the USO [United Service Organizations] shows introducing the acts and that was a big thing for him to do.  'Cause he had a great voice; he had a great voice for talking.  He was not a singer; he was just a good talker.  So as a matter of fact at Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] I would be, I would be the guy reading the sick and shut in list.  "Mary Johnson [ph.] is in the hospital, she's at--you can send cards and letters over there," and I'd be twelve years old reading the kind of stuff that my dad used to do in the USO so I--that's kind of cool.  I was in front of a large group of people.  I wasn't afraid or intimidated by a lot of the eyes watching you so this television thing was pretty easy 'cause it's okay, but you don't see people, there's just a camera, "That's a--that's a camera, oh okay."  There are a lot of people on the other end of that camera but you don't see that (laughter).
Story_ID: 668097
Speaker 1: So your father [James Norman]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --joined the [U.S.] Navy and he, he was a emcee for the USO [United Service Organizations] and a, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --and a cook.  And--
Speaker 2: And a cook, he cooked.
Speaker 1: All right now this is prior to World War II [WWII], right?
Speaker 2: This is during the war.  I mean he was--this was during the war.
Speaker 1: So it was during the war that he joined before the war or after?
Speaker 2: Before the war or just at the beginning of the war 'cause he was--
Speaker 1: All right 'cause the war starts in '41 [1941] with the bombing of Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii].
Speaker 2: Yeah he joined, I remember he joined, talking about that.
Speaker 1: Okay so you said he was injured in the war, right?
Speaker 2: He was injured in the war.  The Seabees [U.S. Naval Construction Battalions] what they used to do is go into areas before the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  They would go and they'd clear an area out for the combats to go in. They would build stuff and a grenade went off near his back and paralyzed him from the waist down and he was a quadriplegic and then the spasm attacks got so bad that they had to sever his spine.  So it was one of those things.  I mean my dad would shake so bad, so violently you would think he was on a ride at Great America [Six Flags Great America, Gurnee, Illinois] and it was just like that and he was just him, and those spasm attacks were that bad.  So they did that to save his life and the result of--when you're not using any of your limbs it makes your heart weaker and he died--
Speaker 1: So he couldn't operate any of his limbs.
Speaker 2: No, so--well it got very bad near the end.  So he got to the point where he died of a heart attack and the government built (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how old was he when he passed?
Speaker 2: How old was he?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think he was fifty-six years old and he died in his house.  He had a cardiac arrest.
Speaker 1: So he did live a--
Speaker 2: Pretty long (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fairly long time after that?
Speaker 2: Yes he did and it was one of those things that, you know, you see these things happen and you say, "Gee if he hadn't--," his brothers all lived until their nineties and ninety-five and everybody.  It was just that he got a bad break because he couldn't use--when you can't use your legs and your limbs it--it hurts the blood circulation in your body and that's one of the things, yeah.
Story_ID: 668098
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did your mother [Mary Ball Norman] have to take care of him by herself, or?
Speaker 2: Well see, she took care of him initially and then he--they, they broke up for whatever reason, I don't know what the--that was about but I remember that.  And, as a child I remember them, he was, 'cause he had to--he had these things that--I remember him going down the stairs and he looked at me and my brother [Lionel Norman] and he says, "You'll find out what happened one day, you'll find out what happened one day.  The best thing for me is to just leave, you shouldn't see your mother and father fighting and so it's better for me to leave."  And then during the summer we go by and see him.  He lived in Lancaster, New York right outside of Buffalo [New York].  So we go up there and his sister ran the General Motors plant [Tonawanda Engine] up there in Buffalo and so we would go up there to see him during the summer or we would go to Alabama with my mother's side of the family during the summer.  We always--as a matter of fact, I spent most of my time in Alabama.  My brother spent most of his time in Buffalo.  As a matter of fact, he, during the summer program in college my brother would work at the General Motors plant making cars and I would just be in Alabama hanging out (laughter).  Eating anything I wanted to eat (laughter) yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay but this is--so your parents moved out when you were about eight you said?
Speaker 2: Eight years old.
Speaker 1: About eight years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay your parents split up and okay so you were raised in Harlem [New York, New York] basically--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and in the summers you would be in Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yeah summers I'd be in Alabama or--yeah Alabama.  A couple of times I went to Buffalo.  My father's mother lived in Buffalo, Mama Ruby [Ruby Norman] they called her, his mother.  So we got to hang out up there a lot but my mother never visited, she would stay in New York [New York].  She'd say, "What do you want to do?  If you want to go with me to Alabama or do you want to go to the north with your daddy [James Norman]?"  I said, "I want to go with you ma," so I'd go with her.  My brother would go with dad but the point is I had a choice and sometimes I would go 'cause my brother would say, "Man they give us anything--all the ice cream in the world," and I said, "Really? I don't get any ice cream in Alabama, it's rough out there, it's hot, hot."  "Man you ought to see the waterfalls, they call it Niagara Falls, it's big, it's huge," and I said, "For real?"  So I said--I was so curious I wanted to go see what New York City was all about--Upstate New York was all about.  So it was kind of cool, it's kind of cool.  It was a fun time.  As a peewee, you know.
Story_ID: 668099
Speaker 1: Do you just have the one brother?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have--I have another brother, his name is Butch [Butch Norman (ph.)] but he is--we have the same father [James Norman] but different mothers.  You know how--you know how the extended family is like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so Butch is younger than you I take it?
Speaker 2: Yes he's younger.
Speaker 1: And is your brother--is he younger or older?
Speaker 2: The one that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, the one you were raised with [Lionel Norman].
Speaker 2: Twin, so--
Speaker 1: Oh twins all right so you were born the same year.
Speaker 2: Yeah so the point is--but Butch he was strung out real bad on some bad drugs and stuff like that.  I remember he came to stay with me in Chicago [Illinois] and he came with this duffel bag and so I said, "Hey Butch how you doing?"  "All right."  So he got ready to leave and I said, "You brought a lot of stuff," and he said, "I sure did," and then my wife [Ondina Outerbridge Norman] said, "Three of my fur coats are gone, where did they go?"  Butch got her.  I said, "Butch probably," he said, "Man, I just need some help man, I need some help."  I said, "Okay."  And I would pay money for therapeutic programs to get him straight.  He'd be out, doing fine but then he'd go back into the same neighborhood where he was infected with drugs and he'd fall back in--fall off the wagon.  I did that three or four times trying to you know--he was just a thief but he's my baby brother.  You know.  Everybody's got that albatross somewhere in the background, I'm not ashamed of him.  But you know, my wife was like--she didn't have to say nothing, she'd just say, "That was a nice beaver coat I had," and I'd say, "It sure was but I'll get you another one baby," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So Butch, is he still alive or is he--
Speaker 2: Yes he's still alive, he's in--he lives in Buffalo [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay and he's still struggling with these issues (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's--I think so, I try not to make him a part of my direct--I haven't talked to him in maybe eight years.  So I would have known if he had passed away, someone would have told me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they had a family reunion picnic this summer, they said he was still--he was all--he was still in Buffalo.
Story_ID: 668100
Speaker 1: Well your twin brother--Lionel, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Well he was a stand up comedian.  He was a stand up comedian, did very well and he was on 'The Mike Douglas Show.'  He was on 'The Mike Douglas Show' with--he was a stand in for Bill Cosby.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know Cosby was almost a semi-regular on (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would shoot the Ford Motor Company commercials in Charlotte, North Carolina.  So my brother would be the stand in.  So he was the same height as Bill, same build and so he would be out there in the trailer with Bill Cosby.  So my brother would go out there and do all the lighting and go through the lines and so Bill didn't want to do all that stuff.  So he would--so I've got pictures of my brother and Bill Cosby, great pictures of the two of them, just, you know.  Bill Cosby in his prime, this is before--
Speaker 1: So they are about the same size--
Speaker 2: Yeah same size and everything.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: So that turned out to be very nice, he got to--I remember he was--he owned a stand up comedy club in Charlotte, my brother did and so he would have a lot of entertainers coming by and performing stand up and Bill Cosby said--he invited him on the show when Bill Cosby was hosting 'The Mike Douglas Show.'  My brother went down there and performed.  My brother was a tremendous musician; he also was--he appeared on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' when he had a steel drum band from Harlem [New York, New York] and so they'd perform on 'The Ed Sullivan Show.'  My brother was also a boxer I remember 'cause I used to go with him to the gym on 135th Street and Broadway and the day I went there to watch him, Muhammad Ali was in there getting ready for the Liston [Sonny Liston] fight and he was talking and we were laughing and I was just like--I said, "Is this every day at the gym?" he says, "Yeah."  'Cause I'm a scholar.  My brother was an athlete; he played basketball, he played all the sports and I'm just like a couch potato, I know my place.  I can't be standing in no ring and have somebody hitting me.  Said, "Nah."
Speaker 1: Your brother sounds like a very talented young--
Speaker 2: Yeah very talented young man.  And as a matter of fact he was going from club to club and that's how he passed away.  He was apparently going from club to club, he was working a full time job at the television station as an engineer and he was--apparently passed--he fell asleep at the wheel and ran into the back of a tractor trailer truck on Interstate 85 right outside of Salisbury, North Carolina.  It was a tragic thing that happened but he died doing what he wanted to do.  He wanted to be a stand up comedian, he was a very funny guy, very outward going kind of guy and--
Speaker 1: So he was doing all of this at the same time he was an engineer at the TV station, comedy club--
Speaker 2: He was doing, he was doing it all.  He was doing it all and was very successful.  One of the things he gave me all of his video tapes.  He used to send me his tapes and say look at this.  I got to tape him on 'The Mike Douglas Show' that was like the coup de grace (laughter) so it was like--
Speaker 1: Mike Douglas for those who don't know had a show that used to come on in the afternoons--weekday afternoons--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: You old enough to remember that?
Speaker 1: Out of Philadelphia, yes.  Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah so my brother went up there, he was on the show and Mike Douglas was on vacation and Bill Cosby was the host of the show.  Bill Cosby said, "I want you to meet an old friend of mine; he is my stand in when I do the Ford Motor Company commercials and his name is Lionel Norman, he's out of Charlotte, North Carolina. Come on out here Lionel," and that's how it happened.  He did a nice--nice thing that he extended an olive branch and he said--he owns a comedy club in Charlotte.  He was doing all of this stuff plus he was an en- television engineer.
Story_ID: 668101
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You grew up with Lionel [Norman's brother, Lionel Norman] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, when you consider--we always ask this question, when you consider your parents' personalities, their opinions, the way they looked, the way they walked, talked, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mom.  Yeah, my mom [Mary Ball Norman].  My brother takes mostly after his dad [James Norman] 'cause when we were growing up all summer vacations he spent with dad, I spent mine with mom.  And this--I guess that's the side of me that said, "Well I don't want her to be by herself," that's--that worked out very nicely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we got to--but so we--we got along very nicely, very nicely.
Story_ID: 668102
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest memory in the family?
Speaker 2: The family?  I can remember Thanksgiving, and we lived on the second floor of a six flat.  I remember cranberry sauce and turkey and things like that.  I remember all of that those were fun times 'cause those are the times when mom [Mary Ball Norman] and dad [James Norman] were together so, so you remember that.  That's kind of like etched in stone, you see the smiles and I look at some of the pictures of mom and dad when he is in full uniform and they were like at some club in Harlem [New York, New York] somewhere.  Someone took a picture of them and he had on this [U.S.] Navy uniform and mom was there they were cute as a button.  But that's one of those things that--those were the good times.  The bad times came--dad didn't want to talk about it and neither did mom but it was best that they not be together because they didn't want us to see the ugly side of the belly of the beast.  So I said okay I'll go along with that, you know, one of those things.
Story_ID: 668103
Speaker 1: So your father [James Norman] went on to father another son?
Speaker 2: He--yes he went on to father another son with a young lady in--in Buffalo [New York], 'cause he's like ten years younger than me, Butch [Butch Norman (ph.)] is.  And so, but I know he's got my nose, you can tell we're related.  But, but see drugs can really change your life and so I met him late in life too.  I know my brother [Lionel Norman] said, "Do you know we've got a brother?"  I said, "We've got a brother?"  And he said, "Yeah his name is Butch."  I said, "For real?"  He said, "Well you know there is another lady, they've got the same father we have but a different mother."  Said, "Oh okay."  So I talk to him on the phone things like that and then one time I invited him to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And that was the story--
Speaker 2: He cleaned me out (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your father could move on some level, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well see the spasm attacks were--was violent.  It was violent.  It was like you took a bed and just shook it up and down like that (gesture) and he--the engine that made him shake like that was something internal to his body.
Speaker 1: So he didn't come out of the war [World War II, WWII] a quadriplegic but--
Speaker 2: No he became a paraplegic (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He became one later, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Paraplegic, and--
Speaker 1: Okay I'm just trying to understand that, and so on.
Speaker 2: And, because he--three fingers are gone on, on his left hand from whatever this blast that happened was and it's one of those things that--he always accented the positive of things.  I'd go to a barbershop in New York [New York] and they'd say, "Hey that's Jimmy's boys."  People who knew my dad used to say, "There's Jimmy's boys," and stuff like that.  I'd be working at the barbershop, sweeping the floors of the barbershop.  I always got a job on Saturdays working--I'd be working in the barbershop sweeping, and my brother made more money playing nine ball than I made all day working at the barbershop.  I'd say, "How'd you make all that money?"  And he'd say, "I was playing nine ball."  I'd say, "Man that's amazing," and he'd say, "You worked all that--that whole day--that's all the money you've got?"  And I'd say, "Yeah."  But see he was good, he would play with one hand and I'd say man he's good.  He's a smack--talked smack, I'm real conservative, he's more outgoing than I am, a lot more.  But he could, he could do a lot of things; I mean he played basketball, football.  I--I didn't do any sports, I was a scholar.
Story_ID: 668104
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: I went to school at--at P.S. 186 [New York, New York] in--between Amsterdam and Broadway on 145th Street.  P.S. 186 from the first grade--from elementary school all the way to the sixth grade and from sixth grade until the ninth grade, I went to Junior High School 43 [J.H.S. 43; J.H.S. 43, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. School, New York, New York], that's right on about 129th Street and Amsterdam Avenue across the street from the bus station.  I went there and I was a guy (background noise) I was a guy who specialized in art.  So I was a great artist and I take nothing back.  I could actually sit there with a easel and charcoal and actually draw you. I'm very good at it and so those were the kinds of things that I did in school--and my art skills were pretty good but I was--
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to draw at school or did you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was a God given thing, I just picked it up.  A lot of people in the art class and then they said they picked it up and they said--'cause in the seventh and eighth grade they said, "Man this guy can draw, let's put him in the special art class." That's how I got to be in art class.  So I was pretty good, and I could draw and then I acted in plays, you know, 'Oklahoma!' and things like that, I acted in plays.
Speaker 1: This was in school?
Speaker 2: In junior high school.  Then when you get ready to go to high school--I went to high school Samuel Gompers [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York]. First I went to Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] and then to Samuel Gompers but the point is that the--I remember I used to go by the store in New York City [New York, New York] called Daviga [ph.] and I would sit there and look at the guy in the window, Daviga, and I'd say, "That guy is fixing all those televisions."  I said, "Man, I want to--." He said, "If you go to one of those trade schools you can build your own TV."  I said, "For real?"  See we had a little tiny black and white.  It was round and circular and you had to hit it all of the time or put aluminum foil on the antenna.  So I said, "I'm going to one of these schools," and I got real good at fixing televisions, real good.  I remember--
Speaker 1: Did you go to a school or did you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I went to the school, I went to the school--the trade school.
Speaker 1: How--how old were you; were you still in high school?
Speaker 2: I was in--I was in tenth grade--ten, eleven, twelve.  I went to the trade school and fixed televisions and I would have a sign in Harlem [New York, New York] like, television on the brink?  Call [HistoryMaker] Art Norman.  People would send me their stuff and I'd fix their televisions.  Man, the televisions went out and got the little white line across the middle well that means your vertical oscillator is not working or your horizontal oscillator is not working--is inoperant.  I would go--back in those days everything was tubes and I'd know what tube to take out and put back and I used to sit there and rewire stuff.  In school we used to do that and, I mean really--I got real good at fixing stuff.
Speaker 1: So those were the days of u-Test-m machines and--
Speaker 2: U-Test-m, yeah I had a red and white RC--red and black RCA [RCA Corporation] bag and you'd open it up and full of tubes depending on what's, you know, so we had the big picture tube and I'd fix these things and I said, "Wow I want to, I want to really--," when you take electronics you've got to know your math and I'm good at math, really good at math.  And so I'd sit there and excelled in math and that's how I got to be a math-physics major in college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] but the point is I excelled in that area--in that arena but one of the things I did as a freshman in college--the first thing I did, put up signs all around the dormitories.  Television on the blink? Record player won't play? Call Art Norman.
Story_ID: 668105
Speaker 1: Let me go back to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --grade school and high school.  Now were there certain teachers who were mentors to you during this (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was--but I think most of that came from being mentored by these young black men in the program in New York City [New York, New York], in Harlem, called Minisink [New York City Mission Society].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-I-N-I-S-I-N-K.
Speaker 1: Now is that the same organization that has a camp--Camp Minisink [Dover Plains, New York].
Speaker 2: Camp Minisink that's right, that's where my mother [Mary Ball Norman] used to work during the summer.  There were sometimes when my brother [Lionel Norman] and I would not go to New York, or--my mother got a job at Minisink and she worked in the kitchen so that meant my brother and I would go to Camp Minisink free, free, you can't beat free.  So we'd go up there, and I said--I exposed--and plus they had all these black college graduates around us and they all went to Saint Aug [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and--
Speaker 1: So they were the counselors right?
Speaker 2: Yeah the counselors and like, you good at math, they would be challenging us, be talking to us about Benjamin Mays and talking about how great these people are and I said, "Wow.  I saw Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York]," and they said, "Well yeah he went to Morehouse," I'd say, "Wow."  And you get the--but see they reinforced it because of your mentors, but these college graduates.  My parents went to school in fifth and eighth grade and now I'm networking with college graduates like a new world to me.  So Minisink was like after school, (claps hands) Minisink.  On Sundays I'm at church but Minisink was--you get ready to go to school and I was going to go--I was accepted at CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York], Fordham University [New York, New York] and the people at Minisink said, "No, no, no, see you're from New York City, you need some discipline."  "Okay what does that mean?"  "That means you need to go a historical black college [HBCU], they'll set you straight.  If you cut a class in a historical black college, you will never cut another class."  I said, "Whew man," he says, "If you cut a class at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] or you're just number 2102, 'He ain't here, absent.'"  I remember the first year, 'cause I started playing pool 'cause I was trying to be like my brother who is really good.  So the freshman year I played pool and I was running the ball and I cut my geometry class--algebra class.  Dr. Boyd Gatheright walked down into the student union, got loud, like put bass in his voice, and you know when people put bass in their voice in a historical black college, "Mr. Norman [HistoryMaker Art Norman], you cut my class today, the next time you cut my class I'm going to have a Trailways bus ticket for you. You can take your butt right back to Harlem [New York, New York]."  Everybody in the room said, "Oh," (laughter) scared me so bad I ain't never missed another class for the next four years.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate with honors or anything from high school, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I did, I graduated with honors that's why I wanted me to go to these other schools but the Minisink people said, "Go to a black college. You're going to get discipline you won't get at the other schools."
Speaker 1: Those are the people that had the most influence on you at the Minisink after school program (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh.  Oh my gosh yes, and had a--and the guy that mentored me whose name was Jimmy Robinson [ph.] and there was a Roberto Barragan [ph.] and these people were--Jimmy Robinson was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  Roberto Barragan was an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and these are people all around us all the time so when we get to college and as a freshman said, "Which one you want to pledge?"  I said, "Pledge; I know Jimmy was an Omega."  So the people who got to me first--I said, "Whoever comes to me first that's the one I'm joining," and I became an Omega.  But the point is these people with Minisink were unbelievable mentors and they're stern, they're disciplinarians.  They were like, "You're getting out of New York City."
Speaker 1: So math is your favorite subject.
Speaker 2: I love math.  Never got anything--
Speaker 1: How far did you go--how far did your school go--Samuel Gompers [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York] go in math?  Did you go to trigonometry or--
Speaker 2: Trigonometry, all facets--
Speaker 1: Calculus.
Speaker 2: Calculus everything and I excelled in all of them.  In fact, I was, at Johnson C. Smith, I was in remedial class helping people who were slow.  I was very good at math and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I never got a B or a C or a D or an F--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --in math.
Story_ID: 668106
Speaker 1: Now another question about your growing up days--your coming of age days.  Did you--I know you fixed a lot of televisions, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: --take time watching television?
Speaker 2: No I just fixed, as a matter of fact.  There is a picture of me--my brother [Lionel Norman] and I 'cause I had him help me we built a radio station at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  It was a carrier current radio station.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute I don't want to jump on it too fast let's get you there first at Johnson C. Smith and we'll get into the story.  I just wondered in growing up how much attention you paid to the news people on television.  Did you idolize any of them or did you even care about them?
Speaker 2: Yes I did Bill Beutel I loved, he was an ABC correspondent.  I remember him coming to a Minisink [New York City Mission Society, New York, New York] meeting talking about how he got to be where he is.  Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode] was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Mal Goode was black--
Speaker 2: Black and he was one of those guys that covered Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] all the time.  As a matter of fact--and A. Philip Randolph was our graduation speaker at Samuel Gompers High School [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York] and the year before that it was A-Okay Alan Shepard.  The point is these--these brilliant schools for--where the thinking man was--one of the things I asked for and received was the president of the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations], or Pullman porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], I wanted him to speak and he came and he spoke and he was eloquent and everybody said wow.
Speaker 1: So you were the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was running stuff.  I mean I was the vice president of the student body at the time but the point is, it was--they had a lot of influence.
Speaker 1: Now this is an integrated school too.
Speaker 2: Yes it was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very few blacks at these kinds of technical schools because you had to take a test to get in these schools.  So I could have easily gone to an academic school like at George Washington [George Washington High School; George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York], Franklin High School [Benjamin Franklin High School, New York, New York] or Howard Taft High School [William Howard Taft High School, Bronx, New York].  There were a lot of schools in the city that you could go to but those technical schools you had to take a test and I took the test and excelled in the academic side of the test and I got accepted.  So that meant I had to take two trains sometimes three trains to go to school in the morning.  I'd take the BMT [Brooklyn-Manhattan Transit Corporation], IRT [Interborough Rapid Transit Company] and then I had to--sometimes if I had plenty of time I could take the bus from one side of Harlem [New York, New York] all the way to the Bronx [New York], you know.
Speaker 1: That's where Gompers was, in the Bronx?
Speaker 2: Yeah so I said, "That's okay," it's one of those things that I learned how to fix anything, anything I could fix it.
Speaker 1: Okay so you graduated from Gompers in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty--two, three, four--'66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1966.  So we're going to pause here again.
Speaker 2: All right, you all need to talk?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It may have been '67 [1967] I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 668107
Speaker 1: Okay so, 1965 or '6 [1966], we're, we're--one of the two.
Speaker 2: One of the two.
Speaker 1: But you're going to--you're attending Johnson C. Smith University--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in--it's North Carolina, in--right, Charlotte [North Carolina], Charlotte (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well here's the thing.  Here's the thing I graduate from high school [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York].  Instead of going directly to college guess what I did?  I was Boo Boo the Fool; I said, "I can make more money working at Daviga [ph.] fixing televisions than all these guys going to college."  Said, "I really," said, "Yeah."  So I went to work fixing TVs, fixing TVs for a year and all my boys went to college.  They did well.  Vince Matthews [Vincent Matthews] who ran in the Olympic games and won a gold medal.  All my boys went to Johnson C. Smith did well.  Mike Turner [Michael Turner], Oscar Turner all did well, we all graduated together and my first year fixing TVs I would go to people's houses and one woman looked at me and she said, "You know what you're doing," and I said, "Yes ma'am," she said, "All right, I want you to fix the TV," and I said, "I got you, I can do that."  So I'd fix the TV and make it work again and she said, "It looked better when I bought it. How come you can't make it look the way I bought it?"  I said, "Ma'am it's about seven years old, it's going to take a while," I mean tubes don't last that long.  "You just don't know what you're doing."  I kept hearing that over and over again.  I said, "Trying to fix TVs in Harlem [New York, New York] is hell."
Speaker 1: Did they want to pay you after?
Speaker 2: Oh they paid me but the point is it was the public comment that really angered me, I said.  So during the summer all the boys came back and said, "Man college is a lot of fun," and I said, "Was it," and they said, "Yeah man.  You make a lot of money?"  And I said, "It's all right but the mental challenge ain't there."  It's, you know, you're fixing TVs and I thought I'd make a lot of money, I said no I'm going to college.  So I went a year behind everybody else.  So I went got to Johnson C. Smith all my friends were juniors--I mean sophomores and I was a freshman, but that was okay.  So when I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So about fall of '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Yeah and so that one year angered me so bad that I went to school and I pledged Que Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] under the guys that I should have pledged with 'cause we all joined the Feather [Order of the Feather Fraternity, Inc.] together, which is a fraternal organization inside Minisink [New York City Mission Society, New York, New York], so a pen and scroll and the feather.  These are organizations--fraternities inside this military boot camp of sorts at Minisink.  I was a cadet corps member and I was outstanding officer of the year in the Minisink cadet corps [Camp Minisink Cadet Corps].  I rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel which is big time in the Minisink--New York City Mission Society Cadet Corps.  So I did well but I had to start all over and it humbles you if you're starting all over but I knew I knew my math.  Man I was kicking butt on the math, I was doing very well.  I was helping other students who were slow from other parts of the country.  I would hold after school classes and talking and helping kids from Laurinburg, North Carolina they were a little slow.  I just caught on so easy I guess that's coming from the real life experience there but that one year off made me so thirsty for education.
Speaker 1: So you think you were a better student, a more serious student now?
Speaker 2: I was much more serious.  I wouldn't say--well I'm not a drinker anyway, I'm not a drinker, I mean, I, you know, and they'd say, "Let's go get drunk," that wasn't my--not an idea of fun for me, I'm not going to get drunk, I'm not going to drink until I'm drunk.  There's no drunk driving record anywhere in my past but the point is that didn't excite me, mental things excited me, you know.  So I--I just wanted to--I was very serious.
Story_ID: 668108
Speaker 1: Who were some of your professors at, at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] that--
Speaker 2: Dr. Boyd Gatheright while I was here, math--he was head of the math department at--
Speaker 1: What was his last name and how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Gatheright--Dr. Boyd Gatheright.  Tenacious, aggressive, very big voice, but a mathematical genius.  Then we learned FORTRAN [Formula Translation] another language which is computer programming language of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and the machine that we worked on at the time was about the size of a school--was about the size of a Volkswagen bus it was a computer 386 [Intel 80386] and we had these little index cards that you had to punch--like hanging chads from Florida.  But that was the program the language that we learned was FORTRAN and I was real good at it.  I could actually put my database together--you can pay the entire staff at make believe company and it was good--it was a good time for learning computers 'cause that was it.  And that big old thing that looked like a Volkswagen bus that was the equivalent of a 286 computer [Intel 80286] by today's standards but it was fun and you were ahead of the curve and I was excelling in everything that I touched.  And that's when I--in college that's when I said we need to build a radio station, how come we don't have a radio station here and he said I never thought about it and I said let's build one.  So I called my brother [Lionel Norman] and I said listen let's build a radio station and he said I'll be right there.  My brother flew into town, we built a radio station.  We took an aural frequency and a pipe and put a transmitter on the AC line inside the campus.  So we were broadcasting a radio signal--in other words you can pick up the radio signal in any frequency we want, 560, 1600 and we broadcasted as long as you plugged your radio into an AC outlet you got the radio station all over campus it was unbelievable and it was WJCS [WJCS Radio, Charlotte, North Carolina], Johnson C. Smith.  And so I was--they did a story on me in The Charlotte Observer this guy built a radio station, a carrier current radio station and he didn't need a FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license to get on the air that was me and we did that and we kicked butt.  But it was--the point is so one of the things that they said--says I built a radio station I mean I physically built it and like I went to the different radio--television stations in Charlotte [North Carolina] said, "Listen can you donate a audio board," and said, "Sure, sure."  I get all the stuff I needed to build it and so we put it together and it was working.  Other people helping us 'cause I did all the soldering myself 'cause that's what I did and then we got it and it was working.  So they had auditions so the head of--Ernest James [Ernest James, Jr.] the head of the broadcast department at Johnson C. Smith said we're going to have auditions.  So I said to myself, "I got it made, I built the station, they're going to turn me into a deejay, I'm going to be like Frankie Crocker," and I think I'm going to be bad.  Had auditions and I was--I stunk so bad and they said, "You know, all right, do me a favor. Why don't you just do the news at the top of the hour every hour that's all--you're the news guy, you just don't--."  'Cause everybody tried to rhyme like Muhammad Ali back in the days, float like a butterfly, sting like a bee.  They said, "All right, that ain't you, you sound real--it's too stilted," and I said, "Okay."  So I was so hurt, but I said, "Okay I'll make the best of this.  So at the top and then I volunteer to do the bottom of the hour news and that's what I did.  I ripped AP [Associated Press] wire off and read the little snippets at the top and the bottom of the area, whatever is happening on the campus that day, what's happening in black colleges [HBCUs], 'cause I used to write a column in Charlotte Observer what black colleges scores and things like that so I was good at that.  I was editor of the newspaper [The University Student] there and back then it was--I used to write the articles in the newspaper but it was on a mimeograph machine.  This was long before Xerox came along.  I would have to set the type on a roller ball and then once I got it right then I'd have to roll each page off.  That was how I got--see being the editor of a newspaper meant you had to do all that.  Didn't have no staff so I'd write columns, and--the boycott and when is King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] coming to the campus, he's going to speak all those articles I wrote myself.
Speaker 1: Dr. King came to the campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah Dr. King came to the campus and--
Speaker 1: I remember [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory came to the campus.  Dick Gregory--we called Dick Gregory and said, "Listen I understand you're going to be down the street at the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina]," and he says, "Yeah, I'll stop by," he said, "'cause I know you're a poor black college, y'all can't pay my plane ticket to get there but while I'm in town I'll stop by and talk to you."
Speaker 2: Let me just say this. Dick Gregory in 1967, '68 [1968] was big.
Speaker 1: He was huge.
Speaker 2: He was big.  He drew record crowds at every college campus--
Speaker 1: Man.
Speaker 2: --both the major colleges and the black colleges all over the--
Speaker 1: Man, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) country, so--
Story_ID: 668109
Speaker 1: Also like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was still a big--huge draw, too, so I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he was on, he was on his way down, just before he died he was on his way down, because he kept using the word Negro and see on my campus it was like everybody tried to be Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], "I'm black and I'm proud."  Dr. King had his--I'm from Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and I said, "Oh no he's a Christian man."  All of those people--I remember as a young boy watching Dr. King he came into the church with Sidney Poitier, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Marlon Brando and Charlton Heston in Harlem [New York, New York].  I remember everybody said they used to call him Uncle Tom King and I said, "No, no, no, no, no.  Moses is on his side, 'cause I saw Moses with him in church Sunday." It was Charlton Heston.  But the point is that King was vilified at black colleges [HBCUs] because you had everybody was into the James Brown, I'm black and I'm proud ['Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud'], I'm black this and I'm black that and King was still using the word Negro and people used to say, "So you with Uncle Tom King, you turn the other cheek?  Malcolm said if he hits me on my left side, I'm hitting you back." I said, "That's not the way to go," said, "I'm from the church."  So I'm a strict follower of Dr. King and he was--you're still using the word Negro and everybody else is using black, and black, and black.  He just took a beating but I stayed with him 'cause he was a Christian man.  So I always wrote positive things about Dr. King on campus.  It's one of those positive things that I got to see and, well, after he got killed he became a martyr.
Speaker 1: You're right though people had started to question--
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: --his--
Speaker 2: They used to pick on me so bad.
Speaker 1: Yeah his relevance I guess in 1968.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was he still relevant?
Speaker 2: He was still relevant I mean he would come--see he came over on to campus him, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young would be with him, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond would be with him, Maynard Jackson would be with him and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] would be with him and that was his entourage.  Cirilo McSween would be with him all these guys were with him and everybody knew who everyone was.  Dr. King was the one with the Nobel Peace Prize everybody else had--I mean Jesse Jackson was the guy that was supposed to play in the NFL [National Football League] because he was an All American quarterback at A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] but they said in the NFL blacks could not play the position of quarterback 'cause they're not intelligent enough.  So he was so angry about that he stayed with Dr. King.  Cirilo McSween he was a huge. He was from Panama, fastest man alive but King liked him because he was great with numbers, he was a mathematical genius.  He was treasurer for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].
Speaker 1: He ended up owning--
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: --I don't know how many McDonald's in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Oh my god all of them.  Ray Kroc gave him anything he wanted but the point is these guys I met in college.  I said wow this is amazing.  So Dr. King would say, "How's your mama doing?"  I wanted to go to Clemson University [Clemson, South Carolina] really bad because I wanted to be the first black to graduate from Clemson and Dr. King told my mama he said, "Mary  [Mary Ball Norman], don't let that boy go to--you know you get gray hairs overnight."  So it turns out one of my best friends he went to Clemson and became the first black to graduate from Clemson, Harvey Gantt and I went to Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  Today, once Harvey and I get together, we're showing each other's pictures, I've got pictures hanging out with Dr. King, and Jesse Jackson, Maynard Jackson, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis and Harvey's got pictures, "N word go home."  Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] figures painted on his door.  It's a different environment--social environment for a young black man and the nice thing about it at night when Dr. King would come up all the white students from the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina] would come over and sit beside us to learn how to integrate lunchroom counters.  But point is Dr. King's movement was inclusive.  Everybody, Malcolm X and--there was no white anywhere nearby but King was very inclusive. He wanted everybody to be on the same field.  I remember that when he came to Harlem he walked in with all the whites and they loved him and he respected them and he made us all respect them too.  I know I got to, just before he died, Charlton Heston was on a live show when I was anchoring downstairs and he came in and he was talking about a program he was working with.  After I said, "Can I buy you a cup of coffee," he said, "Sure," we got coffee on the first floor where you were and I said, "Mr. Heston, I just want you to know that I know you're with the NRA [National Rifle Association] and all that but before that you really left a permanent mark on my house because you came into Harlem with Marlon Brando, Harry Belafonte," and he said, "I remember that."  I said, "Yeah, and I told everybody that Moses was on Dr. King's side," and we both laughed.  About a week later he made it--disclosed that he had Alzheimer's or the early stages of Alzheimer's or dementia but the point is but I got to have the conversation with him because it meant a lot to me.  I was there when he walked in.  See in the black church like Abyssinian, any black church, if King was a part of it you're inclusive.  Some of these, these whites who are friends of mine in North Carolina are friends with me today, absolutely.  But the point is Rap Brown would not--if I was a follower of Rap Brown I wouldn't do that.  Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] came up on campus a couple of times.  Elijah Muhammad came on the campus a couple of times.  I mean they, they were too busy vilifying King at the time.  Said, "I can't, I can't deal with that," (laughter) so it was one of those things.  But you learn a lot, but I was a serious brother back in those days.
Story_ID: 668110
Speaker 1: I mean Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated while you were in college right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And do you remember where you were and what happened?
Speaker 2: Yes I was at, I was at--in the dormitory.  In the dormitory at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and it was weird how it happened and we saw the fire trucks and the police cars going by.  We saw the smoke.  I was watching TV watching Chicago [Illinois] burn, I remember watching that and the first they did they said, "We're closing down the campus."  So we all had to go to the Trailways bus station or Greyhound bus for me.  We got on the Trailways bus and I went all the way back to New York [New York] but as I was watching along Washington, D.C. and all the places you had to go through before you get back to New York City you could see the National Guard all around and the tanks and things like that.  I said whoa.
Speaker 1: Were there riots in Charlotte?
Speaker 2: There were some minor riots.  Someone threw a brick through the window of Belk's department store downtown or Ivey's department store [J.B. Ivey and Company] downtown.  There was a television crew that was going through Johnson C. Smith campus, somebody threw a brick at it and it turned out that the person that they threw--that was part of that is the person who later hired me at WSOC [WSOC-TV] in Charlotte, North Carolina.  But the point is he says, "I remember," 'cause the way I found out and, he says, "You went to Johnson C. Smith." He said, "Yeah, I thought I was going to die one night driving by Johnson C. Smith."  I said, "Why," and he says, "Somebody threw a brick at our car and we almost lost it." I said, "Wow."  "But it's okay, okay."  So I'm saying, "Lewis Brooks is the news director who just hired me."  But the point is I was taught that these people are not the enemy.  But Dr. King his way was gold because we never hated white people, we're part of the southern--we came out of the church, that ain't something we do.  All my friends who were Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Malcolm X everything was the evil white man this, the evil white man that.  I said, "You all got to come down off this; this ain't the way to go."  It turned out that Dr. King was right the whole time.  He became vilified near the end and he turned that corner and became a martyr, the rest is history, wow.  But it was there, it was a scary time, we didn't know where we were going, I kept looking on TV, Chicago was all up in flames.  It wasn't that bad in D.C., light stuff in Charlotte, North Carolina but man Chicago was ablaze.  Were you here?
Speaker 1: I wasn't here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had riots in Dayton.
Speaker 2: Did you really (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dayton, Ohio, right.
Speaker 2: Gosh, man.  So it was--it was a learning experience but, you know, I think the fact that I'm a Christian coming out of the Christian church, my friends are all over the place.
Story_ID: 668111
Speaker 1: Okay so, you were on the verge of graduation then--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as well, right?  And so, so, what were your plans?  Now you, you majored in engineering right?
Speaker 2: Math and physics.
Speaker 1: Math and physics, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you had the skills of a radio engineer right?
Speaker 2: You're right, and so I went to work at--I was heavily recruited by Dow Chemical Company to go to work for them as well as IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  They wanted me to go to Kingston, New York but all those jobs started in September.  So I had a brand new baby, had a brand new wife.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about how you met your wife.
Speaker 2: Well she was on the campus at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  She was one of the cheerleaders on the campus and she was from Wilmington, North Carolina.  So Velma [ph.] is her name and so we talked and fell in love and became--got a place off campus and then rode out my senior year that way.  I said, "I've got to find me a job.  The high paying job at IBM or Dow Chemicals doesn't start until September. I need a job now."  So what you going to do? And I said, "I'm going over here to the TV station."  So, "How are you going to get the job," and I said, "Well I'm an engineer so I'm going to go over there."  I took the engineering test; that's one of the things that we had when we left New York City [New York, New York].  Everybody was a licensed engineer they call it a FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license.  So, as I said, I had mine so I said, "I'm going over to the TV station."  Said, "You've got one of those," and I said, "Yeah." "You've got a job," just that quick.  Then I found out the kid, the young kid engineer, all that meant is that back in the day if the light on the transmitter went out, the towers, somebody had to get up there and change the bulb and them forty or fifty year old engineers weren't going to do it.  They'd say, "Get the kid, get the kid Norman.  Norman get up there," I was already scared of heights (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had to climb up--
Speaker 2: I had to climb--they had stairways inside the tower, so I said, "I'm scared of heights but I'm not going to let them know that.  I'm going--I'm not going to look down," so I'm going to go all the way up there--
Speaker 1: Did you have a safety belt or something?
Speaker 2: No you just--no safety belt.  It was just you climb up and I changed the bulb and I came on down.  Anytime a bulb went out, I went up there.  But my shift at the TV station I came to work at midnight and got off at six o'clock in the morning.  Midnight to six o'clock in the morning, and anything that was broken at the TV station, I fixed it, from the projector to the video tape machines to the cameras, the oscillators, the klystrons, I fixed it all. That's something I did.  The learning experience was a short curve for me so I did very well and I also ran commercials.  You know, like, like the movie--I'd load the movie on the projector, hit play and every about four or five minutes you see the little round circles in the upper right hand that means it's time to roll a commercial.  I would have the other projector, I would sit there and roll the different commercials sometime to film, sometimes to video tape and then in between, while the movie is running I had to take the transmitter radius out.  What the frequency of the aural carrier, the frequency of the video carrier for the 4.5 megahertz signal transmitted by a television station.  That's what I did.  I was pretty good at it.  Now while I was there, there was a thing on the bulletin board it was like an AM FM and a TV and said, "We need an engineer to re-ticket on the weekends 'cause we have a good deejay but we don't have an engineer on duty.  Art, would you be willing to work six days, possibly seven a week?"  "Absolutely," so I went to work doing that, and then they had austerity right after I got there.  "Austerity," I said, "what does that mean?"  "Can you read?  "Can I read what?"  "Can you read radio news?"  I said, "I did that at Johnson C. Smith. I was at the top and the bottom hour, I did the radio."  He says, "Well that's what you have to do here."  So every top and bottom of the hour I would be like, "This is [HistoryMaker] Art Norman, WMAQ radio [sic.], what's happening in the news, President Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is in town today blah, blah."  I would read the entire newscast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is WCCB [WCCB-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina] just to be--
Speaker 2: WCCB and--and I did everything.
Story_ID: 668112
Speaker 1: Were you the first African American employee there?
Speaker 2: Yes I was. The first African American employee who was an engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had janitors there; they were not engineering.
Speaker 1: So you were the first professional.
Speaker 2: Professional, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--and then I stayed there a year.  Now At WCCB [WCCB-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina] I was just an engineer, I climbed the tower and did all that.  I stayed there maybe a year and a half and went to WSOC [WSOC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina] 'cause they were looking for African Americans to integrate the staff and I went over there and they had an AM and FM.  That's where I started doing the radio, at WSOC 'cause they had the WSOC AM and FM.  So I would do the--their radio format was called MOR, middle of the road.  So I would be playing Johnny Mathis and Frank Sinatra's songs. So they didn't want none of this trash talking stuff.  It was like you had to keep your dialect right, you know.  So I was--I could do that 'cause of the radio.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you, you were raised in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were born in Alabama, raised in Harlem.
Speaker 2: I was born at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay right born in Harlem Hospital (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --comes from an Alabama family and well you know people talk about people being 'Bama and all that sort of thing and the accent and everything that goes with it.  How did you--how were you able to--you don't even have a New York accent.
Speaker 2: No I don't, no.
Speaker 1: And so, so did you decide or how did your accent evolve?
Speaker 2: I took public speaking classes at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and I learned phonetics.  Phonetics is the key to ridding yourself of any accent whatsoever.  Phonetics, articulation and I took classes in that.  Every semester I had a class in phonetics because I had terrible New York City accent.
Speaker 1: How would you sound?  Can you repeat, replicate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't remember but it was bad (laughter).  You could tell I was from New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Now I remember that accent and--
Speaker 2: I got rid of that accent to make myself more marketable.
Speaker 1: Is it true--now I've heard that the goal of TV news people is to sound like they are from Nebraska or someplace in the middle of the country--people with no, or very slight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no I sounded like my black professors at Johnson C. Smith.  These guys who went to Saint Aug [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], those guys were polished.  They didn't talk trash, they didn't slur words.  These were educated black men who mentor the kids from Harlem like me.  So I said, "They talk good."  And they said, "Well you've got to get rid of your trash talking."  I remember one time I went to a--I was going to go get me a job at a--in North Carolina I was going to get me a job at the bank.  They had the job in the paper and I said, "Okay I'm going to get me a job."  They said, "What you going to do?"  And I said, "I'm going to put on my dashiki with my beads on and my big old Afro and I'm going down to get me a job," had platform shoes and bellbottom pants.  I walked into the bank, looked like they called security (laughter).  But the point is I wasn't ready. That's when mentors are really helpful.  They said, "All right.  You can't--you've got to use honey to get in stuff like that, step back, cut your hair, put on a tie."  These are black college graduates telling you that and they are articulate.  I did it.
Story_ID: 668113
Speaker 1: --iPhone, I said, "Okay."  He says--so, I'm going out and buy one of those books for dummies, so I get to know how to use it, 'cause that's what I had to do with Bill Gates' stuff.  He says, "If you have to get a book for dummies for iPhone, I've failed.  My engineers--you pick it up, it works from day one. If you have to look at a book?"  And, these guys, they, they think in--in different realms of a--of cerebellum.  They're just smart!  But they're commonsense smart.
Story_ID: 668114
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right so we--we're at--
Speaker 2: Ready?
Speaker 1: --WSOC [WSOC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina], yeah, SOC, and--
Speaker 2: WSO--WSOC.
Speaker 1: And you're doing the radio news.
Speaker 2: Radio news, and Monday through Friday I'm engineer.  Saturday and Sunday I'm reading the news on the radio, Saturday--so I'm seven days a week and then the job comes back from IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and Dow Chemical [Dow Chemical Company] and I said, "No I'm going to stay here."  My wife says, "You sure," and I say, "Yeah we've got all our friends here in Charlotte [North Carolina] everybody we know is in Charlotte.  Why are we going to Kingston, New York for IBM or somewhere else, we'll just stay here."  And she said, "What do you think about the future?"  I said, "I don't know, it's--I'm the only Negro there," and she said, "Oh okay we'll just stick with it."  My wife and I made the decision, the kids growing up, so we stayed in Charlotte and that was a good decision because--and then, then one day the S hit the fan and they needed blacks on the air and they said, "Art, you--," the general manager said, "Who is that guy on the radio?"  They said, "His name is [HistoryMaker] Art Norman, he's from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]."  The general manager said, "What?  He's black?"  They said, "Yeah." "Well bring him up to my office right away."  So I go into the office, he says--I thought I did something wrong and he says, "Listen, I'll tell you what, how many days a week you work here?"  I said, "Seven days a week, Monday through Friday I'm an engineer midnight to six a.m., Saturday and Sundays I work the morning shift on the radio."  "Seven days a week?"  I say, "Yeah I've got a brand new baby I've got to feed the baby."  He says, "Ah," I'm making like seven thousand dollars a year, twelve thousand--seven to ten thousand dollars a year.  So he says, "I tell you what, I'll double your salary if you work five days a week doing television news.  You know how to write don't you?"  I said, "Absolutely.  Everybody keeps asking me the same question over again but that's what we did at Johnson C. Smith."  He said, "Well come on in but since you're an engineer, we need somebody who could turn on the," 'cause they had this new thing called the minicam.  It was actually a transmitter and the way in the early days of television you take a minicam truck out into the street, you had to have an engineer there to sign on the transmitter sort of like a transmitter at the TV station or radio station.  They said, "Art you're the engineer in the field but you're also a reporter," so okay.
Speaker 1: So they got two for one.
Speaker 2: Two for one.  I said, "I don't mind as long as I'm part of the equation."  So I would go out on stories and I would do--shoot my story then I'd climb up on the truck and aimed a beam at something equivalent to a Sears Tower [Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois] and send that signal--get it all lined up, lock it down, come down and talk in front of the microphone by myself.  Sometimes I'd have a college student with me.  See, this is a right to work state; you didn't have to be in a union or anything like that, this is North Carolina.  So I was doing that every day.  And they--they doubled my salary I went from like seven thousand to fourteen thousand.  But the point is it was a lot of money for me.  I said, "Wow plus I'm on TV now talking on TV?"  I said, "Wow."  They said, "You want to anchor the news," and I said, "No I'm just fine, I like telling other people's stories," and they said, "Okay."  So I stayed there in North Carolina doing the news for a long time.  Didn't anchor, never did anchor in North Carolina.  I was--I went from there to--they hired me away from WSOC to something called WRET [WRET-TV; WCNC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 668115
Speaker 1: WRET [WRET-TV; WCNC-TV]. And that was a television station in Charlotte [North Carolina] owned by Ted Turner, his name is Richard Edward Turner [sic.] so Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.].  So I went to work over there and back then it was the first black news director at WRET and he used to be a reporter and so his name is Kirk Peters [ph.].  Kirk Peters said, "Listen man, I can bump up your salary even more if you come to work for Ted Turner."  I said, "But he's--," he said, "Come on."  This was before CNN.  So I went to work over there for a year.  He says--so I'm there doing the news and a friend of mine sees me from Baltimore [Maryland] on the air.  He says, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman] you've got to come to Baltimore man; we need somebody like you in Baltimore."  So I go from--so as I'm leaving the station to go to Baltimore, Ted Turner says, "Hey man I'm selling the station, you're leaving at the right time.  Here's the thing, you can come to work for me and go to CNN.  I'm getting to start a new network called Cable News Network, CNN out of Atlanta [Georgia]," 'cause he already owned TBS and all the other stations.  He says, "You want to think about that?"  See back in the day I said, "No, twenty-four hour news, that ain't going to make it," (laughter).  "Most people are in the news like for thirty minutes at six o'clock and another thirty minutes at eleven o'clock or ten o'clock.  We ain't gonna--"  I said, "No that's okay I'm going to Baltimore."
Speaker 2: So this is 1978?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668116
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you received an award for coverage of a fatal air balloon crash in '75 [1975] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes see that was back in the day when I was shooting by myself and they said that the air balloon--the balloon that was used in the movie 'Around the World in 80 Days,' 1975 and so we're there and they said, "Listen," see what they used to do is send two reporters out on a story and a reporter would shoot my story and I would shoot his.  So the reporter that I was paired with his name is Tom Sweeney [ph.], he was the later--and he [sic.] said, "Tom you're taking too long, I'm supposed to meet this guy from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and ride off in a balloon."  He says, "I'm sorry man but it's just taking too long."  I said, "Ah man you're f-ing me up, you're f-ing me up."  He said, "Don't worry about it." I said, "Yeah you're right, what can I do, I can't fast forward time," so I relaxed.  So this guy calls me on the phone and said, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], we're here at Johnson, you wanted to take off on the balloon ride from your school."  I wanted to give my school a shot in the arm.  I said--I said, "We're not going to get there so just go on and leave without me."  They said, "Okay."  So I'm on the way back and I'm listening 'cause every car had a police scanner in it and they said the balloon blew a hole in it and it landed on 144 thousand DC volt line.  I said, "Oh my god, let's go there to the scene of the crash."  I go there and all I see before the ambulances get there are four bodies in the gondola of a balloon, they're burned up and the bodies are still moving.  To me I say, "I was supposed to have been in that balloon.  God said it's not your time."  So I set up the truck and I broadcast live from there for the next couple of hours.  With that--I wanted to stay far enough away where you could see the smoke and the police but not the bodies.  And so that's what I did, I broadcast live from there and I won all kinds of awards for doing that and those kind of awards that open the door for me to go to Baltimore [Maryland].  But those are the things that--it was a frightening thing to see and when the other guy took too long on a story it must have been you know the right--for the right reason 'cause it's amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--yeah, that's, that's really a tragic story.
Story_ID: 668117
Speaker 1: Now did you win a Peabody Award [George Foster Peabody Award] for another story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I was a photographer--
Speaker 1: Oh, for the--
Speaker 2: --a photographer, for Lloyd Dobyns.  It was the--he was a news director here at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV] in Chicago [Illinois] but he was--they called it NBC weekend news edition.  So they would come to these right to work states like North Carolina and he was doing a story about Duke Power Company [Duke Energy Corporation] and all of the problems they were having with the, the nuclear power plant construction.  So every time he came to town I would meet him and we would go out on a story and I'd be his cameraman.  So he says, "Man," so he won a Peabody Award for that so he called me and he said, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], you can put it on your resume, we got a Peabody," and I said, "For real?  That's great."  He said, "Put it on your resume," and I said, "I will."  It's just one of those things; I said, "Okay I'll put it on my resume."  But he got all the glory, it's his name, but all the footage for the story I shot myself.  'Cause everybody had to--see, in North Carolina you're a reporter and every reporter was assigned a camera--a 16mm camera.  I had two 16mm cameras in my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were shooting film in those days--
Speaker 2: Film, 16mm film and then after we shot it we had to send it through a development lamp that we owned ourselves and develop it and then after you did that you have to sit there and splice it together through a flagellator.  I mean it's nothing like it is today, but you had to do all that yourself.  So I became very good at that so that anytime NBC wanted to do anything in North Carolina they always said, "Let's go get Art, he knows how to do this stuff."  He would do his stand up, he'd be on the fifth take or the sixth take of his stand up, I'd just say, "No problem do it again, do it until you get it right."  So he had a good time doing it and then later on--it's just weird how that became part of my resume and he was a news director here.  He eventually rose to the position where he became a news director here.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: At WMAQ.
Speaker 1: WMAQ okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah so it's kind of like the guy that told me to put it on my resume, those kinds of things you put money into the bank, you don't know when it's going to come into fruition, you know what I mean?  I said wow.
Story_ID: 668118
Speaker 1: So, 1979 you started at WMAR [WMAR-TV] in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Baltimore and that was a great place to be because now, now for the first time I'm in the--I'm working in a union market, I never heard of that before.  And so, that's--we're AFTRA--American Federation of Television and Radio Artists [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists].  Everybody's making like nineteen thousand dollars a year, whoa that's a lot of money.  From North Carolina, fourteen [thousand dollars], I'm up to nineteen, sometimes twenty.  I said, "Wow, making a--," said, "man somebody pinch me, I ain't made this much money in the whole time, wow."  So we were out there doing stories and everything and everywhere I went, I didn't have to shoot it myself, I had a cameraman, I had a soundman, had a light man.  This is a great market to go to, I said, "This is great."  It's one of those things that you get there and you say, "Man," so you really appreciate people who do small things for you.  In North Carolina I had to do my own editing, in Baltimore that's a union.
Speaker 1: That's somebody else's job.
Speaker 2: Yeah somebody else's job.  You try anything on a piece of machinery, they'd break your damn knuckles (laughter).  I said, "Okay, okay I respect your space."  Those things kind of ingrained in me and so I said, "Okay I can work with this."  Won a lot of awards there doing--journalism awards and a very nice place to work.  Crab city man, a lot of crabs.  But I was close to New York [New York] too.
Speaker 1: Okay so, well what are the highlights of working at WMAR?
Speaker 2: The highlights you get to or I think one of the things that we used to get off work, I was president of--all the places I worked.  I was president of the Charlotte Association of Black Journalists [Charlotte Area Association of Black Journalists].  In Baltimore I was president of the Baltimore Association of Black [Baltimore Association of Black Journalists]--and my vice president was Oprah Winfrey, unbelievable.  We're all reporters together.  I came from North Carolina to Baltimore, she came from Kingsport, Tennessee to Baltimore and we're like peas in a pod and we're running the black journalist association and our mentor was Max Robinson, he was one of the founders of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].  So he'd come to town and Oprah and I would do anything in the world for him.  But our database--there was no such thing as computers, there was, but not for us.  It was FORTRAN [Formula Translation] the size of a Volkswagen bus, so everything was three by five [inch] index cards.  Oprah would sit there at night and fill out the cards, send out, "There's a meeting coming," we'd get postcards and handwrite it and we'd have parties at night where everybody sat there and handwrite stuff and we would send it out.  Who paid their dues, there's no computer and you'd say, "Ah man, Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman] didn't pay his dues."  Everything was three by five index cards.  It was really a lot of fun, we didn't have much money and we used to get off work in Baltimore, Oprah would say, "Who's got all you can eat today?"  I'd say, "I don't know, let's go find out," and Oprah would say, "Let me go check," and we'd check and it would be like the Hilton, all the crab cakes you can eat and all the hot wings.  Oprah and I didn't drink so we'd go in there and order a Diet Coke [Coca-Cola] and go crazy, we were poor as hell (laughter) I mean at the time.  But we weren't poor but poor is--we didn't have a lot of money.  So it worked out nicely.
Story_ID: 668119
Speaker 1: So--when did you first get involved with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]?
Speaker 2: Oh in North Carolina, in North Carolina.  In North Carolina I was with the, the Insti- I was with the IEEE [Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers]--the engineering association and once I got to reporting back in the day, [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, my mentors in school, 'cause I used to write for the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] in New York City [New York, New York].  I used to write the sports column for the different high schools.
Speaker 1: So this is when--when did you do that?
Speaker 2: In high school [Samuel Gompers Vocational Technical High School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: When you were in high school.
Speaker 2: In high school, in high school.  I would go there and file my reports in the Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune] in New York, I would do a column for them.  I was all over the place writing.  See writing is something that came very easy to me, so writing is always--so I was a founding member of the--we had our founding meeting for NABJ founders was in North Carolina.  So my roommate in college, his name is Derwood Hall, he says, "Scottie [HistoryMaker Art Norman]," that's what they called me, my nickname is Scottie, he said, "I'm going up to the A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. They are going to have a foun- start a journalism organization. You need to come up there."  I said, "I can't get off work, I'm shooting a story today, so go take good notes," he said, "Okay."  So he went up to A&T and all these founders of NAB--Bob Johnson [Robert E. Johnson], John Johnson, Max Robinson, Vernon Jarrett they all got together and my roommate was the founder of NABJ, Derwood Hall.  I think there were forty-one founders, should have been forty-two but I couldn't get off work.  So that's fine but I was the president of the organization in Charlotte [Charlotte Area Association of Black Journalists].  I was president of the organization in Baltimore [Baltimore Association of Black Journalists] and I'm a former president of the organization here in Chicago [Chicago Association of Black Journalists; National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter] too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't realize that, so--so NABJ was founded at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No NABJ was founded on the campus at A&T at a conference and Mal Goode [Malvin R. Goode], Mal Johnson [HistoryMaker Malvyn Johnson] and things like that, they were all there at this symposium and that's when they were talking about the fact that this reporter in Chicago [Illinois], his name is Lacy Banks and they said Lacy Banks, I saw the notes.  Max said, "Lacy Banks in Chicago, they told," he has a degree in theology but he applied to be a sports reporter.  They hired him on Monday and when they found out he had a religious background they didn't want somebody to say, "Michael Jordan goes up for a three point shot and he made it in the last second according to Genesis, Chapter One."  They thought he might integrate that so they fired him.  Hired him on Monday, Lacy Banks, they fired him on Tuesday.  Max Robinson, Bob Johnson, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], all these guys got together and said, "No, hell no you won't."  So they are getting ready to picket the Chicago Sun-Times, and then the editor of the Sun-Times says, "Okay let's talk about this," 'cause they were getting ready to do all this--Jet magazine was going to write an article, everybody's going to write an article, they said okay.  [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was in this meeting--all these guys came to the aid of this one guy, Lacy Banks.  So they saved his job, then while they were sitting there and looked and said, "Look at this man, we ought to start an organization," that's how it started.  On the backs--like Frederick Douglass said, "Power concedes nothing without a struggle," [sic.].  There was a struggle going on for Lacy Banks.  Well Lacy Banks became the sports editor of the Sun-Times.  What a remarkable story, but he had a rocky road at the beginning but it was those pillars of the journalistic community that saved him and there was one white guy in the group, George O'Hare.  He was in that group George O'Hare, Dick Gregory, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson, Bob Johnson, Max Robinson, Vernon Jarrett, [HistoryMaker] Timuel Black.  A lot of people who were there at the ground floor of this movement to save this reporter's hide and they said, "This--we've got to keep this going we can save more jobs," and that's what they did, that's how it got started.
Speaker 1: This is the Bob Johnson from Jet right, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right Bob Johnson, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] roommate at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], unbelievable.
Speaker 1: It's not the same BET [Black Entertainment Television] Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] I just want to make sure?
Speaker 2: No yeah Bob Johnson did the--at Jet right, executive editor of Jet.
Speaker 1: People get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: That's true, I was talking about him the other day somebody said, "No, no not that Bob Johnson, I'm talking about the one from Chicago," yeah, yeah.  Whose daughter [Janet Johnson Grant] by the way was killed in that--do you remember that high rise office building fire, the state's attorney's office [Cook County Administration Building, Chicago, Illinois], his daughter was killed unbelievable, sad story, oh wow.
Speaker 1: That's the building that's owned by--
Speaker 2: Higgenbotham.
Speaker 1: Higgenbotham, Leon Higgenbotham [sic.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, not Leon Higgenbotham but--
Speaker 2: Who is it?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: But Higgenbotham [sic. HistoryMaker Elzie Higginbottom], I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: So a lot of history.  So NABJ is indigenous to my background and where I've gone I've always been a part of that, even when I was an engineer, I always a part of it because I always liked to write.  I was writing the news in college, writing the news in radio and everywhere I went but I didn't actually do it on air until WSOC [WSOC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 668120
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two [1982], you come over to W--you come to Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to WMAQ.  Now how did that take place?  How did that?
Speaker 2: Unbelievable story.  That's why I think God has worked a miracle for me to be here in front of you is a miracle because I am in Baltimore [Maryland], a member of AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists] on air, and we picket, we go on strike.  The worst thing to do if you are an on air person is to go on strike expect public sympathy 'cause they already think you are on TV, you're probably making a million dollars a year but that's not the case in Baltimore.  But in Baltimore they thought that.  So one day we're out there walking the picket line and Oprah and I were walking together, we're walking holding a sign walking together and so this pretty lady [Teri Goudie] walks by.  So all the guys on the line, sports anchor and all of them said, "Oh man let's go meet her."  So me and Oprah Winfrey say I ain't going and she said, "I ain't going either I'm walking the picket," so they run on to check her out.  They say, "Wow, wow, wow," blah, blah and then they come back.  I said, "Who was that lady?"  "Oh she's the executive producer of news at WMAQ-TV in Chicago." I say, "What?"  I said, "Oprah hold on I'll be right back."  I went to the trunk of my car, grabbed my video tape resume, ran three blocks at full speed, caught up with this lady.  I said (makes sounds), "You don't know who I am.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Art Norman."  She said, "You're Art Norman," and I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Oh my gosh, my fiance talks about you all the time."  I said, "Who is your fiance?"  "Chuck Goudie from Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois]," I said, "What?"  See every time--Chuck Goudie and I used to work at WSOC [WSOC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina] together and we used to go out and anytime they had a RTNDA conference--RTNDA, Radio-Television News Directors Association meeting [Radio Television Digital News Association], the station couldn't afford two rooms so Chuck and I would always be roommates.  So we got to be very close, hung out after work and everything like that.  So she said, "Gosh he talks about you all the time.  Art Norman, I know exactly who you are," so I said, "Well do me a favor, can you give this to your news director?"  "Absolutely.  Her name is Suzanne Maggione [ph.]."  I said, and I ran back so Oprah said, "Who was that woman?"  I said, "She's the executive producer and she's going to give my resume to the boss in Chicago.  She's going to fly--he's flying out of town this afternoon; she'll give it to him the first thing in the morning."  I get a call the next day at three o'clock in the afternoon with a round trip ticket to Chicago for a job interview at the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois], unbelievable.  So Oprah said, "Oh my gosh this is unbelievable."  See back in Baltimore all of us had the same agent, this guy named Ron Shapiro [Ronald Shapiro] was my agent, he was Oprah's agent, Aaron Marrioti [ph.], we all had the same agents.  We didn't know why we had agents but they took 10 percent of everything you made.  So there was--it was a game there but they got us a job.  So I got to Chicago, came to the building, I interviewed and he, he liked me and he says, "We're going to hire you."  So I said, "Wow that's kind of cool."  So I'm walking around introducing myself to people and I see [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders and he says, "Man I don't know who you are man but you must be something special."  I said, "Why," and he said, "They just hired another Negro on Monday, his name is Otis Buchanan," and I said, "For real?"  He said, "They've hired two of you all in the same week; one of you all ain't going to be here."  I said, "I hope it's me that stays," and so we were just sitting there joking about it.  [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon came over and talked to me, welcomed me to the staff, we're talking about it and I said, "Man," I said, "Jim Tilmon you're a legend."  He said, "What do you know?"  And I said, "I know all about you, I researched everything--everybody at this station before I got here.  Jim Tilmon you're a tennis coach at Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] with the great Althea Gibson, no one knows about that but I do.  You learned how to fly; you're a Tuskegee Airman from Tuskegee, Alabama, they taught you how to fly after you graduated from Lincoln University."  He said, "Whoa," and I said, "Man you had to live in the basement of a woman's home because you had to live within five to ten minutes of O'Hare Airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] just to become a pilot for American Airlines."  He said, "I'm scared of you Norman, you know too much."  I said, "No I just know everything about here."  I told Warner about his globetrotting--I just knew everybody on the staff because I knew their backgrounds I researched.  See back in the day they didn't have Google, back in the day they had something very similar to Google it was called the 'Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature,' remember that?  That was Google but you had to go into the library to do it and you'd look up whatever subject you wanted and it told you what page and what magazine, you found everything.  So I found everything about everybody which is the old way of doing things on Google and I found out everything I wanted to know.  [HistoryMaker] Carole Simpson worked here, man, Greg Gumbel was anchoring the sports here, ah man this is a great place to be.
Story_ID: 668121
Speaker 1: So I'm here now. So I'm here working having a good time and I get a call from Oprah she said, "Art, me and my boyfriend have broken up," I said, "I'm sorry, Tim [Tim Watts]?"  She said, "Yeah he kicked me to the side of the road."  I said, "Aw man, you're in luck, a show just opened in Chicago [Illinois]," and she said, "What--what?"  I said, "Something called 'Entertainment,' the guy named Robb Weller he's leaving Chicago to start something called 'Entertainment Tonight' in Hollywood but he was doing a morning talk show at Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and he was also anchoring the early afternoon news on Channel 7."  She says, "Let's call Ron [Ronald Shapiro]," that was our agent.  I called Ron and the three of us got on--we had a conference call and he says, "Okay I'll get you a job interview," I say, "Cool."  Oprah gets--flies into town, we're hanging out 'cause we're still very close to this day and so she gets--she comes to, she goes, her interview is with Dennis Swanson over at Channel 7 on a Wednesday, I'm hanging out with her Sunday night.  She comes into NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois], she meets Ron Magers, Carol Marin, everybody on the staff and they love Oprah.  They're talking to her and they say who are you and she says blah, blah, blah.  She was overweight, real short hair, dark skinned but the point is she was not the magical formula of someone who is going to succeed.  So she's going to be a anchor at Channel 7 maybe and a talk show host and so everybody said, "Good luck to you, good luck," and they pumped her up, made her feel good.  So she goes--so the president of NBC says--Oprah says, "I really like it here, can you go upstairs and talk to the president of NBC, I'd love to work here, I like the people here," and I said, "Absolutely.  I've just been here about a year but I'll do that for you."  I run upstairs to the president [sic.] of NBC, twentieth floor of the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois], I said--his name is Monte Newman.  I say, "Monte a friend of mine is going to be interviewed by Dennis Swanson on Wednesday for the 'A.M. Chicago' job on Channel 7 and she's going to be offered a job co-anchoring the news with Fahey Flynn in early afternoon.  But you could interview her today and beat Channel 7 at their own game."  So he says, "Art, it ain't going to be that easy," and I say, "Why?  She's good, she's going--she's got pizzazz," I'm selling him.  He says, "Okay Art, all right slow down.  We have Phil Donahue here at NBC; he does the morning 'The Phil Donahue Show' inside 'The Today Show' ['Today'] every morning from the Merchandise Mart.  We have the number one talk show host guy in America, you want me to hire this lady I never heard of before?"  And I say, "Absolutely she's that good."  So he says, "Okay Art," (laughter), "I'll take her out to lunch and we'll talk it out," and I said, "You'll see what I'm talking about, you'll see what I'm talking about."  He--we set it up and he takes Oprah--goes out to lunch with him they take a three hour lunch, she--'cause she's good at gab, the gift of gab.  She comes back and he walks her right into my office and he says, "Nice meeting you Oprah and Art thanks a lot, wonderful person, wonderful personality," blah, blah, blah.  So he walks away (whispers), "What did he say Oprah?  He said, "He made me kill myself." I said, "What do you mean?"  "He said, 'What would you do in my shoes?  I've got Phil Donahue here and then I have Oprah Winfrey, what would you do in my shoes?'"  He made her shoot her own self in the foot in so many words.  So she said, "I'd go stay with Phil Donahue," and that's what he did.  Fast forward twenty years, I'm at the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] conference one of these I was president.  He walks up to me and says, "Art I can't believe I didn't listen to you; I'm supposed to be the guy that recognizes talent.  Two days before Dennis Swanson hires her at ABC and she re-writes the record book for on air talent, I had her to myself and I couldn't see what [HistoryMaker] Art Norman saw and I'm supposed to be the guy that develops talent.  What--," he kicks himself and he says, "I had to drink a whole bottle of liquor one night."  I said, "Let it go man, let it go."  He says, "I can't believe it."  See his formula--Max Robinson said his formula for success was probably Vanessa Williams, not the overweight, short hair, dark skinned Oprah Winfrey who has a heart of gold.  He saw the exterior and didn't see the heart and the first day she went on the air at Channel 7, I said, "Break a leg girl," she said, "I'm scared," and I said, "You're fine."  People at Channel 5 said, "Your girl's on TV, your girl's on TV."  So the first day she went on the air the ratings spiked a little bit and everybody at NBC said, "Ah, she just--people are just sampling Art, they'll come back to Channel 5, they're just sampling."  The next day twice as much, the next day four times as much.  She never looked back, the ratings shot up; the Vanessa Williams that they thought they should have hired was Oprah Winfrey.  And she re-wrote it, she got it so good that she--King World [King World Productions] said, "Let's go nationwide with this," and the rest is history.  She is now the Madam C.J. Walker of broadcasting, billionaire.
Story_ID: 668122
Speaker 1: All right, 1983 was--as Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] said, "We shall see in '83 [1983]."  Harold Washington ran for mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois].  Now had the campaign begun--began when you?
Speaker 2: Yes so I was here when that happened.  I was here because the forerunner to that was the fact that Jane Byrne invited Stevie Wonder to be host of the ChicagoFest and by the fact that she was vilifying and mistreating the people who lived in public housing, it didn't happen.  He refused to go inside the park [sic. Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois], and people led the boycott and that kind of opened the door for some kind of--because everyone in the City of Chicago liberal whites and blacks said, "You disrespected the poorest of the poor," and Harold Washington was--like Cadillac Al Johnson [HistoryMaker Albert W. Johnson] and Soft Sheen Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] and all these pillars of the community--financial pillars of the community, including those who were not like Lu Palmer, they were behind Harold Washington 100 percent. The movement was afoot to draft him.  I was there in those rooms, I was there when his original press secretary [HistoryMaker] Renault Robinson was putting things together and he was the guy that was vilified two years before because they made him walk the alleys at police headquarters as punishment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was in the late '60s [1960s].  He was on 'The Phil Donahue Show' actually when that happened talking about it.  That was when I first heard of Renault Robinson.
Speaker 2: Yeah so the--so Harold Washington picked all the right people and he, I was there when the movement started and I remember one thing that rings paramount on the night of the election.  Before he became mayor we were just covering as a generic story everybody said that he's going to--it's a three way race and Jane Byrne, Rich Daley [Richard M. Daley], Harold Washington, but in case--because the movement was so strong on the night of the election they had myself from Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] live in front of the Donnelly center, John Davis [HistoryMaker John E. Davis] from Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Bob Petty at Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and Bob Jordan [HistoryMaker Robert H. Jordan, Jr.] at Channel 9 [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  We were all on the perimeter on the street 'cause they thought there would be rioting.
Speaker 1: Okay four black anchors, I just want to make that point for those who don't know the names.  These are four black news reporters prominent in the city.
Speaker 2: Prominent in the city but we're on the perimeter of Donnelly Hall [Chicago, Illinois].  All the other reporters are on the inside covering what was going on but on the perimeter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In case there was a riot then they would see you all and they wouldn't destroy the sound truck (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's the only thing we could think of.  Why were we outside?  But it turned out to be so positive because when they came to me live and Jordan live and Petty live and John Davis was live, we said, "People are dancing in the streets following an unprecedented mayoral victory tonight for former congressman, Mayor Harold Washington--Mayor elect Harold Washington."  And it was--people were crying in the street, that was not part of the equation.  If you remember that night the Negro National Anthem ['Lift Every Voice and Sing'] was being played and Walter Jacobson looked at Bill Kurtis and says, "What is that song, I've never heard that song before?"  That was the level of disrespect that was going on, on the air and all of the blacks were on the perimeter which would have been maybe riot duty or something like that, turning over cars and stuff like that.  That didn't happen, it was very peaceful, people were crying, they were happy.  But it turned out very positive and after that they assigned me to cover Harold Washington up until the day he died I covered him at city hall.  I had an office on the first floor with Chinta Strausberg, [HistoryMaker] Monroe Anderson.  Monroe Anderson was actually the guy who wrote an article in the Chicago Tribune saying, "Mathematically, Harold could actually win this," and man they beat him up so bad.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah I remember Dick Kay and some of the others saying, "Oh this is impossible," (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Oh, impossible."  (Makes sounds).
Speaker 1: Andy Shaw--
Speaker 2: It's--Monroe held his ground, he was crunching numbers and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Monroe is with the Tribune.
Story_ID: 668123
Speaker 1: Chinta Strausberg--
Speaker 2: Chicago Defender (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at one time seemed to write all the articles for the Chicago Defender.  So whenever you picked one up except for [HistoryMaker] Earl Calloway everything seemed to be written by Chinta Strausberg.
Speaker 2: She had like nine, twelve bylines in the paper on one day (laughter) that's right.  And here's the thing.  We'd be in Harold Washington's--we used to go up to Harold Washington's office at lunchtime 'cause when you're in the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois] every day a different restaurant caters lunch.  So Chinta said, "The mayor wants us upstairs."  So all the black reporters would go up there to his office and man they would lay it out man.  We'd sit up there and, "Man this is cool, this is all right," and so he'd get there and say, "Listen I'm announcing the police chief tomorrow but I'm going to give it to Chinta, you guys have to sit on the line."  We said, "Why?"  He said, "Because she works for a black publication, I want her to have it.  I used to sell the Billiken--I used to be a Bud Billiken [Bud Billiken Club] as a young man, I'm going to give it to her, y'all just have to," and back then was [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page became a reporter covering Harold Washington.  So he sat us down and he said, "Y'all just have to digest the fact that Chinta is going to break this story, and it's going to be Fred Rice [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] tomorrow and he's going to be announced as the new police superintendent, the first black police superintendent 'cause I'm getting rid of Brzeczek [Richard Brzeczek]."  So, "Okay," so we had to--we went along with that plan and it turned out to be very nice. The Defender got a lot of the breaking news stories through Chinta Strausberg, he loves Chinta Strausberg.  Harold would invite her up just to sit around and talk.  Harold Washington loved Chinta Strausberg, he loved talking with her.  He said, "I can't believe you wrote all these articles."  He would be amazed that she--she would, "Oh I'm okay, I'm okay," it was one of those things.  But he was very cordial, easy to talk to and he was followed by Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] who was unique in his own way because he was--you've got to remember Gene Sawyer was a former school educator, a product of a historically black college [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and when he did his budget--the school budget--the city budget, he published it in black and gold.  He'd be in the news conference saying, "[HistoryMaker] Art Norman.  Did you see the colors of this city budget?"  And everybody--all the reporters would say, "What's with the city budget it's just black and gold, what's the difference."  He says, "Not purple and gold, black and gold," man, so he would--
Speaker 1: The significance is Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] versus Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Harold Washington used to do the same thing.  He would talk--say things about the voodoo that's being spewed by Ed Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] and Ed Burke [Edward M. Burke] and the Vrdolyak twenty-nine and how they were hostile to the black community.  He would articulate that and a lot of the things that he--he would give us exclusive interviews to things, but always the best of the interviews went to the Chicago Defender.  We had to--we had to understand that and we didn't mind.
Speaker 1: I know Andy Shaw represented Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] on that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Before that--him--was Hugh, Hugh [Hugh Hill]--with the red hair.  What was his name?  Hugh--
Speaker 1: Oh, Hugh, I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Hugh--I can't think of his last--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 668124
Speaker 1: There was a lot turmoil when Harold Washington passed away.  Now, some people thought he was killed and the way--the speed in which the city council [Chicago City Council] moved to replace him, you know made a lot of people suspicious.  He hadn't even--
Speaker 2: Conspiracy theories were rampant and I remember talking to one of the doctors who was in the room when he passed away, Dr. Barbara Norman and she was saying there was no conspiracy, he died of an apparent cardiac arrest and the facts would bear that out in the long run.  But there were so many people naysaying and saying it's a conspiracy, he was murdered.  But the medical community knew what really happened and the black medical community. So it was one of those things that was real sad because that morning I was supposed to have gone out--when he broke ground he and Alton Miller were out there breaking ground and he was picking up the shovel and he looked normal, he just--when he got back to the office he just looked like he was taking a nap and he was really gone, that's what Al Miller said.  So it was a sad time and a lot of first things happened after his death.  Johnnie Colemon [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon] who was at Christ Universal Temple [Chicago, Illinois] never had a funeral in her church until Harold Washington.  He was funeralized in her facility and it was so sad to see that happen, but it was a celebration.  People from all over the city.  His coffin lay in state at city hall and people from all walks of life cried.
Speaker 1: Did you cover all of that?
Speaker 2: I covered all of that.  I was on the front line of that covering it and I was there when the power struggle--see history will record that it wasn't easy for Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] to jump in there.  They had--they all kind of wars going on and people were jockeying position.  Gene Sawyer got the job initially right after he passed because he was the president pro tem of the city council and that's the man who is supposed to take over in the event of the death of the mayor.  But see you had Tim Evans [Timothy Evans] who was jockeying for position he didn't have that job but he was the mayor's floor leader but pro tem is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought David Orr was the pro tem.
Speaker 2: Well David Orr was on the Harold Washington twenty-one team.  If you look at the pictures on the wall at city hall he's there but he was only mayor for twenty-four hours.  From the time of Harold's death until Gene was appointed.  So Dave was mayor for twenty-four hours, that's about it then it became Gene Sawyer.  And that's when the--everybody thought it was going to be Gene Sawyer versus Tim Evans until the day before the deadline Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] filed a petition to run for office and he did the exact opposite of what Harold Washington did, divide and conquer.  No one saw the big picture that they were fighting--they were calling each other names and things like that.  It was horrendous to see it.  I mean you had people like [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman calling Gene Sawyer Uncle Tom Sawyer, "He can't talk," she called him Mayor Mumbles.  I mean this is a man who is an educator from a historically black college [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], he's well educated and he's a former alderman, committeeman, she called him Uncle Tom and Mayor Mumbles.  It was so sad to see the denigration of black people shooting down black people and then while all that's going on Rich Daley comes in and wins which is the way that Harold Washington won.  Rich Daley and Jane Byrne were going at it.
Story_ID: 668125
Speaker 1: Yeah the Harold Washington coalition was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --basically disintegrated after he died, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we thought there was--there was so much division.  At one time Judge Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham] was trying to mount a movement but it didn't work.  So there was a lot going on politically.  So now you look at Chicago [Illinois] politics and now you think about we had the ingredients and formula and you see Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in the White House [Washington, D.C.], that would make Harold smile.  Barack Obama idolized Harold Washington.  I saw some pictures of Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.], Harold Washington and a very skinny Barack Obama, in Roseland [Chicago, Illinois] of all places.  I mean this is--you've got to look.  This is before he became a senator.  These pictures are really indigenous to our community.  These people are--they, they worked--I remember one of the things that during the campaign for president they said, "Oh he's just a community worker."  I remember one time going down to Rainbow PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and Michelle [Michelle Obama] is sitting on the floor and Barack is sitting on the floor on the other side and there was a bus accident somewhere where twenty or thirty people were hurt and they didn't know what to do.  So the Cook County Bar Association used to do free legal work on a Saturday morning and you could just go there and get an attorney and it would be a lot of lawyers in there.  Michelle and Barack were one of the team.  They weren't a senator at the time, they were just successful attorneys and you get to see it 'cause I remember I said, she's real tall but the ladies respect her, Michelle.  She was--she was the smart one, everybody thought she was going to go places 'cause she was being mentored by [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett's--[HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett.  So we used to hang out with her all the time.  Now all these people that we know are in the White House, it's kind of crazy, it's crazy.  I remember Vernon Jarrett used to say, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman]," because he was a guy that really mentored me, he said, "what you doing?"  And I said, "Nothing." "We're going to Gladys' [Gladys' Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois] for lunch," and I said, "Okay.  Who we going to have lunch with?"  He said, "Valerie, she needs some edumacation," (laughter).  We'd sit around there and just chew the fat.  Vernon was kind of--that kind of a guy; he was a kind of guy like that.
Speaker 1: She was the daughter in law--
Speaker 2: His son, his son, she kept his son's name.  They used to run an AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] clinic in the Roseland community, Vernon Jarrett's son and he died prematurely.
Speaker 1: He was Bob, Bob Jarrett [sic. William Jarrett]?
Speaker 2: Was his name--
Speaker 1: Was it Bob Jarrett?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure but I remember Dr. Jarrett, that was--and I've done several stories on the fact that AIDS clinic is still there and they are doing--I've done a lot of work on their--stories on that AIDS clinic, they're doing very well.
Story_ID: 668126
Speaker 1: How long did you--did you stay a political reporter or did you--
Speaker 2: No and then after, after the death of Harold Washington everybody's assignment changed and so then my attorney said, "You need to reinvent the wheel and repackage ourselves."  So we started doing positive stories in the community.  Making--we'd call it 'Beating the Odds' [ph.].  We used to have a segment every week--twice a week called 'Beating the Odds.'  We would actually highlight positive things in the black community because I remember when I was president of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] we did a study and we asked Father Pfleger to watch television five days a week and write down every time he saw somebody black on TV write it down and what were they doing.  So for five days--we paid him around five thousand dollars to do this.  So he had his parishioners watch TV for five nights--for five straight days and they had to log everything.  Ninety-four percent of the time the people who were African American or Hispanic and on TV were either victims or suspects in crime, that's the formula.  So when Susan Smith got on 'The Today Show' ['Today'] and said, "A black man stole my kid," that's the lady from South Carolina, she fell into that trap, that's our fault as journalists.  We need to start thinking about telling positive stories.  So myself and Lester [Lester Holt] and [HistoryMaker] Bob Petty and all of us got together and said, "We're going to just tell positive stories," so we were going to pitch it together.  So we all got together and said, "This is what we're going to do."  I did the pitch at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and Clarence [HistoryMaker Clarence Page] did it over at Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and then he left there then he went to the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] but John Davis [HistoryMaker John E. Davis] started pitching, he and Burleigh Hines pitching positive stories at Channel 2.  Bob Petty started pitching them over at Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Charles Thomas.  And that's what we did, we'd pitch these positive stories and it went over.  I mean they weren't the first block of a new show but they were in the news show. So in other words if you saw, oh a black doctor saves some lives, and the first born in the New Year was actually a black doctor.  Or the person who did open heart surgery and saved--that it was a black woman donated her organs just before she died, or things like that.  In other words we have to change the formula for blacks in the network, so if you watch TV for straight--a solid straight days according to Father Michael Pfleger, 97 percent of the time they were either victims or suspects in a crime, that is our fault for letting that happen we need to change the formula that's what we did.  We did that in all the television stations in Chicago [Illinois].  So we--
Speaker 1: This is an initiative of the NABJ and (unclear) in Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right NABJ and the formula was put together by--I asked [HistoryMaker] Ken Smikle to shepherd that, and I told Ken, I said, "Listen I need you to write a foundation grant so we can get Michael Pfleger the money to do this," and that's what he did 'cause you can't tell people to watch TV for seven straight days and say, "Thank you very much, have a nice day."  Pay them, you know what I mean.  It's a study and somebody will do it and that's what Ken Smikle did.  Ken Smikle raised the money, got the money by writing grants and we actually did it and the research that we get back then is still paramount today.  So I was president but Ken was on the executive board of NABJ at the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)Right, he's--
Speaker 2: --and Melody Spann [HistoryMaker Melody Spann-Cooper] was my vice president.  We all did this because we, we didn't like the formula that was going on.  [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett was like the Grand Poobah he just sat in the back saying, "Okay," (gesture), "go," (laughter) funny guy.
Story_ID: 668127
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], now this is early--this is go--I'm backtracking a bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but you received a news director's award for live coverage of a shooting in divorce court in the Daley Center [Richard J. Daley Center, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah we were out there shooting, doing--USC marching band [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] was there downstairs broadcasting live.  I was going to be live on the news and the USC marching band was there for some kind of a college thing.  So we went out there with the USC marching band blah, blah, and all of a sudden people are running by, I said, "What's going on?"  Hutchie T. Moore, police officer, paralyzed from the waist down, goes into divorce court at the Daley Center and the judge [Henry Gentile] tells him, "Everything that you own, all the buildings and apartment buildings I'm giving it to your wife [Dorothy Wright Moore]."  And the judge made his decision and Hutchie T. Moore--this is before they had metal detectors, he reaches under his shirt, it's in his lap, pulls out a gun.  He was a marksman as a police officer, shoots the judge between the eyes and shoots his wife's attorney between the eyes and throws down the gun.
Speaker 1: Between the eyes.
Speaker 2: Yes he's good and so that was--that story is paramount because after that metal detectors in all office buildings in the City of Chicago [Illinois] and around the country.  But the point, that happened in Chicago a judge is killed and the judge--Piszczor [James Piszczor] is the attorney.  But that happened in town, Hutchie T. Moore, a disabled police officer and an expert marksman did that 'cause no one, at the time, now you can't do that.  You can't walk into a police--you can't walk into a courtroom without going through a metal detector, you see what I mean.  So but that happened and I got an award for that live coverage.  We're out there live.  There was no like--see when you're live you've got to think on your feet, you've got to--you've got to feel what's going on and I was talking to people as they were coming out.  Says, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman]--," see one of the things that we do as reporters sometimes we'll get to the scene at the same time of a police officer.  So the facts come from the witnesses.  So as they are coming down the stairs, "Come here, what happened, come here what happened?"  I'm getting all that, you go to about fifteen or twenty of them now you've got the full story.  Then you turn around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is, this is--
Speaker 2: --and go live on the air.
Story_ID: 668128
Speaker 1: This is interesting because you spent a great deal of time as a reporter but you've never been trained as a reporter, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah--writing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean as such, you were an engineer then, then read the news--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then became an anchor, I mean a reporter (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well my major is math and physics, my minor was English.  I was always real good in English, writing, but the people skills of actually--you learn that on the ground.  I learned that, you know, on the ground.
Speaker 1: See you were basically--you had to pick it up as you were doing it--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and you had to be mentored by people that were doing it.
Speaker 2: Yeah well my mentors were the, you know, [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett.  Bob Joh- I used to have lunch with Bob Johnson [Robert E. Johnson] once a week, the editor of Jet magazine.  I used to go over there and sit down--just sit down and talk to him.  He was such a wealth of information.  I would sit down and have lunch with Vernon Jarrett, such a wealth of information and if I'm real lucky I'd go have lunch with [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson, oh that's big time and he has his own cafeteria there.  It cost like ninety-nine cents, you sit there and eat all you want and he said, "Norman [HistoryMaker Art Norman], you have had seconds now, how many times you going to go up to eat," (laughter).  But he--he would have fun with me you know but the point is you sit around these people who are professionals in the field and they give you feed back.  "How you doing on the air?"  "How you think I'm doing?"  They give you feedback.  "You could do this better, you could do that better, how many people did you talk to, you need to talk to more people.  Why do you always"--
Story_ID: 668129
Speaker 1: I know one of the things that, that really helped me, the Andrew Wilson trial was going on in Chicago [Illinois].  These are the two people, Andrew--the Wilson brothers, they shot officers Fahey and Flynn [sic. Richard O'Brien], in cold blood.
Speaker 2: Fahey and Flynn--
Speaker 1: Officer--these are two police officers, I may have the wrong name--Fahey, no, William Fahey and the other he's a Flynn and I--don't know if it's his first name or last name but the point is he killed two police officers in cold blood and they did it.  And one of the things that I'm covering it and I'm like--'cause I'm sitting there and I'm watching, I'm at the trial and I noticed one thing, they're being tried by a six man, six woman jury but there are no blacks on the jury.  So I said, "I'll put that in my story."  So everybody else covering the same story and everybody said six man, six woman jury. Six man, six woman jury, and I said all white jury.  Everybody said, "Why did you say that?"  I said, "It's important.  These are two black men.  Maybe they did it, maybe they didn't, it's not up to me, I'm just a journalist, but there's an all-white jury," and that's very insensitive to me because I'm coming out of North Carolina.  Those kinds of things--(gesture) bells, ring off bells.  So I've, I've covered my story--did the story.  Five years later the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the verdict because they were tried by an all-white jury, they had to go back to trial and when they looked at the stories I was the only reporter highlighting it every day--in every one of my reports, an all-white jury, an all-white jury, an all-white jury.  Everybody else just six man, six woman.  It was sensitive to me 'cause I'm out of North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Did you ever get like push back from the management of WMAQ [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] about that kind of thing?  Say, "Well you shouldn't say that Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], you shouldn't highlight (unclear)," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No one said it, no one articulated that but some people who look like me said, "Art why did you have to say all-white jury, why didn't you be like everybody else six man, six woman?"  I said, "I don't know, it just," and they said, "I don't know Art you better slow that--slow your roll," (laughter).  The same thing happened to [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders.  Nelson Mandela was about to be released and he was saying that the--all that week they were talking about black on black crime, black on black crime.  So Bosnia Herzegovina happens, in Bosnia where they're doing the same thing they're doing in South Africa.  So Warner gets on the air and he says, "White on white crime."  Oh my gosh he gets so many calls.  It was okay if he said black on black crime in South Africa but white on white crime in Bosnia Herzegovina was like an albatross, he got so many calls about that.  So I said, "You okay Warner?"  He says, "No I'm going to hold my own," and he stayed with it.  Every time he got--the station manager had to--he says, "Why do you keep doing that," and he says, "Well you didn't have a problem," this is Warner talking back to him, "you didn't have a problem when I did it with Nelson Mandela, why do you have a problem now?  It's fact."  He got a lot of pushback on that.  But no one ever questioned me about the all-white jury but my vindication came when the U.S. Supreme Court said that was against the law.  I mean against--well--yes, the Supreme Court said no.  So they had new trials and then they were eventually found guilty again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is the Wilson--Andrew Wilson--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Andrew Wilson yeah.
Story_ID: 668130
Speaker 1: You covered the Laurie Dann shooting in 1989 [sic. 1988].
Speaker 2: Yes, that was a classic case of--and I was here in the newsroom and they said the--and I was like the, myself and Tom Shaer, I was on my way to a story and they said, "Head over to Kenilworth [Illinois] over there."  I said, "What's going on over there?" He said, "Well there was a shooting and it was terrorism."  This very wealthy young lady from Kenilworth walked into a school [Hubbard Woods School, Winnetka, Illinois] with a gun, started shooting kids.  And we were live out there.  Broadcasting live during that shooting myself and Tom Shaer were the only people there on the ground at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  Both of us wanted--I mean he's a sports guy but he was at Halas Hall [Lake Forest, Illinois] at Bears [Chicago Bears] camp, training camp and I was on the North Side of Chicago [Illinois] and I got there.  He was on one side and I was on the other side of the school and it was weird because this young lady, she was a terrorist but a wealthy terrorist, from a weal- the cheapest house in Kenilworth is like $5 million.  You ever been there?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh they don't have a ghetto (laughter) but the terrorist was from--Laurie Dann was her name.  So it's a tragic story that happened and I got a lot of awards for that, journalism excellence.
Speaker 1: And it--now around that same time NBC moved from the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois] to the tower [NBC Tower, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes and I'm glad to say that the last newscast inside the Merchandise Mart was done by myself and Allison Rosati. We were anchoring together so we did the last newscast over there at the Merchandise Mart and the next one over here was Ron Magers and Carol Marin.  But the point is, so I'm part of a trivia question, "Who did the last (laughter) newscast at Channel 5 inside the Merchandise Mart?"
Story_ID: 668131
Speaker 1: Didn't have much. He used to be a bouncer at this club right down the street from here.
Speaker 2: Okay, we--we're rolling again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were just commenting off camera about Mr. T cutting down trees in Lake Forest [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I covered that story when I was out there with him when he was cutting down the trees and he didn't care who was watching.  He said--I said, "The community is upset with you for cutting down these big, gigantic oak trees," and he says, "They're my trees, they are on my land, I do what I want."  And he had a saw, a buzz saw in his hand and he actually chopped them down.  I said, "Wow."  He was very popular at the time because he was the star of 'The A-Team,' but he didn't care.  He--the man was a product of public housing, he was a bouncer for years at a place called Dingbats in Chicago [Illinois] and before that--and then Sylvester Stallone was at Dingbats one night, 'cause he had all those chains around his neck when you walked in he was the bouncer and Sylvester came into town and he said, "I like that guy," and he got him a role in a movie ['Rocky III'].  But that's how it happens sometimes you be in the right place at the right time.  But Mr. T did not back down, had plenty of money.  I remember when I was emceeing an event one night for the Boys Clubs of Chicago [Boys and Girls Clubs of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and they said, "If you go past eleven o'clock the waiters and waitresses would be on overtime.  So we have to end it at eleven," and so I'm emceeing and I said, "Mr. T you can only go talk for fifteen minutes," and he said, "Well how much would it go if I go to 12 or 11:30?" I said, "It's going to cost more money."  So he went to the--
Speaker 2: ATM [automated teller machine]?
Speaker 1: --Pastor Henry Hardy [Henry O. Hardy] and said, "Here's ten thousand dollars, if we run--I'm going to talk as long as I want," and he did and that money paid for--he didn't mind 'cause the money was going to the kids and he wanted to make sure his money went to the kids and he wanted to hear--they wanted--he wanted them to hear what he had to say.  I said, "Wow."  I'm sitting there watching him and he said, "You okay Norman [HistoryMaker Art Norman]," and I said, "Okay Mr. T," (laughter).
Story_ID: 668132
Speaker 1: Let's, let's talk about the Cook County [Illinois] sheriff's deputy story--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --department story, rather.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's in Dixmoor, Illinois and one of the things that, every year I used to emcee the NOBLE [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives] banquets, which is a black police officers organization, and I got a call from a group of police officers, sheriff's police officers, and they said, "Something is going on, is rotten in Denmark." "What do you mean?"  And he says, "We're having raids in communities and they are strip searching women inside clubs for no apparent reason."  I said, "What?"  So what we did we got our camera crews out there and we started following the Cook County Sheriff's Office and I was no big fan of Sheriff O'Grady [James O'Grady] for doing this, but they went into a club in Dixmoor with a warrant for--marijuana warrant for someone who was in there, and they strip searched everybody in there including the sister of the mayor [David Johnson] of Harvey [Illinois] who was in there watching the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] game.  And the point we were trying to make in our story is the fact that if you had marijuana cigarette in Schaumburg [Illinois], should everybody in that nightclub get strip searched?  That only happened in the black community and here's another thing that was very upsetting according to the black police officer that approached me about it he said all the white officers were inside this club, the black police officers were on the perimeter, why?  And these police officers were mad and they started leaking documents, I'm not going to use names but they started leaking documents to me showing everything.  I got a copy of the warrant, I got everything.  They're looking for an outstanding warrant for a guy named John Doe for marijuana, why are you strip searching in plain view of everybody in the nightclub in Dixmoor?  Ah, that crossed the line.  It was at the time when--
Speaker 1: So they did this in public?  People were strip searched--
Speaker 2: Right in public.  And at the time O'Grady was running for office and I was on the radio talking about it on WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and V103 [WVAZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois] talking about my story, "Be sure and watch it that night," and who should I get a call--calls in Sheriff Michael Sheahan calls in and he says, "O'Grady ought to be ashamed."  I said, "Mr. Sheriff Candidate I can't have this conversation with you.  You have to be a listener like everybody else because you're running for office, and let the community talk this out." That's what I said on the air to him.  I said, "Listen Michael Sheahan I appreciate you calling in, that means a lot but I need you to back off," (laughter) and he did.  He did because it was--he was trying to politicize it.  I think it was a fact of life that you can't strip search everybody in a nightclub.  And they--they had everybody up against the wall then they started taking mug shots of everybody there in this black club watching the Bulls game that night.  You couldn't do that in Schaumburg, no.  So I did the investigative report on that with a lot of documents and won the investigative reporter of the year award for that series of reports.  It was not just one report, it was over five straight days of these reports.  And so it won a lot of accolades from IRE [Investigative Reporters and Editors], the investigative reporters organization (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668133
Speaker 1: So I think, at the time, correct me if I'm wrong (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think there were only two black investigative reporters in town, you and [HistoryMaker] Renee Ferguson, I believe.
Speaker 2: Well Renee Ferguson was like--she was at CBS at the time when I was doing--I think she was at--she had just come to NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] or she was just about to come to NBC.  I was--I was the political reporter for years here at NBC then I started doing investigative reporting because anybody is an investigative reporter if you've got the inside scoop, it can't be challenged.  I could make you the investigative reporter if I'm a whistleblower and say, "Here's the document that says X, Y, Z," now you're an investigative reporter because you have facts, you're armed with facts and that's what these black police officers did for me.  They weren't just all black.  It's like when the--I used to go to Michael Jordan's house in Highland Park [Illinois]; I used to go up there to hang out right. Every time I went there to Michael Jordan's house I get stopped.  "We had a report of a car looks like yours."  So I get to Michael Jordan's house and Dave Duerson [HistoryMaker David R. Duerson] says, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman] did you get stopped?"  "Yeah man what's up with that?"  So Juanita [Juanita Vanoy Jordan] would be upset, "Ah man they are ridiculous, every time somebody comes to our house they get stopped."
Speaker 1: Yeah he lives in Highland Park--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --an exclusive kind of white--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it turns out, most of the people who come up there had some status.  So fast forward three months later, six white police officers in Highland Park hold a news conference.  It wasn't sparked by Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] or Urban League [National Urban League] or anybody else, six white police officers hold a news conference saying that their boss [Dan Dahlberg] asked them to racially profile anybody going to Michael Jordan's house, and they held a news conference to that effect.  It was major news and now you fast forward ten years where are those six police officers?  None of them work for the Highland Police Department [Highland Park Police Department], they all got fired.  One of them is selling scholastic works but the point is it wasn't Jesse Jackson that did this or Jim Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] it was these guys.  They said, "This ain't right."  I mean Bill Cartwright goes to Michael Jordan's house and he gets pulled over, Dave Duerson and I we'd go together sometimes and we'd get pulled over, always.  They testified--Juanita Jordan and Dave Duerson testified in front of a city council meeting in Highland Park to this effect and I said, "Well I don't want to be up there when you testify," and he says, "Why?"  "Because I--if I--I might want to cover the story, I can't be a part of a story and cover the story, you see what I mean?"  So he says, "Okay."  But things like that happen once you--that's what investigative reporting is all about.  Renee is very good at it too.
Story_ID: 668134
Speaker 1: Do you have a journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: Treat people like you want to be treated, that's all.  You know, it's--there but for the grace of God it could be me.  I mean I'm--I'm a guy that's--whose mother and father--my mother [Mary Ball Norman] was infected with syphilis, she was born with syphilis after the government infected her, that's just wild.  My family is not supposed to be here but they are.  My mama--my daddy [James Norman] couldn't read, at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's also the kind of story that a lot of people would not believe on its face (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: They would say, "Oh wait a minute that's got to be some exaggeration."
Speaker 2: No I was on public aid my whole life.
Speaker 1: But time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --over time it's proven to be the truth.
Speaker 2: It's the truth you can't get out of it.
Speaker 1: Books written about it, it's part of a curriculum in sociology courses.
Speaker 2: I remember we used to stand in line when my mom would get welfare food, get that big block of government cheese, you know, sit there.  But it was fun, it's--a lot of people--you know, you come from the neighborhood and no one is rich, everybody's got a story to tell.
Story_ID: 668135
Speaker 1: When Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was first elected to the--Illinois state senate, I mean, did you think it was special?  I mean in terms of--
Speaker 2: I thought something was happening then that was above us all because he was running against a guy named Jack Ryan who was the darling of the Republican Party.  Every time Jack Ryan held a news conference he was in front of a group of young academic scholars.
Speaker 1: This was for the national center you're talking about.  We may as well go on and continue with this story. Go on I just want to make sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're talking about state senate?
Speaker 1: Yeah I was talking about the state senate, but it's okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, state senate is fine because he ran for office as a state senator after getting trounced heavily by [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush.  When he ran for, for--
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Congress, yeah.
Speaker 2: Congress on the day of the election, 90 percent of the vote went to Bobby Rush, 10 percent went to Barack Obama and wow.  I mean he had to feel bad about that but who picked him up, Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.].  Emil Jones the president of the Illinois Senate said, "I see something in that guy."  He had him run for office for state senator and he helped--he drafted a lot of bills with Barack Obama and if you talk to Barack Obama today he will tell you that his political godfather is Emil Jones.  "He saw something in me."  I've seen--[HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment is former executive editor of Ebony magazine is getting ready to write a book about Emil Jones and Barack Obama and I don't know what it's going to be called but it will probably be something like, 'Godfather to the President.'  But he's got--she's got some pictures of Barack Obama and he looks like he's sixteen years old standing next to Emil Jones.  That's dues paying time.  And he runs for the state senate and he's--and because Emil's president of the senate, now he get Barack to introduce bills and he's very articulate.  So he's now on the floor introducing bills and very good with his words and this is, this is--he's Emil Jones' guy.  So wow he's good, he's good and I said, everybody saw something in him because he was Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyer who had just got beaten badly by Bobby Rush (laughter).  They said, "Man, don't mess with Bobby," but then after that he runs for office again and he's going to run for U.S. Senate spot. So, said, "Oh man this is going to, this is going to stretch now, he's got to go downstate."  Everybody in Chicago [Illinois], it's hard to go downstate and win an election and he's running against a guy named Jack Ryan.  Jack Ryan is the darling of the Republican Party and he's always holding a news conference in front of academic scholars in Chicago, he's going to--he's got it made.  All the polls say that Jack Ryan would win by a landslide.
Speaker 1: I remember the commercial of Jack Ryan with the black kids at Providence St. Mel [Providence St. Mel School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right, unbelievable, that's what--then all of a sudden (makes sound) a report comes out that his wife Jeri Ryan divorced--that was--a document became unsealed, it turned out that he was doing something very dastardly with his wife during their marriage and those documents became unsealed and the head of the Republican Party said, "This looks bad," and he dropped out of the race.  He dropped out of the race and everybody said, "Who are they going to get now?"  Who did they get, Alan Keyes from another city in another state.  That's why I said man this guy--how lucky can you get?  He's going to run against Alan Keyes?  And everybody in the Republican Party hates Alan Keyes.  So he wins handily.
Speaker 1: Alan Keyes moves to South Chicago [sic. Calumet City, Illinois] for, for I think a month or something.
Speaker 2: For a month.
Speaker 1: Yeah it didn't work.
Speaker 2: It didn't--Alan Keyes, someone in his family is gay and he vilified them publicly.  It didn't, it didn't work out very nicely so everything that happened to Barack Obama I think it's--he's been anointed or the stars came in the right place at the right time 'cause it's unbelievable where he came from to where he is now.  Man.  Jeri Ryan [sic.] was supposed to have been the man and then they unsealed that court document and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 668136
Speaker 1: Did you have any opinion about Jerry Springer's presence on Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois]?  I think the news director changed and they had--they were trying a new approach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes well see--
Speaker 1: --and they brought Jerry Springer into--
Speaker 2: Yeah but let me paint you a picture of what was happening outside.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were inside the building in the news room at Channel 5, I'm here with Ron Magers, Carol Marin, [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders, Dick Kay, all of us were here doing our jobs like we do every day.  Then the president of NBC locally walks up, every month--every rating period we're a half point behind Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  So the president of NBC says, "You know what? If I can get Jerry Springer to do your final thoughts at the end of every newscast we can get Jerry Springer audience and we'd beat Channel 7."  What?  And so he says, "We're going to do it." So Carol Marin and Ron Magers said, "We're not going to sit up on the set with Jerry Springer.  He's a panderer of negativity," and they said, "No I'm paying you a million dollars a year to be an anchor person at NBC and you will sit there on the set, anchor the news and introduce Jerry Springer." Carol Marin and Ron Magers said, "Oh no we won't," and they walked away from the job making a million dollars a year. But one of the things they told us, they said, "Listen Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], Warner, Dick Kay all you guys come let's get together, don't y'all join this.  You all sit on the sidelines and watch.  This is bigger than both of us."  And the next day there were about two hundred people picketing in front of the NBC Tower [Chicago, Illinois].  They had Clay Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Clay Evans], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], religious left and religious right.  Father Andrew Greeley and all the nuns, "How dare you put Jerry Springer on the ten o'clock news, this is a family station."  It was so thick every day that the president of NBC got fired.  And that was an African American his name is Lyle Banks.  He's the one that came up with this idea and Scott Sassa the president of the division came to Chicago [Illinois] one day and fired him personally.  Unbelievable.  And he was gone just like that.  The next day we hired a guy who was president and chairman of the board, chancellor communications, Larry Wert and he came in he was a cheerleader, rah rah sis cum ba.  So he said, "Warner Saunders, Allison Rosati--Allison you anchor the news in the morning, Art I want you to be my main anchor, Warner you're anchoring the news at 4:30, I want you to be the main anchor 'cause Ron and Carol are gone, they made a stand."  So Warner and Allison became the main anchors at Channel 5 and that's how it happened and we built it back up slowly, one step at a time.  But the--I remember one time there was conversation with the--Lyle Banks and he was--we were trying to tell him that, "This ain't going to work," and he said, "Listen you just do your job, I'm the general manager let me do this."  He walked up to Warner one day and he said, "Warner you don't fit into my future plans."  Warner used to do--anchor the 4:30 and the 5:00 news.  Just before he did this Jerry Springer thing he dumped Warner's newscast.  He said, "You're not doing the 5:00 newscasts anymore; you're just doing the 4:30.  You represent somebody who is not in my future."  Larry Wert comes in and makes him the main anchor and we're all sitting there saying what Ron said and Carol said, "Stay on the sidelines, they are the big dogs."  They did all the interviews on the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], on CBS, ABC saying what they thought about this debacle in Chicago.  Jerry Springer.  And it didn't work, it didn't work at all.  But he's a popular guy on that realm of television but you can't mix Jerry Springer and legitimate news together.
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember that was a big, big news story at the time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow, yeah.
Speaker 1: --something that shocked everybody.
Story_ID: 668137
Speaker 1: At a certain point you started doing a show called 'Art Norman's Chicago.' In 2002 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is--it was 'Beating the Odds,'  'Beating the Odds' [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Beating the Odds.'
Speaker 2: --and then I changed it to 'Art Norman's Chicago' because I wanted to put my name on it and--what we did we found stories.  It's not just black stories, we did the Irish American history museum [Irish American Heritage Center, Chicago, Illinois], we did the Chinese American culture organization [Chinese American Museum of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], we featured the artists who were in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], Bernie Wong [Bernarda Wong] who founded all kind of cultural institutions in the Chinese American community during Asian Pacific Month [Asian Pacific American Heritage Month].  We did all kinds of people.  So 'Art Norman's Chicago' is a city devoid of racism and stereotypes.  So every week we featured a different story.  We just did a story on 'Art Norman's Chicago' where a young lady who was sold into slavery by her mother and father--her mother.  She was three or four years old sold into slavery and became a prostitute at the age of three or four because somebody liked having sex with a three or four year old.  Her mother sold her into slavery.  Now she's part of a network of people who--her father found her and got her back and now she's a spokesman for--for those children who are sold into slavery and they're around the country they're trying to get them back.  We did that story, it's called the Bottomless Closet [Chicago, Illinois] where they actually go out and they make trinkets and beads and scarves and their made by some of the women who have been abused for a long, long time in a slavery environment.  This young lady she's Irish and her mother is Irish and her father is Irish and he said, "I got my daughter back."  So interviewed everybody and this is a feel good story about a young lady who is down and out but not totally out because she came back, she's got her life back.  She's a ballet dancer now, she sings in church and she's rescuing women every day.  Some of these women are abandoned and they run away from home and you find them inside of a Trailways or Greyhound bus station.  These are the kinds of stories we tell.  We did a story about a kid who was at the Chicago Bulls.  This little boy's name is Noah [Noah Stuart]; he's had four open heart surgeries.  He is eight years old; he may not be here next year.  So we did a story on him through the organization where they actually--the Chicago Bulls called and they said, "Listen we've got this great story, he--Make-A-Wish Foundation.  He says he wants to be--his name is Noah and he wants to be Benny the Bull and he wants to hang out with Yannick Noah." I said, "Let's make that happen."  The Bulls called, said, "Okay we can do it," Reinsdorf said, "Let's do it."  So we go over there, the little kid, he's about this tall (gesture), working out with Yannick Noah who is seven feet tall.  It's the greatest shot you've ever seen and during the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh Joakim Noah you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah Joakim Noah, Joakim Noah.
Speaker 1: Yannick is his father.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's his father I'm sorry.  And Joakim and so--thank you.  So Joakim says, "Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman], we can do this story," and I said, "You're sure?"  He said, "No problem."  Then so I said, "Let me get Benny the Bull.  Benny the Bull you might make a little outfit for him?"  "Sure."  So in the beginning you know how they dim the lights and Benny the Bull waves a flag, on that night this little eight year boy was waving the flag with Benny the Bull and he gets to work out on the court and he's hanging out Derrick Rose and the whole team and made his day.  That's what Make-A-Wish is all about--Make-A-Wish Foundation to give--some of these kids won't be here next year or next month or in five years from now.  But their last wish and their best wish to feel good today.  So we did that story about how people helping people make a difference.
Speaker 1: How do you choose your story ideas?
Speaker 2: People write us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People write us and say, "Art I've got a good story for you, my son is this and he wants to--can you make that happen," and I say, "Okay let me make some calls."  The Bulls--I called Mike Reinsdorf [Michael Reinsdorf], I said, "Mike can we do this," and he says, "You are in luck," and I say, "Why," and he says, "Noah is injured so he--he's got plenty of time, he's not playing at the beginning of the year," so I said, "Cool."  So we get him to work out, we take him into the gym and it's probably one of the best stories.  It's now--that story that we did is on the Bulls' website now.  The point is it's there and you can go see it and it makes you feel good.  When you look at a story like that, it's 'Making a Difference,' 'Art Norman's Chicago,' 'Beating the Odds,' these are people--we did a story on [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson where he came from with a $450 check--public aid check started him on this--to be on the Fortune 500 list of the richest people in America.  What a story from John H. Johnson.  That's beating the odds (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668138
Speaker 1: A lot of people saw that story too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And talked about it.
Speaker 2: My gosh [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson was--what a--and he, I'm sitting there interviewing the guy who is my mentor like, "So what you going to ask me Norman [HistoryMaker Art Norman], what are you going to ask me?"  I said, "I don't know man I'm just--I'm playing it by ear."  "No you got to tell me what you're going to ask me," (laughter).  So Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] says, "Why don't you tell dad what you're going to ask him."  I said, "Linda I really don't know, we're going to have a conversation," and he was cool with that because I was honest with him and I've been around him a lot.  I'd go have lunch with him.  It's just that he's a good guy--he was a good guy.  I was there at his funeral with Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came in and walked Eunice Johnson into the chapel--Rockefeller Chapel [Rockefeller Memorial Chapel, Chicago, Illinois] it was a sad day but there were so many people there.  I was sitting there next to Lacy Banks and Lacy Banks said, "Man," he was crying he says, "man if it wasn't for John H. Johnson they fired me but they hired me back, people don't know that about John H. Johnson.  Today I'm the sports editor of the Tribune [Chicago Tribune]--of the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]," amazing story.  Said, "Wow, that's John H. Johnson."  So you run into people and they make a difference in your life.  Make a difference--my, my series of reports are called 'Making a Difference,' 'Beating the Odds' [ph.] or 'Art Norman's Chicago,' so that's what it's all about.
Story_ID: 668139
Speaker 1: How did you--now I know you re-, you retired in 2009--
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well I retired because my wife passed away from brain cancer.  My wife of thirty-eight years and I'll send you an article but wife of thirty-eight years with me and she had brain cancer and it was going to be a debilitating situation.  So she says, "Well just go on to work and have somebody take care of me," and I said, "Oh no, hell no, no, you're my college sweetheart I'm going to stay with you," so I stayed with her until she passed.  (Pause) Tough.  I told NBC, "I'm retiring."  They said, "Why, why, why?"  I said, "I don't want somebody coming into my house like a visiting nurse or something like that; I'll be there until she passed away."  She passed away in my arms.
Speaker 1: This is 2009, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She had a chance to see the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was very happy about that.  She was very happy about that.  She called her father [Selma Outerbridge], she called her mother [Ruth Outerbridge], we took pictures.  As a matter of fact we have a house in Galena [Illinois] and we used to go to Galena a lot and we'd see Michelle [Michelle Obama] and Barack.  I've got pictures of my wife and Michelle and Barack together, downtown Galena just hanging out.  And we--we had a good time.  You would--go to Galena and Michelle and my wife Ondi [Ondina Outerbridge Norman] would go hit the shops.  Barack and I would be sitting on the park bench talking, he'd be smoking his cigarettes.  The point is, it's one of those things, it's a good time.  We had--we had a lot of fun up there and she was so happy and--when they won the election, we were very happy for them.
Story_ID: 668140
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you see it coming, could you see the--
Speaker 2: Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] coming?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you could see it coming if you knew what to look for.  He had that charisma.  I remember when he spoke two years prior at the--I think he was a keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].  We knew that he had something, had that charisma of a Harold Washington.  He could captivate you with his words and he'd make you stand at attention like wow and that was good to watch that.  It was a good time to see so many people.  Some of the things that we remember about that campaign, some people--I know Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] opened a lot of doors for him in Iowa.  It was the coldest day of the year when he announced for president but he did it in Springfield [Illinois], the place where Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] kicked it off.  See when you kick off your campaign for president it means a lot.  So he did well and Oprah was right there with him, she loves him to this day, it's cool.  I mean Oprah--they said, "Art you want to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and stay in the Lincoln Bedroom?"  I said, "No I'm still a journalist I can't do that," I said, "but I, but I appreciate everything you're doing Barack."  We're still close.  I mean, I know--I was out at a dinner the other night with Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] and so he said, "Man I'm tight with the president," and I said, "I know you are he wouldn't be where he is if it wasn't for you."  He says, "Yeah," I said, "But do you have his phone number," and he said, "Yeah I've his number right here in the phone."  He pulls out his phone and I say, "Call him."  He said, "No I'm not going to call him," and I said, "Then you ain't got it."  So he said--he starts dialing and then he says, "(Mumbles) I'm here with [HistoryMaker] Art Norman," and he says, "The president wants to talk to you," and he passed me the phone.  "Hello?"  "Art why you picking on my man Emil Jones?" (Gesture), "I'm sorry Mr. President I just--didn't think he had your number," (laughter) and he said, "Art why you play me like that?"  I said, "I'm sorry; have a nice day Mr. President."  I give the phone to Emil and he says, "Huh, huh."  He got it like that.  I saw the picture when Barack came to town two nights ago for a campaign rally at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] and Emil and Barack were hugging on the stage.  It was good 'cause they--you can tell they have a long relationship it's not just a, "Hi how are you doing former president of the senate [Illinois Senate]."  No, they--they've served some time in Springfield together, long hours.  It was good to see, very good to see.
Story_ID: 668141
Speaker 1: What you described in this interview I think a lot--would surprise a lot of people, is the tightness of the black media community and the--
Speaker 2: Oh we're very good.
Speaker 1: --well the, the movers and shakers of the black community are, are connected.
Speaker 2: We're connected and we also mentor.  You go to Miami, Florida the number one anchorwoman in Miami, Florida is a former intern of mine, Robbin Simmons.  You look--you go to Raleigh, North Carolina, former intern of mine doing very well.  You look at 'Celebrity Fit Club' on VH1 my former intern Dr. Ian Smith.  You look down the line over the past thirty-three years, I have mentored over three hundred people, white and black.  You go to Detroit, Michigan right now anchor there former intern of mine, you go to Nashville, Tennessee white female, blond, blue eyes former intern of mine.  You go to Grand Junction, Colorado former intern of mine, they're white and black.  One of the things that's so cool about it I remember the guy Evrod Cassimy who's a morning anchor, number one anchor in the morning in Detroit.  He was in my office (unclear) so Alex [ph.] the white student from DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] said I've got a job in Grand Junction, Colorado.  I said, "Good, good," and he said, "I'll see you later Art [HistoryMaker Art Norman]."  I said, "Well he's next to go--Evrod will be next to go."  Two months later Evrod said, "What's happening," and I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "I sent over two hundred tapes, no one returned my phone call or email."  I said, "What?"  He says, "Maybe I need to think of another career," and I said, "No, no, no.  Listen, let's call Alex."  He said, "What are you going to call Alex for, he just got the job?"  I said, "Alex is going to walk your video tape resume into his boss."  He said, "Art I already did the research on that, .007 percent of the people in Grand Junction, Colorado, are black.  It doesn't make sense for them to hire me."  I said, "That's not up to you.  It's up to Alex."  My interns are very diverse in their thinking, I send the video tape resume to Alex and he walks it in to the news director.  A week later Evrod gets the job.  The point is--so I told my African American mentee, I said, "Listen.  That man opened a door for you, for the rest of his life you will kiss his butt on demand because when you had nowhere to go, he walked it in to your news director and now you're the number one anchorman in Detroit.  Don't you forget where you came from," and I'm yelling at him.  He said, "I've got it Mr. Norman, I've got it, I know."  So they had dinner together last week.  Evrod is now married and Alex is now dating a young person.  The four of them sat together and had dinner.  But they--I said, "You guys are friends for life, don't you ever forget that."  That's some the things that--these kids--they grow up and they're going to do great things.
Story_ID: 668142
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career is there anything major you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No because even your mistakes you learn from your mistakes.  I remember going to a Klan rally--yeah I can't believe that either, but it was one of those things that--I'm in North Carolina and I'm going to a Klan rally and the speaker is David Duke the grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK].  So I'm a wise bud and I said, "I'm going to call the Klan and say, can I do an interview, I'm not going to tell them I'm black."  So I say, "Hello David Duke."  "Yeah how you doing," he's coming in from Louisiana.  I say, "Okay I'm in Charlotte, North Carolina.  We are going to come over and meet you Concord [North Carolina] and we'll do a sit down interview where you're going to have the rally."  He said, "Oh great, great, what time are you going to get there?"  I said, "Two o'clock."  "Beautiful."  I said, "Oh man," I hang up the phone and said, "Whew what have I done?"  See these are the kind of stories I put on my video tape resume that in the next bigger market--love.  "What the hell did this Negro--?"  Anyway I get, I'm getting to go to their rally and so my camera lady is a camera lady and she's white female.  So I said, "Listen Marsha [ph.] when we get up there let me carry the bag."  "No, no, that's not your job," and I said, "It's going to look kind of weird."  "I don't care, my job is to be a camerawoman."  She was trying to make a statement that she didn't want anybody to take--I said, "All right, okay, okay."  So I'm getting ready to leave the station then I get a call from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  They said, "Mr. Norman [HistoryMaker Art Norman]," I say, "Yes," he says, "You're going to be out there at the Klan rally today, we got a--this is the FBI and we got a feeling that your civil rights are going to violated."  I said, "For real?"  He said, "Yeah I just want to let you know if you hear any gun shots immediately fall to the ground, immediately, and tell your camera lady the same thing.  We have agents and they've infiltrated the Klan and the Klan rally."  So I said, "Okay."  "So you just go out there and do the interview like you're going to do it but if you hear shots immediately go to the ground."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "We'll be out there but you won't see us."  I said, "Okay," I hung up the phone I said, "Marsha that was the damn FBI."  "Get out."  So I called the station manager over there and he said, "Well should we do anything?" And I said, "No, they're going to be out there."  So I get out there and as soon as I walk out there, get to the car everybody is like--it's a Klan rally.  Everybody's got their sheets on and stuff like that and they're like, "Hey nigger."  So I said, "Water on a duck's back, I'm not going to let it bother me," said, "I'm going to walk through this."  I walked through all those name calling things and I felt like Jackie Robinson, I know what he felt like all right.  So I went through it, got to David Duke he said, "I didn't know you was colored."  I said, "Yeah you got me; I'm the same guy you talked to on the phone.  You didn't ask me what color I was."  He said, "You know what you're absolutely right, and you've got balls to come in here," I said, "Absolutely."  So we sat down and did the interview.  We did an interview for about a twenty minute interview.  They gave me all kinds of awards for that interview but the point is I walked right into the lion's den and wasn't afraid and he had a lot of respect for me.  We did a good job--good interview and no easy questions, no powder puff questions.  I think I felt a little brave 'cause the FBI--I knew the FBI was somewhere nearby (laughter).  But these guys they were drinking, they were drinking liquor, they were getting liquored up and it was getting late.  I wanted to get out of there before it got night but the point is it was a hostile environment and I got out of there and I said, "Whew."  There are other times--I've seen some (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did Duke provide any escort for you to leave or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No just, "Thanks for coming by to see me, can we walk you to the car?"  And I said, "No I'm fine I know where, I know where it is."  He took a picture with Marsha the lady, he wanted to take a picture of all three of us together, we took a picture of them together, they took a picture and I said, "Fine."  I'm still alive (laughter) just one of those things you have to go through you know, it's North Carolina.  Wow, it's--things are different in North Carolina, so--but you bring that to the table to your next city or your next town, to your next assignment that you can do that--that you can do that, you can talk to anybody.
Story_ID: 668143
Speaker 1: I've looked down the barrel of a shotgun.  I was in South Carolina doing a story about the illegal fireworks sale which is kind of like Chicago [Illinois].  So I'm going to the guy right on the other end of the border of South Carolina, as soon as you cross the border fireworks are legal.  So I walked to this guy and said, "Hi how you doing," I'm by myself and a big old minicam truck.  I said listen, "I saw your fireworks sign," and he said, "Yeah," looking real mean.  "Yeah."  I said, "I'm with Channel 9 [WSOC-TV] in Charlotte [North Carolina], I wanted to come in here and talk to you about fireworks and I'm trying--," and he says, "You get the hell off my property."  I said, "Well I'm not that kind of a guy, I'm trying to get your side of the story because fireworks probably stimulate your economy, send your kids--pay your water bill, your light bill everything together."  He walks away, he comes back out, (makes sound) has a shotgun pointed at me.  I say, oh Lord I'm not going to turn around because he'll shoot me in the back so he's going to have to shoot me in the front, I'm not going to turn around.  So I said, "Okay you win, I'll go back to my car," and I'm by myself.  I back up to the car and drive off but my hands are shaking and he's--he threatened--he cocked the gun (makes sound) I say, oh my gosh, and I'm looking at the barrel of the gun and I say, what is the last thing you see before you die?  I'm looking at it and I say, what's going to come out the barrel of that gun is going to be--it's going to spatter me but I'm going to keep talking to him.  I said, "Listen I'm just trying to do a story, we just need your side of the story 'cause in North Carolina they think what you do is evil.  I think what you're doing is the right thing.  You're paying taxes on the sales of fireworks," I'm going through this whole litany of things that's right for him.  I got back in the car and drove off.  I had a wet spot in my car but the point is I got out of there.  You see a lot of stories like that.  A lot of stories that scare you to death, especially in North Carolina.  I went to a Jesse Helms rally--get out the vote rally.  Why did I go there?  But it was a--no one liked me but they knew who I was so I stayed there, got an interview with Jesse Helms.  What's so weird with Clarence Thomas was confirmed to the United States Senate--to the U.S. Supreme Court, Jesse Helms and Strom Thurmond walked him into the chambers with his white wife [Virginia Lamp Thomas].  Now I know Jesse Helms personally now, Jesse Helms don't like nothing interracial, neither does Strom Thurmond.
Speaker 2: Well he did have--
Speaker 1: He did have a daughter [Essie Mae Washington-Williams]--
Speaker 2: It doesn't mean he liked it though.
Speaker 1: And--and I have met her but I didn't know it was his daughter, she's at South Carolina State [South Carolina State University], Orangeburg, South Carolina.  But it was one of those things that she never told anybody about the connection, she kind of--she had his nose I noticed that.  But those kinds of things happen so I just let it slide.  You see a lot of stories that--you know when to hold them and know when to fold them, know when to walk away and then when to hide.
Story_ID: 668144
Speaker 1: So I'm glad you raise these 'cause we missed them from the North Carolina segment when we were talking about it.  But that's--so did you ever encounter a time in Chicago [Illinois] where there was a dangerous situation that you found yourself in?
Speaker 2: Yes as a matter of fact I was covering a Harold Washington campaign and he was running for mayor and he was in town campaigning with Walter Mondale who was then the vice president of the United States.  So Walter Mondale is in Chicago campaigning with Harold Washington and they were in the St. Michaels church [St. Michael Lutheran Church] on the northwest side of Chicago.  Not a place to be if you're running against [sic.] Harold Washington 'cause you hated the man and the time he was running for mayor against a guy named Bernie Epton [Bernard Epton].  His campaign slogan was before it's too late.  Before it's too late what?  That was his campaign, before it's too late.  So Walter Mondale and Harold Washington get out the car--the entourage car to go speak--to go to the church and the N word is uttered almost in unison, N word, N word lover.  It was like--you could see the face and Harold Washington said, "Walter let's keep going, keep going, this is every day."  This was when his first campaign--it was so hostile I said wow.  Then you think about this happening then you think gee what was it like when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was alive?  I mean they spit on him in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois]--in Gage Park [Chicago, Illinois] they spit on him.  I just did a story, a 'Making a Difference' story during Black History Month.  The children of those whites who hated Dr. King so much found their mama's and daddy's Polaroid camera shots because when they mistreated black people they took pictures.  If you notice all the lynchings, they took pictures.  Well the parents of these kids took pictures when they mistreated King, spit on him, throw rocks at him and they have an exhibit now at the DuSable Museum during Black History Month, this is what our parents did.  How awful was that?  These are white kids having an exhibit at the DuSable Museum of African American History [Chicago, Illinois] and Dr. Carol Adams [HistoryMaker Carol L. Adams] put it on and it's just told by white kids about the atrocities that happened to King in Chicago and using all footage--Brownie, Instamatic footage of the hurling of the rocks and the N word signs and stuff like that, it was horrendous.  See the kids are saying--told me in my interview, "We are not our parents, we deplore this, that's why we put the exhibit together at the DuSable Museum."  So that was one of our making a difference stories and when I did the story everybody loved it.  Got an award for it--I got an Emmy Award for it last year.  But the point is those kinds of things happen.  Those are stories that are not told all the time.
Story_ID: 668145
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite story?
Speaker 2: Those--those are the kinds of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are the kinds of stories, that tell the story of the unsung hero.  It's always good to have--my, one of the stories the guy--every year we do a Hustle up the Hancock, you have to climb a hundred and something stairs.  Well the guy who climbed all the stairs had artificial lungs--he had cancerous lungs and the lady who died in an automobile accident in Northwest Indiana--Hammond, Indiana, she died very tragically but her family donated her lungs to this young man.  He is thirty-five years old and he ran all the way up to the top floor of the Hancock building [John Hancock Center, Chicago, Illinois] and her family has supported him every step of the way.  It was a feel good story.  This is the parents who lost their baby girl and this is a beautiful story to see.  But the point is he made it and one of those things his mentor for organ donation was Walter Payton.  You remember the Walter Payton story and how his liver was going down and it didn't get there on time but he was saved.  He has a picture of Walter Payton on his desk at work, he's a banker.  Now he can run with the best of them.  But he was, with--the lungs in this thirty-five year old man belongs to a sixteen year old girl who died in a--tragically in a car accident, unbelievable story.
Story_ID: 668146
Speaker 1: Once again when you look back over your career from where you started in North Carolina to today, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm as good as the people who I've mentored.  Don't ask--like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] used to say all the time, "Don't ask Dwight Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] about Dr. King 'cause he only knows what I told him.  I walked in the White House [Washington, D.C.] to get my Nobel Peace Prize they had tux and tails on, had my brand new Timex watch on everything was polished, my fingernails were done, so that's all he saw.  If you want to know something about Dr. King ask the janitor at the White House who I sat there and talked almost forty-five minutes before I got to see the president, and these--these--ask them."  Like the garbage man near the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee], ask those people about Dr. King.  So if you want to find out about legacy with [HistoryMaker] Art Norman ask one of these anchormen in Detroit [Michigan], ask the anchorman and anchorwoman in Nashville, Tennessee, ask these people who are mentored, 'cause they had to go to all my meetings with me.  Even the white students, my mentors, they are members of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], rule number one.  So like when you come to a NABJ meeting and here at NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] my interns were on the front door checking attendance and they were white it doesn't make a difference.  They walked in, sat down, did everything they needed to do, it doesn't make a difference.  But see they--one thing I like about my people, they're not afraid to go in the black community.  One of the things we found out, we used to go to Cabrini Green [Cabrini Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] all the time and they said, she's from Naperville [Illinois] and she said, "I don't know, I heard so much about Cabrini Green." I said, "99 percent of the people at Cabrini Green are decent people.  It is that 1 percent that gets all of the negative publicity."  So I said, "When you get out here walk like you're proud don't walk like you're afraid."  When we get out the car she's walking, they say, "How you doing."  Now she's talking--she felt so relaxed.  She had this innate fear of going into public housing.  It ain't like that.  So now she's in Nashville, Tennessee and she's not afraid to go into the black community to tell a positive story, she says, "There are a lot of stories to tell."  She does a great job, I've watched all of their videos. They are very good, much better than me, they are very good.  But they have a lot of diversity in their mind, you know.  So it works out.  Judge me by how my kids--how good my kids are doing.  I've had over three hundred people I've mentored.  A lot of the kids--we grab the kids in high school.  We--we have a program where we mentor called exposure.  We grab the high school editors of the various yearbooks and we grab them and we bring them up here to this room as a matter of fact, we mentor them on a Saturday.  We have a ten thousand dollar grant from the Chicago Tribune foundation [Chicago Tribune Charities, Chicago, Illinois] and we pay their lunch and we pay their cab fare or bus fare to get here and they do that once a month and that's our foundation.  We call that exposure--the National Association--NABJ exposure program, alive and well and doing very well.
Story_ID: 668147
Speaker 1: Tell us about--now, now do you have children of your own?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, I have a--I have a vegan, I don't know where he came from. I've got a vegan, Arthur, Jr. [ph.], he won't--he says, "Dad how can you go to McDonald's and eat the carcass of a dead cow?"  I said, "All right."  I said, "What about cheese?"  "I don't eat cheese, I don't eat eggs," I say, "Wow."  Now my other son is Moe [ph.] he eats anything, Harold [ph.] eats anything.  They are very good kids and--but they'll eat bacon.  So when we have Thanksgiving, my wife [Ondina Outerbridge Norman] used to fix a Tofurky for him, and every--we'd have a turkey and a Tofurky.  Because I didn't want to make him feel bad, I would eat the Tofurky because no one else wanted to eat Tofurky.  So I'd sit there with Arthur, Jr. and I would say, "Okay let's eat the Tofurky."  We'd sit there and eat Tofurky, it taste like turkey just the consistency is not there.  It's kind of like thick flour, polent- I don't know it's weird like yogurt, hard yogurt or something like that but it taste like turkey (laughter).  My son--I said, "Where the hell did you come from I raised you on--," and he's the one that did all this research about our family and continued our research and said, "You know we're Jewish."  I said, "All right you were baptized in a Baptist church, you ate bacon with everybody else now you're going to tell me you don't eat no animal products and we're Jewish," and he said, "Yeah."  So okay, shalom (laughter).  I love my kids though.  I can't--they can't--I can't be mad at them.  They're smart.  'Cause they, you know, one of the things that--some of the kids that they grew up with are strung out on drugs like my brother [Butch Norman (ph.)].  A friend of mine here at NBC [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] says, "Listen, I'm going to New York [New York] next week," and I said, "Yeah?"  And he says, "Give me your brother's address I'm going to look him up."  "No he'll see you as a mark."  The next thing he'll be saying, "You know I got hit in the head by Art Norman's brother he took all my money."  (Laughter) God knows that boy is crazy.
Story_ID: 668148
Speaker 1: And you remarried too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm remarried, I'm--one of the things, I was in the, in the--I used to see a psychiatrist once a week, grief counseling, and I was one of eight people in the class at Gilda's Club [Gilda's Club Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], which is a support center for people who have lost a spouse to cancer.  So I'm in this class of eight people, a bunch of different classes but I'm in eight--and I'm still in this class.  Eight people, six ladies and two guys, all of us have lost a spouse, or someone very close to them in their family.  So I sit in there and we can laugh together, we cry together, we talk about it and we talk it out and it's a tough environment but it's something that's very necessary.  And they're going through all of this, I meet this pretty little lady [Terri Diggs Norman], she's a Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], she was from--she's from Dayton, Ohio.  I said, "Man," so we get to talking and one of the things, when you at your lowest emotionally and you're not ashamed to tell somebody something like that, you get now move forward and I'm moving forward with her and she's doing very well.  You talked to her brother earlier tonight.  She's a very nice lady; she is a secretary for Delta Sigma Theta.  We go to all of the Delta conventions together and I'm kind of like a well kept man in the hotel.  We were at a convention in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], sixty thousand Deltas pre-registered.
Speaker 1: Yeah that was the 100th anniversary, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, said, "Wow," I couldn't believe all those people but it was very nice.  So God has blessed me to bring her in my life so I'm not a good single guy.  I'm not a bachelor, I'm not a philanderer.  I don't like to get out there and have fifteen different girlfriends.  I'm a well kept guy, I want to be stable.  I'm very conservative in my thinking and so--and plus my wife sings in church every Sunday, she's in the choir, beautiful voice.  This is kind of nice, she's done very well.  She's a sales center vice president for AT&T [AT&T Inc.].  She's been there she used to be with the--before she came to Chicago [Illinois] she was running the--helping run the telephone company in Dayton.  So she came out of there and so she went to Miami of Ohio [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so she's a pretty smart kid--very smart kid and she has a staff that's a very large staff and they all work for her.  She controls a lot of accounts, a lot of money and I try to support her as much as I can because that's one of the things we learned in our support group.  We sit with a psychiatrist and we talk it out, we've got to support each other.  Because if I had run into somebody else who knows nothing about support groups it would be pretty difficult.  Well you know it's some days I may just you know--I may get a little--feel a little sorry, you know, I might produce a tear or something like that.  But someone who is from my class, that's okay.  I'm fine with that--she's fine with that.  As a matter of fact she has never been married.  She and her father from Dayton were like together when he passed away from cancer.  She was devastated, I mean she was vice president of a major company and corporation; she needed some help so she went to the class.  We sat there, we talked to each other, one thing led to another and my boys love her (laughter) so everything is doing very well.
Story_ID: 668149
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There's nothing else?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, we're fine, we're fine we're just having a good time.  We're in Chicago, Illinois and I'm still mentoring young journalists of tomorrow today.  They're in high school, we mentor--we meet in the same room and when they get ready for video tape resumes, I'll make a call to all the different TV stations and I'll get the anchors and reporters who are members of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] to meet me in this room.  It's not a meeting, they are one on one with these kids helping to them to pick their college.  It's more than just being a journalist that's what I tell like Suzanne Le Mignot, the anchor-reporter here in Chicago.  She came over here and she was rolling up her sleeves and she was helping this kid pick out--she wants to go to Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  She says, "Okay but be ready now, if you go to Hampton you're going to get a lot more discipline than you would if you went to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]."  Then I had Marion Brooks over here who is from Portland, Oregon and she grew up in a--only black in an all-white community, she went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she says, "Well I was accepted to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but I didn't want to go because I didn't know how--anything about being black."  She went to Spelman and learned a lot, changed her life forever.  Those are the people adults I have mentoring the kids.  I'm running the organization and when I make a call they come and it's good to see it.
Speaker 1: Would you--you're sixty-seven now right, and are you--you're doing your show, 'Art Norman's Chicago,' you have the mentorship program and do you see yourself writing a book at some point about your experiences--
Speaker 2: Well that's something that I pondered but I wanted to write a book to help somebody else.  I don't want to write a book about me, I've got an interesting story but I want to write a book for a young kid from public housing or a kid who's--may want to change his life around, pick up this book and say, "Man I can do this," and maybe how to be a journalist.  All the journalism students in Chicago, they all know me.  High school, we help them pick out the college, pick out what school is good for journalism and things like that and, and I make sure that they--I have one kid who wants to be a weatherman.  A weatherman, he said, "Then you--have you ever heard of Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi]?  It is the number one school for meteorology in America."  Walter Payton's school.  He's going there, he's going there in the fall but the point is you've got to push them in the right direction 'cause right now they're coming out--they don't know anybody that went to college.  Like me I didn't know anybody that went to college.  I saw these men at Minisink [New York City Mission Society, New York, New York] and I said, "Oh who are these guys?  They've got college degrees, my mom [Mary Ball Norman] and dad [James Norman] only got a eighth and fifth grade education they must be doing something right," that's what we're doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Passing the torch, pay it forward.
Story_ID: 668150
Speaker 1: The last question--
Speaker 2: Uh-oh.
Speaker 1: --is similar to legacy--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but a little different but sir how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Helping those who can't help themselves, that's all.  There are a lot of people in the journalistic community that can't help themselves, there are a lot of people who we tell their stories they can't help themselves.  The kid [Noah Stuart] that we profiled the Chicago Bulls may not be here next year but he felt good being Benny the Bull and working out with Yannick--.  He felt real good doing that and that meant a lot to him.  His mother [Shweta Stuart] and father [Michael Stuart] cried during the story when they saw it on TV.  It made a difference.  Their son may not be here.  He's had four open heart surgeries; I don't know what's going to happen.  We did a story about the kids with cancer, cancer camp. We interviewed six kids, four of them are gone see what I mean but they had fun interviewing and being interviewed by me what they want to be and I ask them the question, "If you won a million dollars on the lottery what would you do?"  And the kids who are not here anymore talked about helping somebody along the way.  I said, "You don't want a car?"  "No I want to help somebody see their dreams come to--become reality."  These kids are gone now, cancer camp.  I spent a whole two days with them at cancer camp swimming and playing and jumping in the water. They are watching me, laughing at me jumping in the water, (makes sound), they had a good time.  It's a fun day every day, no two days ever the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that being the last (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You got any more questions?
Speaker 1: That's the last question.
Speaker 2: That's the last question?
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: You sure about that?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: You got one more (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So I just--I just want to thank you for your time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you very much.
