Story_ID: 613446
Speaker 1: We're gonna get started with our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview.  My name is Cheryl Butler.  I'll be conducting the interview today.  Scott Stearns is joining us as the videographer.  And I'm gonna have you say your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment, L-Y-N-N and N-O-R-M-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: Is there a middle name?
Speaker 2: Aurelia, A-U-R-E-L-I-A, Lynn Aurelia Norment.
Speaker 1: When were you born and where?
Speaker 2: I was born on February 13, 1952 in Bolivar, Tennessee.  And Bolivar is a small town about an hour's drive outside of Memphis [Tennessee] in West Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February 6, 2008.
Speaker 1: Where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: At Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], the eighth floor conference room, which is the Ebony floor.
Speaker 1: And what's your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist, magazine editor, managing editor, Ebony magazine.
Story_ID: 613447
Speaker 1: Okay, so just a few fun questions to get things started.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow, comes to the top of my mind, kind of a golden yellow, not a soft pastel yellow, but a nice, rich golden yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food, right now, I'm thinking pasta and shrimp.  That's what's on my mind.  I love shrimp.  I love pasta, but I like a good salad too so I guess that combination makes a ideal meal for me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sounds good.  What about a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Oh, the islands.  I would have to say Jamaica.  I've been there repeatedly, and I just feel comfortable, at home there.  I just love to just be on the beach and have my feet in the water and in the sand.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite season?
Speaker 2: Season, spring and fall.  Spring is so invigorating for me because it's like revitalization, everything is coming fresh and new.  So I like spring.  And then I like fall with the changing weather and the foliage and all of that.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: From myself or--
Speaker 1: Just something, you know, someone may have told you words of wisdom, something you've read?
Speaker 2: Just, just to always do the best that I can.  I mean you, you can't fail if you don't try.  And always just pursue excellence, you know, and I think about those words often coming from either my father [Alex Norment] or Mr. Johnson, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson.  They both were such inspirations to me, and they both were just great men, both from the South, Mr. Johnson from Arkansas, my father from Tennessee.  They had very simple backgrounds, really kind of impoverished, but raised in a rural area and they both had just such simple philosophies of life.  And that's kind of, that has been instilled in me, and just, you know, achieve.  Do your best.  Don't accept failure.  Don't feel like there's nothing that you can't do or achieve.
Story_ID: 613448
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's full name, including her maiden name and when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Esther Morrow Norment.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it also?
Speaker 2: E-S-T-H-E-R, M-O-R-R-O-W, that's her maiden name.  And, of course, she married my father [Alex Norment].  And that's Norment, N-O-R-M-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was, (makes sound) I'll tell you.  That's hard for me to say exactly the year.  I can't tell you because, I guess I think about she passed in, like when I was seven years old, six or seven going into the first grade or I'm sorry--I was in the fourth grade.  I was ten years old.  And I think that was about 1962.  And she was like thirty-five at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. So she was born in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she was born in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: And did she work?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was a licensed practical nurse at Western State Hospital [Western State Psychiatric Hospital; Western Mental Health Institute], right there in Bolivar [Tennessee].  Western State is and was a mental institution.  So people in other areas would say, "I'm gonna send you to Bolivar," you know, because there was a joke about the town being a mental institution.  People in Memphis [Tennessee] would joke about that, but, you know, we took that, but we're very proud of our city.  But Western State was a major employer (laughter) in our city.  And my mother worked there.
Speaker 1: Where was your mom educated?
Speaker 2: There in Hardeman County, Tennessee, went to, went to schools there in Hardeman co- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she go to college?
Speaker 2: No, she did not go to college.  She did finish high school.  She did not go to college.  My mother's background, she came from a sharecropping family, very poor.  But, of course, they didn't know they were poor.  They were happy.  She had like sixteen siblings and she was the oldest.
Speaker 1: The oldest of sixteen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the oldest of sixteen siblings.  And so it's a great family.  I'm still very close to--have a big extended family, still very close even though my mother died when, you know, when we were all very young.  But we were all very, very close.  We still grew up with her family as well.
Speaker 1: How did she pass away?
Speaker 2: Oh, she had pancreatic cancer.  And as I know now and every time I hear of someone with pancreatic cancer, I get rather sad because it's a, it's a disease that once you get, there's no recovery.  And it's, and death usually comes pretty quickly.  So there were five of us daughters--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, that she left.  So, but we had a close knit family and--
Story_ID: 613449
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about her [Norment's mother, Esther Morrow Norment], her parents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What's your maternal grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Morrow [ph.].
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that was her mother, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt Morrow.  Do you know approximately when she was born?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  No, it would have been the end of, before the 1900s.  And she would have been born there in Tennessee as well.
Speaker 1: And what about your maternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: His name was Johnie Morrow [John Morrow].
Speaker 1: And he was born around the same time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, and--
Speaker 1: What did he do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) right there in Tennessee, sharecropper.  Sharecropper.
Speaker 1: Was it tobacco or cotton?
Speaker 2: Cotton, just general farming there in Tennessee, um-hm, more cotton, corn and crops, not, didn't grow tobacco around that area.  But my grandparents, when we were very young, they packed up and moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  And most of their other children, I think some of my mother's siblings had already moved to the St. Louis area.  And they were working in the automobile industry, you know, in the factories.  And then my grandmother and grandfather packed up when we were little, and they all moved to St. Louis.  So that's where most of my mother's relatives are today.  So therefore every summer, we would go to St. Louis (laughter) to visit when I was a kid.  We knew we had our summer vacation in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's fun.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of your mother's siblings, at least some of them?
Speaker 2: Yes, she had a brother named Johnie Morrow [ph.].  I think that he was next to her in age.  And Wadie Belle Morrow Gregory [ph.].
Speaker 1: Wadie Belle.
Speaker 2: W-A-D-I-E, that was a sister who was, I think, a year or two younger than her, at least the next oldest to her; had an uncle named Ray Morrow [ph.].
Speaker 1: Pray?
Speaker 2: Ray.
Speaker 1: Ray.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Ray Morrow.  Alvis, A-L-V-I-S, Morrow [Alvis Morrow], and Joe Morrow [ph.]--these are some of the younger ones I'm naming now, a sister named Shirley [ph.] who was also very young, I mean young in the grouping, and Frances Morrow [ph.], Doris Morrow [ph.]--you want me to go on and on (laughter).  It's a lot of them.  Eddie, Uncle Eddie Morrow [ph.] and--that's all I can think of right now.  I should have written them all down.
Story_ID: 613450
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Did your mother [Esther Morrow Norment] tell you stories of her childhood in Tennessee?
Speaker 1: Well, my uncles did (laughter).
Speaker 2: What'd they, what did they tell you?
Speaker 1: About growing up on the farm in a big house that was rather drafty, and holes, you know, they were very poor and dealing with the animals on the farm--
Speaker 2: What kind of animals?
Speaker 1: --and the chores, you know, chickens and cows and pigs and mules, not horses, but mules, you know, and how far they used to have to walk to school, like ten miles.  I always wondered about that, but I'm sure that it's true, that they had to walk along a dirt road to even get to the main road to get to, to get to school.  Yeah, and so my uncle would, several of them are like real big talkers (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you wonder if they're telling the truth or they're like making up, like stories to entertain you.  But they told wonderful stories.
Speaker 2: Do you remember any of their--do you remember any of those stories?
Speaker 1: Well, one in particular from my Uncle Joe [Joe Morrow (ph.)].  We were very, very close to him.  He was one of the younger ones, but he was always talking about these ghosts in the house where they grew up because he swore that there were ghosts.  So he loved to tell us stories about the ghosts visiting.
Speaker 2: What did he say about the ghosts?
Speaker 1: Oh, they would come.  They would tap.  They would stand over you.  They would be there and how scared they were.  And, of course, their mother, my grandmother [Roosevelt Morrow (ph.)] never believed them (laughter), you know, so those kinds of stories.  And it was always good, fond memories that they all--they never had anything negative to say, never talked about how poor they were.  You know, they never said they didn't eat well or anything like that, so it was, it was always good stories, good memories and the family love and connectedness and the close knit of the family and how they--as the kids grew up and moved out and they would help others, you know.
Speaker 2: Did they ever talk about race relations?
Speaker 1: No, not that much because they all--no, they never talked about race too much on that side of my family.  But, you know, that was kind of understood.  It was racism was something you dealt with.  They never told any stories about racism or lynchings or witnessing anything like that.  But, you know, we knew that it was just a part of life then.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It was part of life.
Speaker 2: How far back can you go on your mother's [Esther Morrow Norment] side, generation?
Speaker 1: Well, her grandparents, and her mother's, grandmother's name was Mattie Sue [Mattie Morrow], and, and I called him Grandpa Lewis [Lewis Morrow], and beyond that, I never heard too much.
Speaker 2: What do you know about them, your great--your maternal great-grandparents?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, you know, and I recall them when I was a child.  I just remember them being warm and tall and elegant, kind of regal.  That was my recollection of my, of my grandfather--of my great-grandfather and my great-grandmother being very warm and hugging.
Speaker 2: Sharecropping family as well?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, sharecropping, impoverished, but like I said, my family, they didn't realize they were poor because there was so much love there.
Story_ID: 613451
Speaker 1: --Let's talk about your father.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's his name and when was he born?
Speaker 2: His name is Alexander Norment [Alex Norment].  He was called Alex.  But, you know, down in the South, names get all mispronounced, and he was called Alec, Alec, and people thought that his name was spelled A-L-E-C or something, and it was Al- actually Alex.
Speaker 1: Was he born in the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1921.  That stands out in my mind.  He was born in 1921, and I know he was about, you know, ten years older than my mother [Esther Morrow Norment].  That's why I say she was born in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Did he have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had siblings.  He had seven or eight siblings, and they grew up on a farm.  But they were landowners, and on a very, in a very good location there on the main highway is where their, their property was, and--
Speaker 1: What was the main highway?
Speaker 2: Highway 64 [U.S. Route 64], which went from Memphis [Tennessee] through other small towns and on through Whiteville, Tennessee which is where my mother and father were born and grew up.  And ten miles down the road was Bolivar, Tennessee, which is where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of your father's siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His--I'm trying to think exactly who was the oldest.  I--an uncle, Major Lou Norment [Major Norment] I think was the second oldest.  He lived here in Gary, Indiana until he passed a year ago.  And then there was my Aunt Lillie B. Norment Rivers [Lillie Norment] who was a school teacher there in Hardeman County [Tennessee].  And she passed a couple of years ago.  And another aunt, Minerva Jarrett [Minerva Norment Jarrett], who was also an educator there in Hardeman County.  And she passed, she really passed a year ago, I guess.  Aunt Lillie B. passed a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: Minerva Jarrett.
Speaker 2: Jarrett, J-A-R-R-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: Was she--that's her married name?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was she related to [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett's family in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Her husband, you mean?
Speaker 1: Her husband.
Speaker 2: And I talked to Vernon about that, and we found out that the Jarretts were related because he's from Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that's when I, guess when I came to Chicago [Illinois] and I met Vernon and we just fell in love, and we had these common roots in Tennessee.  We knew some of the same people, and, yes, there was a commonality there, the Jarretts.  And then my Aunt Ora Norment Butler [Ora Norment Robinson], who after my mother died, just became like a mother to me.  She wanted to actually adopt me.  Back then they didn't do official adoptions.  She just wanted to take me and raise me.  My father wasn't letting us go.  He wouldn't let any of his kids be raised by someone else, but I've always been very close to her, and I still am very close to her.
Speaker 1: What's her husband's name?
Speaker 2: Butler, her husband's name was Ernest Butler [ph.], um-hm. Ernest Butler.  He was from Tennessee as well, and they married there.  And then they moved to Ohio, so they--all my life she has been in Ohio pretty much.  And then I have a uncle who is the baby sibling on that side of the family, my father's younger brother named Lloyd Norment.  And he taught college in Mississippi and Tennessee and then he taught high school here in the Chicago area.  He moved to Chicago long before I did.  And so, and so I was very close to him.  I still am very close.  He moved back to Tennessee about a year and a half ago.  And I still kind of look after him 'cause when, I know when he was here, my father called, "You check on Uncle Lloyd, you check on your Uncle Lloyd" because my father felt like he was the care keeper for the whole family.  He wasn't the oldest, but his father [Major Norment] died when he was very young.  So he left high school in the eighth grade to work the farm, and to take care of his youngest siblings.  And that's why his youngest siblings, he helped send to college to make sure that, you know, they could have a better life.  But even though he only went to the eighth grade himself.  So he was always looking after them, and felt like he was the patriarch of the family and fussing at them.  It was just funny, even in later years, my father would be fussing at them like he was their caretaker.  I mean when they were in their fifties, you know, and he tried to tell them what to do (laughter) or chastising them.
Story_ID: 613452
Speaker 1: Now, what about his parents?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. His mother was Ida Norment [Ida Deadmon Norment].  I think her maiden name was Deadmon, D-E-A-D-M-O-N.  And she was from that area, not Whiteville [Tennessee], not Bolivar [Tennessee], but another area that was called Middleburg [Tennessee], around then.  And my father's father, my grandfather was Major Norment.  And he came from Arkansas, from what I understand.
Speaker 1: Do you know approximately when they were born?
Speaker 2: Still the late 1800s, late 1800s.
Speaker 1: What did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: They worked a farm.  They owned the property this time, but they were farmers.  They were farmers.
Speaker 1: Active in the community?
Speaker 2: Was very active in the community and the church.  There's a church there in Whiteville called El Canaan [El Canaan Baptist Church].  That's where I went when I was a child.  That's where my father [Alex Norment] went.  That's where his parents went.  So it was like the family church.
Speaker 1: Is it Baptist or--
Speaker 2: It's Baptist.  I grew up Baptist 'cause--then when we moved to Bolivar, we became members of Springfield Missionary Baptist Church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee] which was a block from where we lived, and so that's the church I really grew up in.  But we always had a connection to El Canaan, which was only ten, twelve miles down the road.  So we were always there back and forth.
Story_ID: 613453
Speaker 1: Did your father [Alex Norment] tell you stories about growing up in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: My father didn't, didn't talk a lot, and I tried to get stories out of him.  But, but I just know that he worked the farm, and again, they had, they did have some horses and chickens and cows and hogs and there was a smokehouse 'cause I, as a child went to the home where he grew up.  You know, that was where my grandmother [Ida Deadmon Norment] lived, and the smokehouse was still there.  And they would always joke with him about the time he burned down the smokehouse.  I'm not sure what he was doing.  They say he burned down the smokehouse, and then I remember the chicken coop there, and then the hog pen which was across the road, you know, and then the cotton fields which were all around the property.  And even when I was in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], we would pick cotton because schools would let out for, in the fall for people to actually pick cotton.  So we did that.  We worked, helped him work the farm, 'cause at that point, my father had his job, but he also was trying to work the family farm as well.
Speaker 1: Can you go--do you know your great-grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: No, they had passed before I came along.  I did not know them.
Story_ID: 613454
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about your childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Being two or three, maybe, a little toddler.
Speaker 1: What do you recall?
Speaker 2: It seems like I remember when a younger sister was born.  I don't know why I remember that.  I just remember we were there in the house in, where I told you my father [Alex Norment] grew up and that we often went back to.  And I just remember all the other kids were in another room, and then we had this little baby sister.  But then, you know, oftentimes kids were born at home, midwives or with family and that kind of thing.  And I remember when we moved from the farm to a house in Bolivar [Tennessee] on a paved road, in a brick house.  And then my father built this house 'cause he worked in Bolivar, and I guess he was driving back and forth, and he moved us there.  And my mother [Esther Morrow Norment] was working there in Bolivar too at Western State Hospital [Western State Psychiatric Hospital; Western State Mental Institute].  So I would have been about four or five years old when we moved there.
Story_ID: 613455
Speaker 1: And you mentioned your little sister.  Tell me about your siblings?
Speaker 2: Okay, I fall right in the middle.  I grew up in a house full of girls.  There was my oldest sister, Ray.
Speaker 1: Spell her name?
Speaker 2: R-A-Y, and she's Ray Wilburn now.  She was my mother's [Esther Morrow Norment] child before she married my father [Alex Norment], but my father raised her.  That's the only father that she knows.  And then my sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Norment Bonner], who is my father's child, and she is about a year and a half older than me.  She is vice president--oh, no, she's been promoted.  She is a COO of a hospital in Memphis [Tennessee] now.  She went into--my father always wanted a doctor among his girls.  And neither one of us were quite inclined for that.
Speaker 1: What's her full name?
Speaker 2: Gwen Bonner, middle name Theresa, (laughter), Gwen Theresa Norment Bonner, B-O-N-N-E-R.  And then I have a sister who is a year and a half younger than me.  Her name is--
Speaker 1: So that's, so you fall next.
Speaker 2: I, I'm next, and as I said, my sister a year and a half older and a year and a half younger.  So I'm right in the middle.  So we're like very close.  We're all so close in age, so we're like the Three Musketeers there.  We have a bond.  And then Vickie Ann Norment Collins [Vickie Norment Collins] is a year and a half younger than me.  Gwen, Vickie and I, and my next youngest sister, Sharon [Sharon Norment Woods], we all went to Memphis State University [University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  So I think Vickie, Gwen and I might have all been there at the same time.  And Vickie end up marrying one of Gwen and my best friends 'cause we knew him before she came to Memphis State and end up falling in love and marrying him.  And he's a doctor, and he was in the [U.S.] military initially when he finished medical school.  So they travel around a lot.  So for years she felt like she could not establish herself in a career, but she became a wonderful mother and homemaker and wife to this doctor to kind of keep him in line.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Robert Collins, Robert L. Collins.  And he is an endocrinologist and in vitro fertilization expert--
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) now in Ohio.
Story_ID: 613456
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Now in Ohio (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so let's talk about your childhood, growing up in that household, five girls.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So the first, in the early days, you lived on the farm?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And do you have any memories of the farm?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's where the cows and the chickens and the outhouse and the smokehouse and, because we went there all the time when my [paternal] grandmother [Ida Deadmon Norment] was there.  So we were back and forth to the farm all the time.
Speaker 1: So your first house wasn't on the farm as a family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I guess we lived in my grandmother's house.  You know, I don't recall living there as much.  I just recall when we moved to the new place. But I do think that we lived there with my grandmother until we moved to Bolivar [Tennessee] into the house that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: And that was when you were four or five years old?
Speaker 2: Yes, four or five years old.
Speaker 1: Where is that house located?
Speaker 2: It is at 427 South Jones Street, Bolivar, Tennessee.  It was a block from the school and a block from the church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: So take me around that neighborhood, describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood of single family homes.  It was not a poor neighborhood, but, of course, it was not a ritzy neighborhood.  It was not considered the best even black neighborhood, but it was a stable neighborhood.  So on either side of us, right there, another, about three or four brick houses to the right and to the left were--they weren't brick.  Maybe they were brick back then, but they were nice houses, newer, nicer houses.  Right next door to us was another family.  They had four or five children that pretty much correlated in ages with our household.  And in a house down from that was another family, the Lakes [ph.] and they had four, five or six children that correlated in ages.  So there were a lot of kids on our block.
Speaker 1: Is this a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It was a black neighborhood.  It was a black neighborhood.  And then you'd go on around the corner 'cause the street kind of curved, and there were other homes with some older people and then some other kids.  And then there was the school.
Story_ID: 613457
Speaker 1: And then my father [Alex Norment] had a business that was a block or two away, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me about his business?
Speaker 1: It was a radio and television repair shop, and he sold records.  So I grew up with music in my blood because we worked at the record shop after school and on the weekend and, of course, we got paid.  So there was a feeling of a little, a little money in your pocket.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the store?
Speaker 1: It was Norment's Radio and Television [ph.].
Speaker 2: Did that give you some prestige as the family?
Speaker 1: (Makes sound) I wouldn't have thought of it as prestige.  But maybe it did, maybe it did.  Well, my father worked his regular job from three o'clock 'til nine or ten too, but that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the--
Speaker 1: He was, he worked at a tannery.  It took different names over the years, but it was a tannery, you know, leather tannery, factory, right there in Bolivar [Tennessee], and it is what gave off a horrible smell (laughter) throughout the town sometimes.  And my father worked his way up to be a supervisor before he retired.
Story_ID: 613458
Speaker 1: So you were talking about your father.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alex Norment (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alex Norment, yes.
Speaker 1: So he held down two jobs?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: What stories did he tell you about the tannery?
Speaker 2: That it was a nasty job, and he told me about racism and encounters that he had there, you know, taking up for other black people on their job and trying to help make sure they got, you know, fair opportunities.
Speaker 1: Any specific stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I just remember him just telling, you know, stories about how he had to talk to Mr. So and So about this and Mr. So and So about that because he knew this wasn't right or that wasn't right, you know.  My father was, he was well known in Bolivar, Tennessee and throughout Hardeman County [Tennessee].  Like I say, we weren't a wealthy family, but I guess because he came from a well known family, but everybody knew him, the black folks and the white folks.  And so, but he had no problems speaking frankly or bluntly, but respectfully to everybody, including the white people in our town.  And this is, you know, in a small southern town, but they knew him and he had a rapport with them.  So he often would speak up for other people. You know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said the family was well known.  Why?
Speaker 2: That's hard to explain because I know we were the Norments and plus there was Alex Norment who had all those girls, okay.  And then later, it was Alex Norment who had all those girls that he put through college and educated.  So he was, he was known for his dedication to his daughters.  He was known as a good father, a strict father (laughter).  He wasn't a lenient father because you know those Norment girls.  Oh, no, we weren't going out on dates, and we weren't running around town.  And we weren't doing this and doing that.  But also, his family before that were well known because as I say, even though my father only had an eighth grade education, his sister [Minerva Norment Jarrett] was a well known school teacher.  She was married to a principal, Jarrett.  So he was well known.  His other sister, Lillie B. Norment Rivers [Lillie Norment] was a well known educator, well respected.  And she was married to a principal, a well known educator.  So, and there weren't many other people, there were no other Norments around except our family, Norments.  Then I think there was one white family Norment.  I always tried to figure out if our family was an offshoot of them, going back to slavery.  But I understand there was a history of Norments there in that county that went way back.  So our family was just, just well known in that regard.  I mean, you know, Bolivar, Tennessee, Whiteville, Tennessee, these are small communities.  Bolivar, back then, it was about seven thousand people.  Even now, they still have seven thousand up when it say population.  And people just know each other, but he was well known by black people and white people.
Story_ID: 613459
Speaker 1: What are your earliest sights, smells and sounds on James Street [sic.] when you were a young girl?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Jones Street.
Speaker 1: Jones.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, hustle and bustle sound of children laughing and playing and running, jump rope, hop scotch, ball, you know, just, just a lot of kids up and down my street.  I mentioned there were, the two houses next to us had five or six kids as well.  So all of us together, that was a lot of kids.  And we were in and out of each other's homes.  And you didn't misbehave in the presence of other parents because that's just like misbehaving in front of your own parents.  They would be told.  A matter of fact, that happened quite a bit, (laughter) you know.  If they saw you doing something wrong, it got back to your parents almost before you could get back home.  So that was one of the sights and sounds of kids playing, being happy.  When I think about smells, it was, you know, food, cooking.  We grew up in the kitchen cooking because my mother [Esther Morrow Norment] died.  We were self-sufficient kind of girls.  We did everything, the cooking, the cleaning, the grocery shopping, clothes shopping, whatever needed to be done, we ran the household.  Now, my father [Alex Norment] did remarry, but to be honest, my stepmother [Lula Smith Norment] was not a housekeeper type.  So we pretty much kept on top of the household stuff.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the smells, the smells of food that--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you as girls cooked.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you cook?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's when I learned to make my famous spaghetti sauce.  And we learned, you know, by trial and error.  And we would call an aunt on the phone or we would use a cookbook.  So I would cook spaghetti.  Even now, I love beans.  We would have a big pot of beans.  We didn't do beans and rice, but we did a lot of beans and peas, fresh greens, which is something I still love today and to me, it's like a delicacy and I prepare them myself.  But I grew up cooking that and learning how to cook that and preparing that and even had a garden and fresh lima beans or butterbeans and okra. Oh, making me hungry.  But we grew up with that kind of, with that kind of food, you know, substantive food.  We didn't, we didn't have a lot of snack foods, probably because of the size of the family I think.  But we had meals.  We had meals.  I do remember when I was older, we had popcorn as a snack, but we had meals.
Story_ID: 613460
Speaker 1: And I think about smells, it's like bacon frying on--especially Sunday morning is when we all had a big breakfast before we went to church.  And it would usually be bacon, sausage, rice--we had rice as a breakfast dish with butter and sugar and, and biscuits.  If not biscuits, then toast.  I mean so that was a weekend meal for us, especially on Sunday morning, we always had a big breakfast.  And we had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you have a family dinner Sunday night?
Speaker 1: Oh, and then I was saying that we had our big dinner after church.  So we would start some of the cooking on Saturday night or Sunday morning before church.  And then about three o'clock after church, we had our big meal.  And we would--of course, there were times we would have chicken, but what stands out in my mind is we would have these roasts, these pot roasts with potatoes and carrots and other vegetables.
Speaker 2: Did extended family members come over?
Speaker 1: Oftentimes.  And our house, because we had the kids, you know, I'm sure my father [Alex Norment] didn't wanna be the one to take all these kids to somebody else's house.  So we were always trying to get people to come by our house, and people always felt like Sunday, you know, was a good time to drop by.  You know, we always had plenty of food, plenty of stuff going on, the kids and all.  And so people, often they'd come by and other family members.
Story_ID: 613461
Speaker 1: And the holidays, our house was the place to be. Because we had all the kids and all the toys and all the stuff.  And that's when we insisted, we knew Christmas is at our house, the Norment house, and so everybody else would come over that afternoon.  They would give us time to do our big Christmas thing and then come over--
Speaker 2: Tell me about one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for dinner that day.
Speaker 2: Tell me about one of those Christmas experiences?
Speaker 1: Christmases?  It was, it was a fun day, and this is how we grew up and it went on even when my nieces and nephews and the younger generation came along.  So we would, first we would be up almost all night wrapping presents the night before.  And then up early the next morning and everybody gathered.  We would not open any presents 'til everyone came in, took their spot, and then we just started opening presents, and it would just be paper flying and ribbons and all kinds of stuff.  And it was just wonderful, in our pajamas and stuff.  And if people came by early, then they just saw a mess with us and how we looked, and the house was a mess.
Speaker 2: Do you remember your favorite gifts?
Speaker 1: Well, yes, as I got older, my father [Alex Norment] knew that he couldn't be shopping for all these girls.  And he would give us each fifty dollars and that was it.  And back then, we stretched that fifty dollars.  We would go shopping and we bought--it's amazing now.  You can't buy anything for fifty dollars now, but it's amazing what we bought with fifty dollars back like when I was in high school and growing up.  So, so that was good.  That was good.  That was, that was my favorite gift, you know.  And I might have gotten something from my sisters or from some relatives or stuff, but that fifty, we were good.  We were good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You could buy a whole wardrobe, I'm guessing.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, we did, and we were good.  We were happy, and then we would save our own money from our little jobs at the church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee] and in my father's shop [Norment's Radio and Television (ph.)] and buy things too.  You know, so even back then, it was always good just to have a little money in your pocket, that independence. And I liked it then, and I like it now.  And I instill that in my nieces and nephews.
Story_ID: 613462
Speaker 1: What are your favorite memories of your mother [Esther Morrow Norment]?
Speaker 2: My favorite memories, meals and her warmth and her playfully chasing my father [Alex Norment] around the house 'cause he was a jokester, a prankster, and always doing something.  And she used to do this thing with this, with this wet towel, do it like this and then pop him.  I don't know why that stands out in my mind (laughter).  That stands out in my mind, but it was always playful, and we always got a kick out of them playing around.
Speaker 1: Do you remember a particular trip or holiday experience with her?
Speaker 2: I really don't because, you know, she died when we were so young, and then I remember her illness, which I don't like to necessarily think about.  I remember her sisters and brothers, you know, coming over, you know, in big family gatherings or traveling with her out to her mother's [Roosevelt Morrow (ph.)] house like, we called it out in the country 'cause whereas my father sort of lived on the highway, where his family lived, they lived like way off in the country.  So I remember, you know, trips with her out there.
Story_ID: 613463
Speaker 1: What do you remember of her illness?
Speaker 2: That she always tried to be strong for us.  I remember once I was gonna be in a spelling bee at school, and I didn't realize the spelling bee was the next day.  And I went to her, and I remember she was lying in bed, and I said, "Mom [Esther Morrow Norment], I just, I can't, I'm not ready, I can't do this.  I can't be in the spelling bee tomorrow.  I haven't had a chance to study."  And she was very sweet and loving and encouraging and just said, "Just study, just do the best you can.  You will do a great job." And the next day, I mean I didn't win the spelling bee, but I may have come in third.  And I said, wow, okay, I made it through that.  And now that's one thing about my mom that stands out in my mind and her telling me that on her sick bed, you know, "Just do the best you can.  You can do this, you can do it.  Don't be afraid."  And that's one of the sustaining memories that I do have of her.  And, and I did a good job the next day.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when she did pass away?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I do.  We, the family--she was in the hospital, and my Aunt Shirley [ph.], her sister, had come to stay with her--us, during that illness.  And Aunt Shirley was at the hospital with mom.  There was an event at school, and my father had taken all of us to school that night for this event.  I don't know if any of us was participating in something, but we all were at an event at school.  We had just gotten home, and I remember my father getting a call and we knew something was wrong 'cause we were still dressed, coming from school.  You know what I mean?  And from that program, and I remember him just breaking down and crying and said, "Mama is dead, Mama has died."  And he did say, Mama, you know, and we were all just kind of stunned and startled.  We knew she was ill, but at that point, we didn't know that--anything about pancreatic cancer and that it was terminal.  Now, he probably knew it was terminal and others probably knew, but we did not know.  We did not know it was terminal then.  I just remember being stunned and other people coming over to the house that evening and helping us get ready for bed, telling us to take our--cause we just was there, still with our clothes on and stuff.  You know what I mean, just, you know--
Speaker 1: In shock.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just in shock, Um-hm.  So I do remember that night.
Speaker 1: And you remember the whole, the mourning period and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I remember the services and family in and out, and that's when relatives were there, and they were telling my father, (pronunciation) "Alex [Alex Norment], I'm taking--" they called me Rea [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], and my middle name is Aurelia.  They didn't call me Lynn growing up.  So I was variations of Aurelia, which often came out to be Rea.  You know, I'm in the South now (laughter), so I grew up as Rea, Marietta, Rea, some variation of Aurelia.  And my aunt said, "I'm gonna take Rea home with me."  And my dad said, "No, you're not.  She's staying right here with me." 'Cause I remember that was all within a few days of my mom passing, because they felt like, here he is, a widower, and he can't raise all these girls.  And they wanted to separate us, divide us up.  And he said, "I'm not having it." And fussing at them, "Y'all go on back where you came from.  You ain't taking my girls."
Speaker 1: Did you understand what was going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was kind of a bright, young girl.  I knew what was going on.  I stayed out and let them talk it out, but I knew what was going on.  I did.
Story_ID: 613464
Speaker 1: How did you cope, you know, what were your coping mechanisms?  Did you go off by yourself, or did you talk to your sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sisters and I were very close, so we talked a lot 'cause we were all sharing one room.  There were two sets of bunk beds.  So we were (laughter) very close and sharing one closet.  Each had one drawer to put our things in.  So we talked and that is consolation and my sisters are still my best friends to this day because we're very close.  But then I did, I would retreat to books during that period of mourning, but also just growing up.  That's how I escaped and realized there's a bigger world out here.  I did a lot of reading.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: A lot of novels, just reading, you know, I can't remember anything in particular, but I escaped in books.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite author back then?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't recall back then, but I--no, not during the growing up period.  I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Did you read adventures or--
Speaker 2: I read adventures.  I did.  I read adventures, things appropriate for the age and then started reading more novels, but it seems like they always took me somewhere else.  They always took me, mentally and physically, to another time, to another place.  And I enjoyed that.  I enjoyed that, and so I continued to escape, and then that fostered my interest in writing, you know, from reading a whole lot.  But--
Speaker 1: Was this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I don't remember, I don't recall, remember my childhood being sad though.
Story_ID: 613465
Speaker 1: You know, I know it's traumatic, you know, to lose your mother [Esther Morrow Norment], but we had so much family and love around us, I never felt that we had been deserted or that something was truly missing from my life.  Now, my older sister took it a lot harder 'cause she was like in eleventh grade, sixteen or seventeen at the time, and later we've had to talk to her.  And we tried to help her get counseling because she would say things like, and start crying, "You don't know what it was like, you know, to lose your mother and that's all I had."  And I said, "We lost our mother too, you know."  So we tried to help her through it.  We didn't realize it, it was so damaging to her whereas the rest of us just kind of took it in stride and depended on each other more, but she was a little different.  And, but for the most part, we came through it as strong, strong people, strong, strong women, and then later in life, getting to know people who had their mothers, who grew up with it, I can see, yep, she's like that because she had a doting mother because they were spoiled sometimes or they expected certain things or maybe the way they dressed, you know.  I just felt like we didn't have that, not that we didn't have that little feminine touch.  It wasn't that.  But we didn't have a mother to give us that constant wisdom or we didn't have someone constantly telling us that--making us feel like our whole life was focused on getting a man and marriage and children.  That was not how we grew up. Because I have friends, and that was their focus like when I went to college [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] and stuff.  The whole thing was to get married, to have children and they had a whole different mindset. And I often wondered, ooh, if mom had been with us, would I be more like that?  I don't know.  It may have been.  It may have not have been.  But it was not like I didn't wanna have children, but that wasn't my focus.  That wasn't my goal.
Story_ID: 613466
Speaker 1: Was your focus school, academic achievement (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) School, achievement, job, career, what I wanted to do with my life.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your early years of school.  What school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Went to Bolivar industrial elementary school [Bolivar Industrial School, Bolivar, Tennessee] through the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: What were your early memories of Bolivar elementary--industrial elementary?
Speaker 2: When I first went to school, it was truly a raggedy wooden school.  Here again, I must remind you.  We're in the South.  We did not have equal opportunities and equal resources, but we had some very good teachers.  But I remember the school being raggedy.  They tore it down by the time I was in junior high and built a new school. And the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many, how many classrooms?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy. I'm trying to think 'cause there was this, it was like two different buildings.  So all together, there might have been twelve classrooms.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a big school.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a big school.  It wasn't a one room schoolhouse, now.  I don't want to give that impression.  But it was, it was small, and I remember the classrooms and the teachers.  My first grade teacher was Alfreda [ph.], last name was Lake [ph.] at the time.  And she was wonderful teacher--of course, she knew my parents, very inspirational and instilled in me that, hey, I can do anything; you can do anything.  And I, I'm gonna say I was, I guess they considered me kind of smart. I did study.  I made good grades, so, and I wasn't one that my dad [Alex Norment] had to like make do this, make do that.  I knew the expectation, but this was just me.  So I was always one of the best students in the class, something that I didn't flunk.  I was always helping other students, but she was very encouraging and sweet.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the school projects you participated in?
Speaker 2: Elementary?
Speaker 1: Yeah, were there plays or--
Speaker 2: Well, in high school, I remember plays.  In elementary school, I don't remember plays.  I remember maybe doing readings and participating in programs 'cause we were always participating in programs.  I'm not saying we were made to do it, but it was what was expected.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your other teachers at the elementary school?
Speaker 2: At the elementary, see, now this particular teacher that I loved so much was my first, second and third grade teacher.  I'm trying to think.  I think my fourth grade teacher was, I think her last name was Ross [ph.], which was a prominent family there.  My fifth grade teacher, I think her last name was Horton [ph.].  And I must say, it was like the sixth grade was the first time I was separated from the other students who had been in the same class with me from the first grade on.  So I remember that was a little vexing, but I remember overhearing the teachers arguing, saying, "Well, you always have the best students in your class.  I want some of the best students in my class too."  And somehow I got separated (laughter) from the people I'd been with all those years.  And--
Speaker 1: You were known as a smart student?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What subjects did you really gravitate toward?  I know you mentioned writing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, English, uh-huh.  I was always good in English, anything dealing with writing, but, you know, in elementary school, you just arithmetic and everything.  And I always made A's in all of that.  In high school, I moved more towards more literature and English and that thing because that's when I kind of got the inkling I wanted to go into that as an area.  I--but I always did well in math, but I didn't like it, still don't.  But I realize it's an important part of life, but when I have to start dealing with the numbers and that kind of thing, it's like, it's not what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I'm forced to do it.
Story_ID: 613467
Speaker 1: Now, you went to a colored school?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was called a colored school, is that what you mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: A black school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm, black school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, up through the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, did you notice race relations in your town?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very conscious of race relations in my town because my father was always so outspoken and out there in the front in the banks.  My father had this business [Norment's Radio and Television (ph.)] so we were constantly going to the bank, making deposits, doing this.  I learned banking very early.  We helped him with his taxes.  So I was constantly interacting with other people outside of the black community, and had no issues.  And then we did out little shopping with that little fifty dollars we got at first, right there in Bolivar [Tennessee].  So, but, so the storekeepers, the people at the bank, they always knew were Alex Norment's girls.  We were a Norment.  I guess they could tell by looking at us (laughter), and they knew my father.  So there was a lot of interaction.  Now, when I went to the white school, there was that intermixing more so.  And that was in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: In your younger years, did you notice discrimination or racial divisions at all?  It sounds like, because of your father--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and because of your family name, he did have access in a way maybe some other blacks did not.
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say we had access, but we weren't timid.  We weren't afraid.  We spoke to people--you know others, some people in town, believe me, they like didn't wanna look a white person in the eyes.  You know what I mean?  It was still a lot of that in the--as I was growing up.  But because my father was the way he was, I mean I knew to be respectful with people, and I called people Mr., but I called the black people Mr. or Ms. too.
Speaker 1: So descry- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But we weren't afraid, but--
Speaker 1: Just help me understand the racial landscape of Bolivar.  Was there a dividing line or--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't live necessarily side by side, but where I was on Jones Street, one block down, then there might have been some white families, you know.  So it wasn't like blacks lived on one side of town and whites lived on the other.  We kind of all mixed from block to block or the neighborhoods were like very, very close to each other.  There was not a lot of racial tension in my little down.  At least I didn't not perceive it growing up, but in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], when I started interacting with whites on a daily basis, I became more aware of it, more conscious.  I never experienced any outright racism in high school.  I don't remember anybody ever calling me the N word or out of my name.  There were people I know who kind of kept their distance--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but no, no--none of that serious, in your face kind of racism.
Story_ID: 613468
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, your move from elementary school to high school.  And what year did you leave Bolivar industrial elementary [Bolivar Industrial School, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Okay, I know when I went to ninth grade, I went to the high school.
Speaker 1: What high school?
Speaker 2: It was called Bolivar Central High School [Bolivar, Tennessee].  But I would like to say that my last year at the black school, I wrote an essay, and I was encouraged by the teachers to enter a competition that was state wide, black and white.  You write an essay, and you can win a trip to Cape Canaveral in Florida.  So I wrote this essay, and I won.  I was one of three black kids out of at least thirty kids from across the state.  So I realize now that, oh, that was unusual.  And I did it.  It was more like a little term paper for, oh, for junior high because I was in eighth or ninth grade when I did that.  And it was a great experience.  First, we went to Nashville [Tennessee].  I think it was--what's the name of this school, Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], for several days and then we boarded a plane for Florida.  I'd never been on a plane before, had never been away from home except to St. Louis [Missouri], away from my family.  Hey, but I was a big girl, and I enjoyed it.  But when I think about racism, I think about then.  Now, the black girl who was on the trip wanted to separate herself from me, and then we stayed in the room with the chaperons who were white, but it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 613469
Speaker 1: So you entered Bolivar Industrial High School [Bolivar, Tennessee] in 1966?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe that's the right year. Um-hm, that's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And is that when you won the essay contest?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the ninth grade I participated in this essay contest and won that trip to Cape Canaveral in Florida.  And so it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: What stands out in your mind about that trip to Cape Canaveral?
Speaker 2: I just remember the enormity of Cape Canaveral.  So I just remember being in this place.  It was like cavernous.  And then I remember, I think that was the first time I was on a beach.  They had a beach party for us (laughter), and I think that's when I fell in love with the water and the beach.  And I remember walking on the beach, those two things stand out in my mind and just the total experience of being with all of these other young people, mostly white from throughout the state who had written this essay and, you know, just the intermingling.  And everybody was pretty friendly, although I know some of them kept their distance and that kind of thing.  But, you know, overall, it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: And you said one of the other black girls kind of kept to herself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess she didn't want all the blacks to sort of be lumped together, but there were times when you had to have a roommate, and they wanted me and her to room.  And she really didn't want to.  But we did and, you know, I'm easy going, whatever.  I wasn't trying to force myself on her, but the chaperones made that decision.  And I'm sure it's because some of the white kids, they didn't wanna room with us.  But it was like no big deal to me.
Speaker 1: Was that a different experience for you being with the majority white kids on this trip?
Speaker 2: It was because I, up to that point, I'd been in high school or in the school with black kids all together, but for some reason, it didn't, it didn't bother me though.  I didn't feel out of place.  I just, I just flowed right in.
Story_ID: 613470
Speaker 1: And your first year of high school, you attended the black high school?
Speaker 2: That's right, uh-huh, Bolivar Industrial High School [Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the ninth grade there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Was desegregation starting to happen?
Speaker 2: You know, I think that first year in the ninth grade was the first year that they had voluntary desegregation, where you could actually choose the school you wanted to go to.  Two of my sisters went that first year.  I stayed at Bolivar High School, Bolivar Industrial, and the next year, when I went to the tenth grade, I moved to what was considered the white school.
Speaker 1: What was that one called?
Speaker 2: Bolivar Central High School [Bolivar, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Now, one is industrial and one is just a high school.  Was there a difference in focus?
Speaker 2: No, it was just what they called the high school.  Oftentimes I found that in the South, they would give the high schools those kinds of names, industrial or technical or mechanical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Vocational.
Speaker 2: --maybe they started out as being trade schools.  But it was a bona fide high school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was just called Bolivar Industrial.
Speaker 1: Now, I meant to ask you.  The essay contest you won, do you remember the title of the essay?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) I don't.
Speaker 1: Or the subject?
Speaker 2: I just know it had to do with the future, and, and the perception of the future and what we could achieve in the future 'cause I think we had a subject or a general parameter as to what we were supposed to write about.  And I remember putting a lot of time into it, even doing an illustration as like the cover sheet and that kind of thing.  And, of course, I had some help from, from my teachers.  I remember, I think it was Ms. Ruby Andrews [ph.] was a teacher that encouraged me at that point in school [Bolivar Industrial School, Bolivar, Tennessee] and, and got me involved in that. Um-hm. But I can't remember exactly what the topic was, (makes sound).
Story_ID: 613471
Speaker 1: So what about the transition then from the black school to the white school?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a smooth transition for me.  My older sister was already there.  There were a handful of blacks, and when I went there were a few more blacks who went.  I don't remember any overt racism.  There might have been some subtle things.  We, black kids, yeah, we stuck together.  We weren't trying to be cliquish, but, you know, I didn't feel like I was there alone.  Again, somehow I excelled and was at the top of the class.  And so the teachers all knew me and encouraged me and complimented me.  And I was just glad to know that I could compete with everybody else.  It wasn't anything I was gloating on.  But I just did my best and I continued to be among the top students.
Speaker 1: Now, were your teachers at Bolivar elementary [Bolivar Industrial School, Bolivar, Tennessee], were they white or black?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were black.  They were all black.
Speaker 1: What about your teachers at Bolivar High School [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], the white school?
Speaker 2: I wanna say all white at the beginning.
Speaker 1: Did you notice a difference in teaching methods or treatment?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.  I really can't recall right now if there was a difference.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers at the high school?
Speaker 2: At the high school, there was a teacher named Ms. Kay [ph.], and I believe, I think, I don't know--I'm trying to remember.  Did she teach social sciences?  Then there was a teacher named Ms. Odom [ph.].  I think she taught English, and she was tough.  She was very, very tough, and she was different, but I just studied and did my work.  I remember Ms. Kay and Ms. Odom.  They stand out in my mind as the teachers, and there were some--a couple of the men come to mind, but I can't think of their names.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned you did participate in clubs and plays and things like that, extracurricular activities?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in the Beta Club [National Beta Club] at Central High, and I know that there were other clubs too, and I worked on the newspaper.  I was very much involved.  I wasn't into cheerleading or anything like that.  But I did participate.  I remember a project, and I don't know what class it was, but we did an art project, and I worked with other students, mostly white.  And we did this painting 'Gulliver's Island' [ph.] that comes to mind and the adventures of Gulliver, and he traveled all over.  And we recreated a painting that mapped out his adventures, and I remember just being down on the floor, hands and knees with the other students, and we put that together.  So my experiences were good.  I'm not saying there was no racism because I know that there was, but it's just how you handle it and finesse it.
Story_ID: 613472
Speaker 1: So this is the height of the Civil Rights Movement--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the '60s [1960s] when you're moving from the black school [Bolivar Industrial High School, Bolivar, Tennessee] to the white school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any civil rights activities because obviously Memphis [Tennessee] is, is a hot bed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah, I remember watching a lot of that on TV, and what was going on with Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  But right there in Bolivar [Tennessee], we had our little march and protest.  There were no riots or anything in Bolivar.  Black people kept pushing for more equality, and then there was a march planned around the courthouse.  My friend, my black friends' parents would not let them participate.  They said they didn't want no trouble.  They didn't wanna be blackballed on their jobs, but their parents would not let them.  My father [Alex Norment] encouraged us to.  So I remember having a placard and with a few other blacks, very peaceful march around the courthouse.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: It was like '68 [1968], '69 [1969], and when it was a lot of turbulence going on in other part of the South and other parts of the country, just Bolivar just didn't have a lot of the negative stuff, a lot of the riots.  We didn't have, matter of fact, any of that.  I'm not saying there wasn't racism.  We just didn't have that kind of upheaval, but we did our little march on several occasions.
Speaker 1: And what was the goal of the march?
Speaker 2: To let it be known that we wanted equal rights.
Speaker 1: Where didn't you have equal rights in Bolivar?
Speaker 2: In many, in job opportunities, in job opportunities.  And there was a time that still black folks could not go into a restaurant.  There was a side window where you could place your order.  And I guess that's why we didn't do a lot of junk food 'cause we didn't do a lot of that.  We went to the grocery store, and we went to a black grocery store, took our food home, and we cooked it if we wanted French fries and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go to the white grocery store?
Speaker 2: Later we did, later we did, but we, until--as long as a black grocery store was in business, we just tried to patronize a black store because my father had a business [Norment's Radio and Television (ph.)], and, you know, we wanted blacks to patronize us and so we patronized the black grocery store.  But we did go to the larger store overall too.
Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing about, were there any racial incidents in Bolivar?
Speaker 2: I don't recall hearing of any.  I really don't.  I don't recall hearing of any during that period at all.
Speaker 1: So there was the march around the courthouse in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A march around the courthouse, very peaceful.
Speaker 1: Now, did this follow the Sanitation Workers Strike in Memphis in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it followed or it might--was about the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that being the reason for the march.  But because people were marching all over the country, asking for equal rights was the impetus for that march.
Speaker 1: So ultimately in '68 [1968] Martin Luther King was assassinated in Memphis, and as you mentioned, that's just an hour away.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was the ripple effect in Bolivar?
Speaker 2: An aura of sadness and anger and the resolution that we're just gonna have to make some changes, but, and things just happened to come about peacefully.  There was a time, thinking about growing up in Bolivar, we went to the movies on the weekend.  But all the blacks had to sit up in the balcony and go through the side door.  You couldn't go, you know, sit at the bottom, you know, things like that I recall very vividly because we did go to the movies.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?  How did you process that?
Speaker 2: I didn't like it 'cause we couldn't buy the popcorn and the stuff that the other kids could buy.  And we just went on occasions.  Still we were kids and we definitely wanted to go to a movie every now and then.
Story_ID: 613473
Speaker 1: And we had other places in Bolivar [Tennessee] where you could go, like a little restaurant that was more like a soda shop.
Speaker 2: What was that called?
Speaker 1: It was called Sunrise Inn [ph.].  So--
Speaker 2: Was that black owned?
Speaker 1: That was black owned, of course, and these are all people that went to my church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee], and it was next door to where the little black grocery store was.  So we, we did that after the movie.
Speaker 2: Was there sort of a black cultural mecca or an area where the black businesses were?
Speaker 1: That was the area.
Speaker 2: What was it called or was there a street?
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't called, it was just Sunrise Inn and then the grocery store, and then there might have been another black business there.  And then there was an area where my father [Alex Norment] had his shop [Norment's Radio and Television (ph.)] which was another area, but there was another little black store and a black beauty shop. And on top of it was the Masons [Prince Hall Masons] and the Shriners [Shriners International] had their hall.  So it was their building and three black businesses in the base of it.  You know, so that's what come to mind back when I was growing up in Bolivar, those were, those, that's the, those were the locations where the black businesses were located.
Speaker 2: Was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] active or SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 1: In Bolivar?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In Bolivar, I think it was the NAACP that organized the march we had around the courthouse.  I don't remember the SCLC being there, but, and the people who were, you know, the leaders, they were the people I saw in church, school teachers and minister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the leaders?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't recall any names right now.
Speaker 2: What about the white leaders?  Were there, like the mayor, the sheriff?  Were there prominent white families that you recall?
Speaker 1: Not by name because they have, you know, changed over the years.  I don't remember who was the sheriff or the mayor back then.
Story_ID: 613474
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have white friends in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I had people who tried to befriend me and people I was friendly with at school.  And there was this one girl in particular, her name was Wanda Clamecky [ph.], and in Bolivar [Tennessee] that Clamecky was a different name.  Maybe it was Polish.  I don't know.  But when we were preparing to study for the SAT, she wanted me to come to her house.  She wanted to come to my house, and that made my father [Alex Norment] very uncomfortable.  I remember that.  And I did go to her house once, and she did come to my house once.  But I just didn't push it.
Speaker 1: How was the experience at her house?
Speaker 2: It was fine.  I remember it just being normal, fine.  Her parents, I think they had moved to Bolivar from somewhere else, and they were more open minded and were accustomed to being around other people.  She just kind of latched onto me, and that was fine.  And I think because she thought I was smart, and she wanted (laughter) to study with me.  And that was fine, and my father had no problems with that, but, you know, coming from the old days and with the way things were, he just--and he wasn't that comfortable with me going to her house or her coming to our house.  And he might have been more comfortable with her coming to our house, but she wanted us to ride together to Jackson [Tennessee] which was like thirty miles away, to actually take the test.  And he really didn't like that idea, thinking that someone else would just see a black girl and a white girl out together and create trouble for us.  But I think that I talked him into it.  Unlike my sisters, I was one to really talk and try to rationale with my father--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Story_ID: 613475
Speaker 1: Were there issues of colorism within the black community?  Light skinned blacks, dark skinned.
Speaker 2: I don't remember there being issues in the community, but of course, I always got the little snide remarks, high yellow and red and, you think you this because you light skinned, but, you know, that's, people all over the country experience that.  People in my family were from my color on to about as dark as you could be.  And even among my siblings, I guess I was the fairest, but then two of my sisters were very brown, you know.  And so they always joked me about that too.  My mother's [Esther Morrow Norment] side of the family was very brown.  My father's [Alex Norment] side overall was very fair, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And within the family, like the extended family, did they, were they concerned at all with complexion?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  I never heard anything, saw anything.  But I was the kind of person, I never made a issue out of it.  I never tried to act like I was better than anyone else.  I guess if I had had that kind of attitude I would have gotten a lot more flak.
Story_ID: 613476
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your experiences at the church?  I know you mentioned that a while ago, and you were active members.
Speaker 2: Active members.  Alex Norment's girls, if the church door was opened and it was lit up, we were there.  He was a deacon, superintendent of Sunday school, superintendent of BTU, Baptist Training Union, which was in the evening on Sunday.  And so we were at church all the time, Sunday school services, if it something afterwards, prayer service through the week, you know, bible study on Wednesday nights, choir rehearsal, even to the point that we had the jobs of cleaning up the church through the week for a little extra money.  So we were there.  We grew up in the church (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, which church is this?
Speaker 2: Springfield Missionary Baptist Church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee], which was a block from the house.
Speaker 1: And how was the choir?  You participated in the choir?
Speaker 2: Yes, I participated in the choir, but to be honest, we had a sad choir (laughter).  I couldn't sing.  My family, we are not gifted in that area.  Let's say we're gifted in other ways.  So my family is not a singing family.  In our church, we didn't have a lot of good singers.  So it was not a great choir, but it was enthusiastic.  And we did what we had to do.  And it was a small church.  And it, a lot of--and, of course, a lot of people went to churches out in the rural, in the country area, and our church was considered the little town church.  So we didn't have a good choir.  We never had a lot of that fire and brimstone kind of preaching either, but it was a close, family knit, people who loved each other, cared about each other, so it was an extension of the family.
Story_ID: 613477
Speaker 1: In high school, were there any other sort of pivotal events before you graduated in '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: You know, one thing that stands out in my mind about the high school experience, even though I was going to Central High School [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], I was asked to be in this pageant.  It was called Miss Bronze West Tennessee.  It was held in Jackson [Tennessee], thirty miles away and they recruited girls from throughout the whole area.  So another, one of my best friends right there in Bolivar [Tennessee], and she went on, she continued at Bolivar elementary school [Bolivar Industrial School, Bolivar, Tennessee].  But we were neighbors so we were all in the same church [Greater Springfield Missionary Baptist Church, Bolivar, Tennessee].  So we were always best friends.  So she and I participated.  And so I remember that night of the pageant, and as I say, I can't sing.  I did an interpretive dance, based on a jazz song--oh, god, I wish I could remember it now.  And the song started out, you know, we were always into music.  It was very slow, and then it, the tempo moved up and the end of the song, the tempo was much faster.  So I started out like in slave garb, hair tied, long dress, you know, costumed down, and did this whole dance through that about coming through the slavery thing.  Then for the second part, more up tempo, I pulled off that and had another outfit under it, and I was more modern.  But then for the last part, very fast, I was like Mod, all the way because then I took off another layer of clothes and had on a miniskirt and dah, dah, dah.  So it turned out well.  And then there's a part at the end of the song, like you think the song is over, and then there's another part where I do my little finale.  During the performance that night, whoever was handling the music, cut it off, and I didn't do my finale.  So that, that upset me.  And at that point, they were calling me back on stage, and I was so upset because they messed up the end of my thing, I didn't hear them calling my name (laughter).  And so then I went back out, and I think they were reintroducing everyone.  But I end up winning third place.  My best friend won first.  But people often say because I missed my cue to come back on stage, that probably, I probably would have been second. (Gesture) Whatever.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was not a beauty pageant kind of person, so I did this, and that was fine.  I did it, and then I, I had to do it--and my aunt, I told you Minerva Jarrett [Minerva Norment Jarrett], she was at another high school in Whiteville [Tennessee].  It's called Whiteville High School, they had an event, so I had to do my little dance thing, routine there.  And then it was something at Central High School, and I did my dance routine there.  So, yeah, so that was me in the limelight.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Right, your pageant experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was it.  So it was, it was good.  It helped me in many ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you did so- you did some interpretive dancing.
Story_ID: 613478
Speaker 1: Were you, and this is the late '60s [1960s] when you're in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee] and graduating back in 1970, were you influenced at all by the Black Arts Movement?
Speaker 2: Not so much that because we didn't get that much exposure, but I was influenced by music and writing because I kept up with what was going on.  But it's not like we had any speakers coming to Bolivar [Tennessee], you know.  We didn't have that direct exposure, but I kept up with what was going on.  And, and because my father [Alex Norment] had this record shop [Norment's Radio and Television (ph.)], I was always into the music.  So I kept up with the music and--
Speaker 1: What were som- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I started out into jazz.
Speaker 1: What kind of music did you listen to?  Who were some of the artists?
Speaker 2: Like Wes Montgomery.  I do think this tune I danced to, I'm trying to think, was it a Wes Montgomery tune?  But I loved Wes Montgomery back then.  And, of course, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, grew up with him, grew up with Aretha Franklin.  I guess she was barely out of high school herself back then, but that's what we grew up with and the Motown sound [Motown Records], you know, 'cause we had all the latest records.  All the kids in the neighborhood came to our house to get the music (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have dances and things like that at school?
Speaker 2: We had dances at school.  I wasn't a showboat or anything, but I always could dance.
Speaker 1: Had the Black Power movement made its way to Bolivar? Afros and dashikis?
Speaker 2: It, by the time I got to Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] is when I really saw that.  And so, like from '70 [1970], the early '70s [1970s] is when I, I saw that.  I don't remember dashikis in Bolivar.  I do remember seeing, the Afros were there, of course, but I don't remember the dashikis.  But, if so, it was like a fashion statement kind of thing more so than a rebellion.  I always felt like we were on top of whatever was going on.  I always felt that.
Story_ID: 613479
Speaker 1: And you graduated in 1970 [from Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you always know where you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: I pretty much knew I wanted to go to Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  That's what it was called then, and we still call it Memphis State.  I think I probably applied to some other schools, but that's pretty much where I wanted to go.  My oldest sister, Ray [Ray Wilburn], had gone to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University] in Nashville [Tennessee].  And for some reason I just didn't wanna go there.  I wanted to go to Memphis State.
Speaker 1: And you didn't wanna go, you didn't wanna go to a historically black college [HBCU]?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  It wasn't that I didn't want to.  But I just knew I wanted to go to Memphis State.  It's hard to explain.  That's where I wanted to go, and I guess I felt like my father [Alex Norment] had so many kids in school, and he had to put out a lot of money for my older sister.  And I wanted to go where I thought I could get scholarship and financial aid.  And I felt that I would be able to do that at a larger, at a larger white school with my--
Speaker 1: Did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: I got a scholarship, financial aid and loans.  It was a package that, together it, it worked out, and then I had a job while I was in school too.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you father bring you to campus?  How did you get to campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, yes, I guess my father and my stepmother [Lula Smith Norment] and loaded me in the car, and went down, and that was--and loaded me into the dorm.  I had a corner room, West Hall [West Mynders Hall], overlooking the shady street there at the campus of Memphis State.
Story_ID: 613480
Speaker 1: You mentioned your stepmother.  What's her name?
Speaker 2: Lula Walker Smith Norment [Lula Smith Norment]. Um-hm. And she passed a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: When--do you know what year they got married?  How old you were?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother [Esther Morrow Norment] died when I was in the fourth grade.  They married when I was in the sixth grade, so I think I was about twelve.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good relationship with her?
Speaker 2: I did.  Some of my sisters didn't.  I did.  We all had a good relationship once we became adults. Better, of course.  And I, but I always was a little more tolerant, a little more easy going and not as judgmental 'cause you can imagine, raising somebody else's five girls, that's, that's a rough job.  There are people who said, and even we say now, ain't no way in the world we would have married dad [Alex Norment] with all these girls and going through puberty and all of that.  So she had a rough job ahead of her.  But I always got along with her.  And if I can backtrack for a minute, I know we were talking about my siblings.  I never got to my two youngest siblings.  There was Sharon Norment Woods.  She's a social worker, and she still lives there in Bolivar [Tennessee].  She was the baby, up until my father remarried.  And then my father and my stepmother had a daughter named Pamela [Pamela Norment Washington].  I was twelve years old when Pamela was born.  And she is the baby now.  So it was always a little jealousy between Sharon, but, you know, that's why I still, we still make her the baby now.  We still spoil her to this day; how things linger on 'cause she never overcame being displaced as the baby.  And, and Pam, you know, is the glue that held us together with our, with our stepmother too.  So, so we're still all very, very close, very close as a family.  Okay, so growing up, it was, it was a great experience there in Bolivar.  It was, in our household.
Story_ID: 613481
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your college experiences.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were your first impressions of the university campus?
Speaker 2: I loved it because I was away from home.  As I mentioned before, my father was kind of strict, had all these girls, and he was gonna make sure we all gonna get out of there and not get pregnant.  So nobody had boyfriends, although I had a boyfriend.  But I talked to him about it, but he gave me a hard time.  My sisters said, "I ain't gonna be bothered trying to have a boyfriend with dad."
Speaker 1: So there were strict rules about dating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Strict rules at our house, oh, my god.  I guess we didn't go over that too much, but it was strict--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what kind of rules?
Speaker 2: Because he worked at night, I mean like nobody over, nobody in the house, no boyfriends.  And then because I reasoned with him, "I'm making good grades, Dad, I'm good, I work.  I do this.  Now, why can't I have somebody over on the weekend?"  So I did.  My sisters said, "I ain't gonna be bothered with all of that."  So I was the only one that like did a little dating.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your high school boyfriend?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  His name was Leverl, L-E-V-E-R-L, Moore [ph.].  He was my love.  And, and, you know, our household had a reputation.  Most guys didn't even wanna be bothered trying to date anybody in there.  You know, they knew about Alex Norment.  He was like very threatening (laughter), but Leverl put up with it, and he came on the weekends and whatever.  So he was my boyfriend.  I think I eventually was able to go out on a date or so.  I think he took me to the prom.  But he graduated a year ahead of me [from Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], and I knew his life wasn't going in the direction that I had to go in back then.  So it's like--
Speaker 1: He wasn't college bound?
Speaker 2: No, and, and matter of fact, he even then moved away, as soon as he finished high school, somewhere, Grand Rapids [Michigan], somewhere in Michigan and was working at an automobile factory.  So, you know, when he moved away, you know, I didn't even have a boyfriend after that and just, just thought, I knew I was just waiting to get away to college, not to guys, but just, you know, to be normal (laughter).
Speaker 1: Some freedom.
Speaker 2: Some freedom, and so at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] I saw that I loved having one person in the room as opposed to a whole bunch of us.  But I do think by the time I graduated it was just two of us to a room 'cause we had expanded the house.  And I don't think my father knew this, but at Memphis State, there was no curfew.  I think they had just ended it, like when my sister went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], they had curfews and that kind of thing.  But they had just ended it at Memphis State, no curfew.  You're sort of on your own, and, and that was, that was good.  But, you know, I didn't abuse it, but it was just the freedom.  I never did anything that I normally wouldn't have done, but it just, it just felt good.
Story_ID: 613482
Speaker 1: What kind of young woman were you?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: Initially there on campus?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I want- I'm trying not to say I was country--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --but one time one of, this guy who became a friend of mine was saying, "I can't believe you have on a red coat, red shoes, red pants.  You have on all this red."  "But I've always liked red," you know, so he might have considered that a little country.  So I never did that again.  But I was easy going, but I hate to keep coming back to this, but, you know, I made the dean's list my first semester in school [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  So word spread that I was a smart person, you know.  And so that's what I would hear a lot, and--
Speaker 1: But you weren't considered a nerd, just smart.
Speaker 2: I wasn't a nerd, no.  I was just, I just did my work and just made good grades.  And I didn't feel like I missed out on anything.  But I wasn't considered a nerd.
Story_ID: 613483
Speaker 1: But there was a group of us who lived in the dorms, guys who lived in the dorms, girls who lived in the dorms.  So we had our own little clique.  Most of us didn't have cars or anything, no, you know, just making it from one little student aid check to the next, you know, sharing and buying stuff that we could make a meal off of, and you know.  So it was a group of us who, we had our own little group, our own little clique.
Speaker 2: Who was in that group?
Speaker 1: Well, me and my sisters.  One was Donald Winbush [Don Winbush] who went on to become a journalist too and work for Time magazine, and I don't think is in the business now.  He was in that group.  Danny Harwell [ph.] who went on to work for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was in that group, and he was from Bolivar [Tennessee] and went to high school with me.  He was like a bad boy, but he was smart, you know.  So those two.  Also in the group was Cassandra Taylor who is now an executive with the convention and tourism bureau [Convention and Visitors Bureau] there in Memphis [Tennessee].  Those come to mind immediately, and who were among my close friends there on campus, our little clique.  And there were others who all went on to become very, very successful.  One became head of a institution there in Memphis, a hospital there.  And I was just thinking others, some very successful people came out of our little, our little clique, you know.  But we all had come from humble backgrounds and just was, just struggling to make it through college [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].  And we all had financial aid, but I mean just a little spending money.  We had the support of our parents, but none of our parents were wealthy.  So we didn't have cars.  I mean like now kids go to school, they immediately think, they got to have a car.  That was not a given back then.  So then if you end up with one friend who had a car, then you were lucky.
Story_ID: 613484
Speaker 1: What was the racial breakdown at Memphil- Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: At that time, I think the student population was something like twenty-four, twenty-five thousand.  There might have been two or three thousand blacks at the school.
Speaker 1: Did you all know each other?
Speaker 2: We knew each other, especially the ones who lived on campus.  We all knew each other, yeah, but, yeah, we all knew each other.  And although we circulated in general, but, you know, when you're black, you know each other.
Speaker 1: Were there certain clubs, sororities, fraternities, you belong to or others?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't belong to a fraternity--to a sorority rather.  But my sister, who was at school, the year that I came, she pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] that year.  I always was Delta bound, but my first semester in school she pledged, and I felt like I pledged.  So it was like, I can't go through this.  So, but I would have been a Delta.  She was a Delta.  Then our youngest sister who came to Memphis State behind me, she was a Delta.  She became a Delta.
Speaker 1: What were the Deltas known for at Memphis State?
Speaker 2: Being, I think being smart, assertive, good women.  They weren't known for partying or anything.  Well, I'm just trying to remember.  They weren't known for that, but I never hung out with the Greeks, so I was not, just not into that, except when we all, were together, but just I don't remember a Delta party.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, you said you were there when your sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Norment Bonner], pledged.  Do you remember any aspects of the pledge process that you can share?
Speaker 2: No, except she went through hell.
Speaker 1: Hazing and all that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: I mean the hazing kind of stuff, but nothing that was physical.  She never came back and was crying or saying "I can't do this," but in my mind, it was just like, I can't be bothered.  It was just having to get up in the middle of the night or having to do this for the big sister, having to do that.  It just, being the subservient thing, you know.  But I never recall her complaining of any serious hazing, and she was very finicky about what she ate.  So I don't think they made her eat anything, you know.  She never would--she wouldn't tell though.  A lot of things she wouldn't tell.  But it was just like, she let me know she was going through hell.
Speaker 1: What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that just stuck in my mind.
Story_ID: 613485
Speaker 1: What was the--you mentioned the numbers, two or three thousand blacks at the time, and the blacks had only been at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] for roughly a decade at this point.
Speaker 2: Or less.
Speaker 1: Right, I think 1959 the first black was admitted.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and I'm sure it was a slow process.  So, you know, eleven years later, what was the scene?
Speaker 2: Blacks were, I would say moving and shaking and integrated into all aspects of campus life.  We had a couple of black teachers.  I remember, his name was Dr. Acey [David L. Acey, Sr.] was over the black studies department.  And I remember him being a unifying figure for the black students on campus 'cause he would have on the bashiki and the colors and this.  And then there were other black people who worked in administration.  I remember there was a very fine gentleman who worked in financial aid.  His name was Mr. Allen Hammond, and I kept in touch with him many years later.  And he did his best to make sure all the black students had what they needed, and what they qualified for and that kind of thing.  I remember it being very nurturing because the blacks who were there looked out for u- for us, you know.  And I remember [HistoryMaker] Mark Stansbury who was--and even to this day, he's still affiliated with Memphis State in the media department on campus there, making sure.  But I just know that people reached out and, and really tried to help where they could and to help those who were in need if you needed financial aid or a job or this or that, they, they were there.  So by the time I got there, that was the atmosphere that was there.
Speaker 1: Was there any activism on campus?
Speaker 2: There was, there was for that period through the '70s [1970s] and there were people who were more militant.
Speaker 1: What do you recall specifically?
Speaker 2: You know, protests and the dashikis and the militant talk and, you know, and I'm, I've always been all for the rights and moving and progressing and all, but I also believed in doing your work and doing what you're supposed to do to get where you were supposed to go.  So I just know there were a lot of students of all ilks, you know, that weren't studying as hard as they needed to be.  And they were saying that the teachers were racists or this, but, and there might have--there was definitely some of that.  But also you got to put forth an effort and do your work too.  Everything is not, it does not boil down to racism.  So it was a, it was a good experience.  I, I didn't party a lot.  I feel like I partied enough, and I wasn't into drinking.  I wasn't doing the binge drinking that a lot of the kids do now.  I think about my nieces and nephews and some of them did that.  I didn't have that experience in college 'cause I, I guess because I had no alcohol before I left.  So I drank a little wine and that was about as far as it went then, and I just don't remember any, any outlandish parties.
Story_ID: 613486
Speaker 1: Did you belong to certain organizations?
Speaker 2: I worked on the school newspaper, and then there might have been some other smaller organizations, but, but it was always like media related it seems.  And I must add, I got out of school in three years.  So I took a lot of, had a lot of coursework, so I didn't have a lot of time for a lot of things.  And most of my activities were focused on journalism and the media.
Speaker 1: Was that your major?
Speaker 2: That was my major.
Speaker 1: How did you decide on journalism?
Speaker 2: You know, it started in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee] when I worked for the high school newspaper, and writing and my love of writing and reading.  And I said I wanted to do that.  I must say, when I first started saying in Bolivar [Tennessee] I wanted to major in journalism, it's like, they didn't understand.  Journalism, what is that?  And, but then once I finished school and then had my name in the newspaper, they realized, oh, this is what she was talking about.  But I always wanted to be a writer.  Now, when I first started Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] because my father [Alex Norment] had wanted to have this doctor amongst his girls, the sister [Gwendolyn Norment Bonner] ahead of me who did pledge Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], she was majoring in medical technology.  So, and she's the one that ended up, she's a hospital administrator now.  I said, well, let me check out medical technology.  I did an open house, saw some blood in the lab.  That was it.  I said, I know I'm gonna be a writer, you know, but I never looked back.  And I don't remember that whole experience at the lab that day.  It just kind of blocked it out of my mind.  But I knew from that point forward that I wanted to be a writer and what I wanted to do.  And I never looked back.  So I never wasted any coursework.  Everything I did, you know, counted or went towards--I never had a period of trying to decide what am I gonna do with my life.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was kind of focused.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Black Arts Movement and people like [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez and how [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, Amiri Baraka, at this point in college, were you influenced by these writers?
Speaker 2: No.  For some reason, that didn't filter down to Memphis [Tennessee], into Memphis State.
Speaker 1: Who were you inspired by?
Speaker 2: I was inspired by [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni and the poets, that kind of thing. Alex Haley, greatly, and being from Tennessee, and I met him later.  So I was influenced by writers like that.
Speaker 1: So some from the Black Arts Movement, Nikki Giovanni (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --yeah, some.  Were you inspired by white authors as well?
Speaker 2: Maybe to some extent, maybe to some extent.
Speaker 1: Who did you wanna be like?
Speaker 2: You know, it's, I never wanted to be like anybody in particular.  I really did not.  I never wanted to be like anybody in particular.  I just wanted to be myself and to be good at what I did.  I don't remember ever aspiring or saying I wanted to be like anybody, and--
Speaker 1: Did you read James Baldwin?
Speaker 2: I read a lot of James Baldwin back then, I really did, and later.  But I never felt like I wanted to be like James Baldwin (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I just, hm.
Speaker 1: Did you read Gwendolyn Brooks?
Speaker 2: I read Gwendolyn Brooks and then had a chance to meet her when I came to Chicago [Illinois], but I never felt like that's who I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: As a fellow writer, what was your interaction like?  What was your impression of Gwendolyn Brooks when you first met her?
Speaker 2: I liked her, but she was more of a mother figure at that point.
Speaker 1: What year did you meet?
Speaker 2: I would say within my first few years of coming to Ebony.
Speaker 1: In the late '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], and I had some interaction with her because of Lerone [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett] and he had met her, and I remember she, reading her work, and she--been interacting with her a number of times, and she autographed this book for me and, that I still treasure.  Yeah. So I met a lot of people, but it's hard to say that anybody in particular influenced me.
Story_ID: 613487
Speaker 1: Did you always want to be a journalist in the traditional sense of the word?  Did you also want to be a creative writer?
Speaker 2: I, yes, and I guess I still do.  But just kind of, my focus has been on journalism.  But I always wrote poetry when I was a kid, what I called the poetry rhymes.  And, and I continued to do that up until recently, but nothing--I may have had something published a couple of times, but I never pursued that that I wanted to have anything published.  It was always a way to express myself.  And I remember once in the early years here, I wrote a poem for Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and gave it to him on his birthday.  And he thanked me.  He said it really meant a lot to him, and it was only, less than ten lines.  But just an expression, but I still have a lot I want to do in life (laughter).  And I know I feel like time is running out, but my work here has, has been so focused, it doesn't leave much time or energy to pursue other things.
Story_ID: 613488
Speaker 1: Were there other highlights at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]?  What do you recall?  Any other academic highlights?
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause when you said highlights, I was gonna say, oh, that was the year that Memphis State was number two in the country (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association], well, tell me about that, the basketball.
Speaker 2: That was good.  I was there, I was there, and I was very happy, and always proud to say I was there at that time.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Let's see, whether it '72 [1972]--
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that would have been my last year at school then.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you remember?  I mean did you, were you active that whole basketball season?  Were you a big fan of the Tigers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but the Tigers, period.  Now, even before that, Memphis State, as now, has always had an excellent basketball team.  So we were like, go Tigers, go Tigers, yeah.  So we went to the games, and we were, we were boosters, you know.  So that was, so that was good, and I was just proud to be there at the time that Memphis went, went all the way. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was the end result?
Speaker 2: They were number two.  They lost to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And I remember Larry Finch, I believe, was on that team, and he became a coach at Memphis State and is still associated with Memphis State to this day.
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the players?
Speaker 2: No, not personally.  I mean I knew Larry Finch on campus, and I think it was a guy named James Douglas, but I didn't hang in that circle.  I was, I wasn't a bad girl, you know.  That was, you know, it was--
Speaker 1: You weren't a groupie?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.  And it was always like, oh, the girls who hang out with the athletes, they were considered one thing.  It was just not, unh-uh.  I had, I had my boyfriend there on campus.  He lived in the dorm too, and we're both from very modest backgrounds, so I guess I hung in that circle.  And I would hear them talk about the bad girls, so, probably just their way of keeping us (laughter) in their circle and and not branching out.
Story_ID: 613489
Speaker 1: Were there other highlights?
Speaker 2: It was good.  My, my journalism experience was good.  I worked on the school newspaper then too, and my teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that called?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) I don't remember.  I hate to say it.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the stories you covered?
Speaker 2: I don't remember exactly what the stories were, but I wrote a lot for the newspaper because then I knew that I had to build up a body of work, some clips to get a job in the media.  One of my best teachers there was Mr. Leon Long.  And he also was a copy editor at The Commercial Appeal newspaper.  So he was grooming me to get a job, and the chairman of the journalism department then also worked part time at the newspaper.  I think his name was Dr. Williams [Herbert L. Williams], and I knew him too.  And so when time came for me to get a job, you know, they were big boosters and helped prepare me for that.  And so I don't want it to seem like all I did was study, but once I knew I was gonna major in journalism, I was just kind of single focused on--again, I got out in three years, so I took a lot of, a lot of coursework.
Speaker 1: Why did you wanna get out in three years--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I wanted--
Speaker 1: --because of costs?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I wanted to be independent on my own, out from under daddy's (laughter), out of his pocketbook because, I mean 'cause I had two younger sisters, three younger sisters in school and would want to go to school.  So I just wanted to, to get out and become independent and take care of myself, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember of the antiwar [Vietnam War] protests on campus?  Did you cover any of that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that, I don't remember us having a whole lot of that on campus.  It might have been there, but I was not a part of that.
Story_ID: 613490
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate [from Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in '73 [1973], I do believe that's right.  I think it was in August, '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 2: Yes, magna cum laude, and that's why I didn't have a chance for a whole lot of extra curricula 'cause I was just studying and trying to get out.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job was as an intern at The Commercial Appeal newspaper in Memphis [Tennessee].  I applied, was turned down--and I was still in school doing, I had one semester to go, applied, was turned down.  Mr. Long, Leon Long, who I told you who worked there, had said, "Attach your picture to the application and send it in again."  I didn't know what that was about, but I did.  And I got a call back and I got the job.
Speaker 1: Was that because of diversity?  They were trying to diversify?
Speaker 2: And that's what I conclude that it was, for diversity.  They, I think he wanted them to know that I was black.  Maybe he felt like them looking at my resume and my grades and all, maybe they would not have realized that.  But I never had a discussion (laughter) with him about it.  I just did it, and, and I got the job.
Story_ID: 613491
Speaker 1: And that leads to interesting thing, story.  My first day on the job at The Commercial Appeal, and keep in mind, I was still a student at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: So this is what year?
Speaker 1: This is '73 [1973]. Um-hm, '73 [1973].  So it would have been starting that summer, May or June.  I went to work at ten o'clock that day, supposed to get off at six.  I went out to cover some little speech, did it, two or three paragraphs, turned it in. Said, oh, well, what a dull first day.  And then pandemonium broke out in the newsroom about five o'clock.  And, you know, the photographers and writers, and the editors were screaming, go here, go there.  Some man on the south side of Memphis [Tennessee], which was in a black neighborhood had, was shooting people down in the street, in the street, just shooting people randomly.  And I'm sitting there amazed watching the writers and photographers, you know, grab their notebooks--back then you didn't even hardly use tape recorders, and going here, going there.  And then when things settled down, the, the night editor was leaving--the day editor was leaving.  And the night editor was coming on, and I'm sitting there, and I got about half an hour before it's time for me to go.  And he barks out my name, "Norment [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], get over here."  So this is a guy that I was just meeting. And--
Speaker 2: This is the night editor?
Speaker 1: This is the night editor.  His name was Cava- Cavalara, can't think of his first name, but Cavalara.  And, or Cavagnaro [Charles Cavagnaro], Cavagnaro, and said, "Do you know where So and So and So and So is, this neighborhood on the south side?"  I said, "No, but I could find it."  And he told somebody, "Show her how to get over there on the map."  And then he told me to go out, find what I could, and knock on doors, interview people, find out who the victims were and find out something about the shooter.  And it's like, "Okay, yes, sir."  I was scared to death and by then it was getting dark, the first day on the job, I'd never been to this neighborhood.  I'd been around Memphis State, you know what I mean (laughter).
Speaker 2: What was the south side known for?
Speaker 1: Some neighborhoods were stable, but it was crime and going into any neighborhood whether you know it or not is, you know, you don't know what you going into.  And I'd just gotten a little yellow Volkswagen.  Starting a new job, I needed a way to get around so I got in my car and had directions from them, but also pulled out a map.  My dad [Alex Norment] was one about making sure you have a map, make sure you know where you're going, make sure you have a flashlight.  So I remember leaving the company parking lot, pulling over on the side of the road, studying the map to get my bearings, because unlike other people who were sent out in pairs, I'm sent out by myself, no photographer with me.  And I found my way to the neighborhood, a lot of activity was going on.  The guy was no longer shooting.  He had been killed by police, but there were bodies still in the street (laughter), I'm telling you.  This is my first day on the job.  So I start walking around, knocking on doors trying to find out about the shooter and about the victims.  And I'm getting information, and calling in, called to the office, they said, "Oh, Norment, great, good stuff, keep going.  Call back in a little bit."  So I'm amazing myself.  I'm knocking on doors, people are letting me in, getting information, the victim this age, getting photographs and all.
Speaker 2: Wow, is this a black neighborhood?
Speaker 1: It's a black neighborhood.  It's a black neighborhood, it's a black neighborhood, but you can imagine after the shooting everybody is a little skittish, but, you know, so it was a black neighborhood.  But that night, I met Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Sr.], the congressman, the senior.
Speaker 2: I was gonna ask you about the Ford family of Memphis, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was the first night I met him.  He was, I guess a state representative at the time.
Speaker 2: And he was young as well, right?
Speaker 1: He was young, oh, yeah, he was young, a state representative and working at the family funeral home.  So I knew of the Fords.  I didn't know him.  You know, I didn't know anything about him really, but he--
Speaker 2: The N.J. Ford and Sons Funeral Home [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: That's right.  So the first night I met Harold Ford.  So we shared information.  He had the names of some victims and this.  And he helped me.  I helped him.  He was introducing me to people and say, "Oh, talk to this young lady.  She's working for The Commercial Appeal.  Help her out."  And this and that, you know.  So we formed a team that night and helped each other, and we have been friends for life, from that point on.  And I often wondered, would I have done such a good job on the streets in that neighborhood that night if it had not been for him because it was his neighborhood.  You see what I mean, the neighborhood of the funeral home.  And maybe where he lived at the time.  So that was, that was very helpful.
Speaker 2: Did he introduce you to people and--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --he just helped you with information.
Speaker 1: That night?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, introduced me to people, encouraged them to talk to me.  He was telling me who some people were and like, "Okay, well, one of the victims is So and So, and the other victim is So and So.  You might wanna go to this house over there because the family lives there," that kind of stuff, you know.  So he was very, very helpful.  And as I say, we formed a bond that night, and then after that, we became very good friends, his whole family and I became friends.  So that stands out about that night.  My first day on the job.
Story_ID: 613492
Speaker 1: So you started working at The Commercial Appeal newspaper your senior year at Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who was president of the university at the time?
Speaker 2: I think it was Humphreys [Cecil C. Humphreys], President Humphreys.  That comes to mind.
Speaker 1: And was he pretty--you were a journalist at the time.  Was he a pretty effective president at this time of integration?
Speaker 2: Yes, I found him to be a pretty effective president.  I was, you know, in tune to what was going on, on campus and the world in general.  And I, nothing stands out in my mind that he didn't do what he was supposed to do or that he was trying to hold back progress because the campus was pretty well integrated and peacefully, and I know they made an effort to make sure that blacks had fair opportunities on campus.
Story_ID: 613493
Speaker 1: And what month in 1973 did you graduate from Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in August.  I graduated at the end of the summer term.  So I went through in three years, and that's how it fell, and I was ready to go out into the world, make my mark, be independent.
Speaker 1: And did you remain with The Commercial Appeal newspaper?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  In September of that year, shortly after graduation, I was offered a full-time job, and that was good.  I was prepared to move on and do other things, but I really wanted to stay in Memphis [Tennessee] at that time.
Speaker 1: So your first day on the job, you had a breaking news story, you know, you were impressing all of your bosses with all the information you were getting, in part, with the help of Harold Ford, Sr.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was next?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was a letdown.  It was obits [obituaries] (laughter) because that's what you do when you first start at a newspaper, especially coming right out of college.  So you, you have to do obits, and I did a lot of that.  I wasn't the only one, but I did a lot of that because that way, you learn how to get names correct.  You get your information and facts and talk to the family and so I did a lot of that, that first summer.  But I also had opportunities to do other stories as well.  And from the beginning, I knew that to get good stories, you had to come up with good stories.  One of the other reporters on staff and I, we had become friendly, and she was a white girl maybe a couple of years older than me.  She had a little more experience, but she and I came up with this idea that we presented--and it was approved, to do a housing test, a housing discrimination test where she would go to a housing complex, apply for an apartment, and then I would go, and then what kind of response did she get as opposed to what I got.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Shirley [ph.].  Regretfully, I can't think of her last name (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you went to apartments all over Memphis?
Speaker 2: All over the Memphis area.
Speaker 1: In black neighborhoods, white neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the neighbor- mostly integrated neighborhoods, but where we knew blacks did get an apartment and where there were neighborhoods that were known to be a little more racist, areas.  So we did a major test, and we did this on and off for at least a month.  This is how our work day went, just going to apartments.  She would apply or go in and inquire.  And then I would go in, and sometimes I would be told there was no apartment, where she'd fill out an application and told there were five apartments available.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one of those experiences, going in and being turned down--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) after Shirley had already been approved?
Speaker 2: Well, sometimes I wouldn't know until the end of the day when Shirley and I talked 'cause we weren't gonna, you know--
Speaker 1: Compromise.
Speaker 2: --talk to each other, unh-uh.  But at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about being turned down at one of these locations?
Speaker 2: And just thinking--well, sometimes I would remember the people, and I said, I know they're lying to me.  I just knew they were.  And there were times that Shirley would be leaving out, and I would be coming.  Of course, we didn't know each other.  And I would say to myself, I know they're lying to me, they're lying to me because it was just how, all their mannerisms and all.  And they were racists, and they were too quick to say, "We don't have any vacancies."  "Well, can I fill out an application anyway?"  "Well, you can," and I would, but, you know, it's like, no vacancies.  And she would be told they had five apartments ready.
Story_ID: 613494
Speaker 1: And, of course, after we did our test, started writing it up, and we would call back and call the people who owned the complexes, and they were saying it wasn't true and this.  So it was, it was rather controversial.  It was rather heated.  I got threats, I can't--
Speaker 2: What kind of threats?
Speaker 1: Saying if I knew what was good for me, then I wouldn't run this article.
Speaker 2: You got phone calls or letters?
Speaker 1: My roommate at the time got a phone call and was told to pass that on to me.  I did get some phone calls myself there at the job.  I even had one of the editors there say that he had gotten a call from a friend who happened to be one of the big property owners questioning whether this was real.  And I said, yes, it happened, and told him we're sticking with our story.  And it did publish.  They didn't alter it, but even one of the editors, I think he wanted me to back down, wanted us to back down from it.  And we did not.  So the story ran.
Speaker 2: So the threats came before the story was actually published or after?
Speaker 1: It was, it was be--after--well, before the story ran but after we had done the testing, while we were actually writing and because we were calling property owners, the big real estate people, tell them that we had done the test, and trying to get comments from them.  That's when the threats came.
Speaker 2: When they started getting nervous.
Speaker 1: They started getting nervous, not knowing what was going to be published.
Speaker 2: Did you realize that this was gonna be controversial, a little bit revolutionary?
Speaker 1: After we got to that point and got into it, when we proposed it, we just thought it would be a good investigation to do.  But once we started getting results and writing it up and getting the feedback, I realized, okay, this is, this is a little, this is a little tense.  People are getting nervous.  And still, we're talking about in the '70s [1970s], you know, racial discrimination is still alive and well, and I didn't know what somebody might try to do too.  But the people at the newspaper stood behind me, even though I told you, one editor questioned it.  And so Shirley [ph.] and I were very comfortable moving forward and with what we wrote, you know, very even handed; just the facts.  This is what happened, this is what we were told, this is a response from the property owner.  So, but it was a little, it was a little tense there, especially when someone called my roommate.  And I don't know if maybe the property we were living in was owned by one these big people or something like that, and the name, the lease, her name was on the lease, you know.  It was something like that.  I just felt it was a little too close to home.
Speaker 2: How did the black community respond in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: They were overwhelmingly pleased with the results and, you know, and I know that some legal actions were started, and it got a lot of play, people speaking out against it, you know.  So it was, it worked out well.  And, again, it got my name out there, not that that was the purpose of it.  But, you know, then the black leaders in the community, other than Harold Ford [Harold Ford, Sr.], began to know who I was, what I was doing, this new, young person at The Commercial Appeal because overall, they felt like The Commercial Appeal was a racist newspaper.  That was just the general feeling, not that I necessarily felt that way, but, you know, the community leaders, they just felt like they never got a break from the newspaper, so--
Story_ID: 613495
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many black staff members were there at The Commercial Appeal?
Speaker 2: Just a handful.  I'll tell you when I came there might have been two other people.  There was one girl in the society section, that's what they called it then, who hardly wanted to speak or acknowledge me. You know.  Well, it was like in high school [Bolivar Central High School, Bolivar, Tennessee], like there are the blacks who are there, they don't want to associate with other blacks.  And then, I came, and then it's like there was one other person, maybe or maybe when I came, there was no one else, and then someone else was hired.  I knew there were some people who came through and didn't make it.  And then someone, and then there were people hired and left, hired and left, and then eventually, there was another person who came and had some stability.  But there weren't many black people there.
Speaker 1: Was it known as a conservative paper?
Speaker 2: It was known as conservative.
Speaker 1: And what was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a Scripps Howard [E.W. Scripps Company] owned paper at the time.
Speaker 1: What was the paper most blacks in town [Memphis, Tennessee] read and supported?
Speaker 2: Well, they had no choice, so they read that one, and then there was the Tri-State Defender which is a offshoot of the Chicago Defender here.  It was there.  At that time, there were two major newspapers, the morning paper and the afternoon paper.  So the Memphis Press-Scimitar was the afternoon paper, and The Commercial Appeal was the morning paper, but they both were owned by Scripps Howard.  And eventually, they were folded into one.
Story_ID: 613496
Speaker 1: Do you remember how things changed for you either at the newspaper or outside the newspaper, after the story was published?  And also you mentioned some black leaders who started recognizing you other than Harold Ford, Sr.  Who were some of those leaders?
Speaker 2: One that comes to mind, and I still know him well, is Reverend Billy Kyles [HistoryMaker Reverend Samuel Billy Kyles] who happened to have been with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was assassinated.  He had a huge church [Monumental Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] there and was very active.  He was a very active leader there, and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Smith who was over the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], got to know her well.  Then there was Walter Bailey [HistoryMaker Walter Bailey, Jr.] who was a prominent attorney and who ended up being on the Shelby County [Tennessee] board.  I guess it's sort of like the Cook County [Illinois] board here.  So those three come to mind because they had long histories, and they're still active in the community.  And there was a Mr., his name was Ewing [Herman C. Ewing], and he became a close family friend.  He was over the Urban League [Memphis Urban League, Memphis, Tennessee].  I think I wanna say Charles Ewing [sic.]--oh, he'd be so hurt knowing I couldn't remember his first name now.  But Mr. Ewing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the prominent white leaders in town?
Speaker 2: Loeb, comes to mind, maybe the mayor at the time was Loeb, L-O-E-B [sic. J. Wyeth Chandler] because I know they had a lot of businesses too.  I have to think about that for a minute.  You know, I have been gone a long time.
Speaker 1: Right, but Loeb was a part of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that was, he was prominent. He was very, very--
Speaker 1: And the whole Martin Luther King, you know, right before his assassination with the sanitation workers [Sanitation Workers Strike].
Speaker 2: That's right.  And I think he was mayor when I came out of school [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] and started working at The Commercial Appeal, but I never had too much close interaction.  But that were things I covered and they were there.  I'm not saying they knew me, but, but I know that I covered things, remember being there as a reporter and taking notes and things like that.
Story_ID: 613497
Speaker 1: And how long did you remain at The Commercial Appeal?
Speaker 2: For four years.
Speaker 1: What were some of the additional stories that really stand out?
Speaker 2: I began doing religion stories, and there was another prominent leader.  Bishop Gilbert Patterson [Gilbert E. Patterson], I met way back then long before he became head of the Church of God in Christ.  And, you know, he passed last year.  He became a good friend, and I stayed in touch with him over the years and very proud and pleased with him.  And Bishop J.O. Patterson [J.O. Patterson, Sr.] was head of the Church of God in Christ at that time and his son [J.O. Patterson, Jr.] was in, eventually on the city council [Memphis City Council].  So there were a lot of prominent black people that I interacted with--
Speaker 1: Covering religion.  Do you remember one of the stories you covered?
Speaker 2: On religion, um, I just tried to make sure that I got some black people in there, and I know I did a story on Bishop Gilbert Patterson and some issues that he was dealing with, but I did a lot of stories on what some of the white people were doing too.  I did one story that some of my black religious friends and mentors let me know they didn't like.  And it was about, I think it was a pastor in particular who was very flashy with a big Rolls Royce and a limo and flashy clothes.  I did something about that.  They did not like that and said, this is not what we should be putting in front of our people.  You know, as a journalist, I just saw it as a story.
Story_ID: 613498
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you cover the historic Beale Street redevelopment, any of that stuff?
Speaker 2: I didn't really cover it.  I, some of that was starting when I was there, but it really did not take off 'til after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the situation there?
Speaker 2: On Beale Street?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was a wasteland.  At the, what we call the top of Beale Street, right near Main Street, there were a few pawn shops or some of those clothing stores that had all the flashy stuff, they might have still been open.  But going down Beale Street, it was nothing like what we know.  So therefore, I missed the original heyday of Beale Street.  So then when I came along, it was a wasteland, a slum, boarded up buildings, nothing was going on, and then I saw the beginning of the renaissance.  And, of course, most of that happened after I left, and going back now, it's like wow 'cause it's amazing.
Speaker 1: Had you ever taken trips as a girl to Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we went to Memphis all the time.
Speaker 1: So you remember Beale Street in its heyday?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I don't.  No, we might have gone to Memphis, but I never went to Beale Street.  It wasn't a place where dad [Alex Norment] would take his young daughters, you know what I mean.  It was, it was more like joints and clubs or, and that kind of thing.  That was--
Speaker 1: So, not shopping (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was before my--unh-uh, no shopping.  That was before my time, though, when it was in its hay day.  But the time I got to Memphis State [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], Beale Street was past its prime.  It was not a place that you would go.  And then after I started working for the newspaper, they started the revitalization, so I, I totally missed the heyday of Beale Street.  But I know the new heyday, and the revitalization of that whole area.  When I was there, you know, the Peabody Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee] was completely, like almost gutted and renovated.  So I saw the old Peabody and then I saw the new Peabody, and that whole area, the whole downtown Memphis being revitalized because when I was there, it was, the whole downtown was like a waste.
Speaker 1: In the early '70s [1970s], did you start to hear talk about who might get the bid to do the redevelopment?  Was there any kind of controversy starting about that?
Speaker 2: I do recall that black people were very much involved.  And I remember specifically an office being set up and black people being involved.  And one of my best friends [Cassandra Taylor] from college and I, we sat beside each other at graduation.  She was on the same dorm with me, I think she was working for someone at the time that was at the beginning of that renovation, and later she started working for the convention and tourism bureau [Convention and Visitors Bureau], which was a offshoot of that.  So I do remember black people being involved.
Story_ID: 613499
Speaker 1: When you were talking about taking trips to Memphis [Tennessee] when you were a girl, it reminded me that you also said you took trips to St. Louis [Missouri] during summers as a girl.  And I didn't touch on that as much.  What are some of your memories about St. Louis in the summertime, and I guess that would be in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: That would be in the '60s [1960s].  Of course, it was a whole new world from growing up in a small town [Bolivar, Tennessee].  So apartment buildings, almost like tenements.  I don't, I think my relatives lived in the projects, but they were like, you know, poor neighborhoods, but they kept them clean and all.  And I remember the quarters and the space being tight, little bitty yards as opposed to what we were used to in the South.  So basically, playing in the streets or in a vacant lot on the side.  I know one of my [maternal] aunts had a house, and there was a vacant lot, and that's where all the kids in the neighborhood playing, so that you were introduced to the kids and some of them were rough, a little inner city roughness that we weren't accustomed to.  And some of them would do things to us, you know, to hurt us, but, hey, it was all part of growing up too.  So I had fond memories of going to St. Louis.  In the South, my, I had all these uncles and aunts, and they were very caring, very loving.  It was a good experience and exposure to the zoo, the Saint Louis Zoo [Saint Louis Zoological Park].  I guess it's in Forest Park [St. Louis, Missouri], that area.  I remember that, and other outings like that, so it was good.
Speaker 1: Was there, the trips to the zoo, was there like, you know, the day that black people could go to the zoo or was it integrated when you went?
Speaker 2: I remember it being integrated.  I don't remember there being a day you could go to the zoo.  Unless my memory is failing me, I don't remember there being a day.  I remember at that point, it was all one.  Well, maybe in the '60s [1960s]--well, I guess that was in the '60s [1960s], but I don't remember there being a day that, that blacks could go.  I just remember going and just enjoying it.  And the, I guess the porpoises or whales, I remember the water shows and things like that that we just didn't see on a regular basis.  I was exposed to the zoo in Memphis, of course.  But the St. Louis Zoo stands out in my mind a lot.
Story_ID: 613500
Speaker 1: So bringing us back to 19--the 1970s, you left the newspaper [The Commercial Appeal] in what year?
Speaker 2: I left the newspaper in 1977.  I started at Ebony in March of 1977.  I ended up getting the job in, at Ebony.  I was working at the newspaper, doing well, had a future, they told me, was in Chicago [Illinois] for my uncle's [Lloyd Norment] wedding.  This is my father's baby brother's wedding.  He got married late in life, and stopped by Ebony 'cause I had a friend in Memphis [Tennessee] who knew some people here and said, "Stop by and say hello."  And I talked to people here and told them I would love to be able to do some writing out of Memphis for them.  And they took me around and introduced me to people like I was being interviewed.  I just didn't expect all of that.  But before I could get back home good, they had an assignment for me.  And this goes back to some of the things that I was covering.  This was the time that Al Green had had that tragic incident at his house.
Speaker 1: Describe what that incident was?
Speaker 2: It seems like a woman got killed at his house.  There was another woman there, and I think the woman who get killed had thrown grits on Al Green, and there was a big controversy, kind of a scandal because instead of calling the police, he called this officer or it was someone kind of high up that he knew who went to the house first and went through all of that.  And then it became public knowledge, but I was one of those assigned to try to get some more information on that.  And I had worked on that story.
Speaker 1: You had or had not?
Speaker 2: I had.  I worked on it.  So therefore, at Ebony, they wanted me to do a follow up with Al Green to see how that incident had changed his life.  And so I called and set up an interview with him and, and hung out with him for a day.  And, now, that was, to this day, one of the most unusual interviews I have ever done because Al Green is an eccentric person.  And I've gotten to know--he and I became friends after that.  He is eccentric, but that was my first time getting to know him and seeing how weird he really is or was.
Story_ID: 613501
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: What did you observe?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's what I'm about to tell you.  Now, I'm a reporter.  My notebook, I don't think I was even using a tape recorder.  If I was, I know it was my notebook, but every time I would write notes, he would stop talking.  "Do you have to do that?"  Here I am doing a story, not only for the newspaper but for a major publication [Ebony], and it's like, can't take notes?  So although in my family, we're known for not having good memories as you have seen from some of questions (laughter) on names.
Speaker 2: You're doing a great job.
Speaker 1: And so I just had to put my notebook away.  But we hung out all day, and so when he would leave the room, I would write all the notes down, write down everything he said.  When he'd come in, I would just listen and we would chat.  When I had another opportunity, I would write down everything.  So it was trying, but I had to make it work because he was, I could tell he had warmed up to me.  He liked me.  He wanted to talk to me, but something about when I started writing, he couldn't handle it.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: I know.  Wasn't that odd?
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Where did he take you?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You said where did he take me (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I mean did you go around town with him or what did you do that day?
Speaker 1: And I was about to get to that.  (Laughter) He had some property out, I would say about twenty or thirty miles outside of Memphis [Tennessee] in this area called Oakland [Tennessee].  Back then, it was like the country.  Now, Memphis and Oakland have moved together.  They have a whole housing suburbs out in the Oakland area.  And I always wonder, now, what is Al [Al Green], where was his house--he had this farm out there.  So it has a nice little house on the farm.  It's not where he lived.  He had a main house out in another farm, wooded area, but he wanted to go out to the farm.  And so that's where we went, and we were riding around and in his house where I couldn't take notes, you know.  But as long as he was talking and I wasn't taking notes, he would just talk and talk and was telling me everything about his background, his family.
Speaker 2: What was he telling you?
Speaker 1: About how he grew up.  I think he grew up in Arkansas, and from a very poor family and got put out of the house because he was into the kind of music he was.  It was really, you know, religious father, I think was a preacher, put him out, and you know, those kinds of things that we, we could relate a lot.
Speaker 2: What did he say about the grits incident?
Speaker 1: That's what I'm getting to because that came.  As a journalist I'd learned, in school [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], 'cause I'm still fresh out of school, that you save the hard questions for last.  You get people to warm up to you to open up, and I had spent the day doing that.  So on the way back, I'm saying, okay, I gotta ask the main stuff.  I gotta get to the question.  And I said, "You know, Al, this incident with the grits and at your house, how did that affect your life?  Has that changed your life?"  And then he started saying, yes, it had changed his life.  He's been born again, and he's found God again, and he has opened this church.  This is news.  That was, nobody knew that.  It had not been published, even though he had this church.  Nobody in Memphis knew that.  I'm at the newspaper [The Commercial Appeal], covering religion.  It was, so I have breaking news here.  And I remembered everything he said.  I wrote down every word.  Like I said, my family's not known for a good memory, but my memory was sharp that day.  And I wrote it down.  And he took me to my car.  I got in my car, and that's when I sat there, and I just, I had quotes and everything.
Speaker 2: So how soon after the grits incident did he start this church?
Speaker 1: Maybe a year, maybe a year or within a year 'cause this might have been a year later.  But he had already started this church, and he said how he was in a hotel and the Lord spoke to him, and he was just running around knocking on people's doors and this revelation.
Story_ID: 613502
Speaker 1: So I had, I had a scoop for Ebony, but then I also wrote it up for the newspaper [The Commercial Appeal] because it was, 'cause what they wanted was just a simpler, to the point, kind of story.  And, but that's, that changed his [Al Green] life.  So Ebony, of course, was pleased with that story.  They gave me another assignment, and before I could even finish that second assignment, they were offering me a job.  I was not looking for a job.  I felt secure in the job I had.  I felt like I had a future.  I was not looking to leave, but they offered me a job, and I thought about it, prayed over it, talked to my parents.  My dad [Alex Norment] was not, didn't like the thought of me going to that big city of Chicago [Illinois] that's filled with crime.  That's how he saw it, you know.  But I decided after deliberation, I would accept the job.
Speaker 2: What was the job?
Speaker 1: As assistant editor, as a writer, here at Ebony, right here on this floor in this building in the corner right over there.
Speaker 2: What did--so what month was that?
Speaker 1: I started the job in March 1977, and it's been good since then.  I thought I would be here like most journalists start out in their career, a couple of years, two or three years, move on, get some more experience, you know, before you settle down.  But I've been here all these years since.  It turned out to be good.  It's been a great experience.
Story_ID: 613503
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment, Lynn, L-Y-N-N, Norment, N-O-R-M-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist, a writer, interviewer like yourself, editor.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 20th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois] at The HistoryMakers' offices, 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago.
Story_ID: 613504
Speaker 1: Well, what we're doing today is we're completing an interview that was started some time ago.  And this is roll six, I guess, and we left off with you in Chicago [Illinois] after completing school [Memphis State University; University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee], after completing a stint with the Memphis Commercial Appeal.  You were working Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], Ebony magazine, and you're interviewing Al Green.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So what--you might have covered some of this, but let's go over it again, just for the sake of continuity.  But what, what happened with--that you were interviewing Al Green?  Now, he was a famous singer, and all that, but what, what was the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I lived in Memphis [Tennessee] at the time.  I worked at The Commercial Appeal newspaper, my first job out of college.  I had come to Chicago for my uncle's [Lloyd Norment] wedding.  My father's [Alex Norment] youngest brother lived in Chicago and was getting married.  He was in his late forties, getting married for the first time.  And I had a friend in Memphis, [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey, who is now a retired judge in Memphis, had said, told me that he had met some editors with Ebony, and that I should give them a call since I was coming to Chicago.  So the wedding was on a Saturday, and so that Monday, I called Ebony and asked for the managing editor, Mr. Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders].  I was told that Mr. Sanders was out of town, and I was put on hold for a while.  And the very nice receptionist came back to the phone and said, "No, but Mr. Herbert Nipson, who is the executive editor would love for you to come by."  So I was delighted.  And got myself together and went down to the Ebony offices at 820 South Michigan Avenue and met Mr. Herb Nipson who was a, a wonderful man.  And he had long, flowing curly hair.  If anyone knows of him, he was a, he was a great guy, showed me around the office, introduced me to the editors, introduced me to the legendary Mr. John H. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson].  And I was delighted.  And I told him that I was a reporter at the newspaper in Memphis and would love to do some stories for him out of the Memphis tri-state area.  There were a lot of things going on there, and I would just love to do some freelance work.  And Mr. Nipson said he would keep that in mind but within a week of my returning to Memphis, he gave me a call and asked me if I would do a story on Al Green.
Story_ID: 613505
Speaker 1: This was about two years after what is called the grits incident with Al Green.  And Mr. Nipson [Herbert Nipson] wanted me to do a story, talk to Al Green and the crux of the story would be, how did that incident affect Al Green's life and career?  And as a reporter at the newspaper [The Commercial Appeal] in Memphis [Tennessee], I had actually worked on stories dealing with that incident.  And we found out when we were, came to the office one morning, that the night before a woman had committed suicide at Al Green's house.  He had a, a large, very nice house out in Shelby Forest [Tennessee], is what it was called.  And there were some private homes in the area.  And he obviously had two women at his home.  And one of them had become angry, and thrown some boiling grits on Al Green.  He and the other woman had run into a bedroom and barricaded themselves there.  And then they heard a gunshot and the other woman, no later was found dead.  But instead of calling the 911 or the police department, Al had called someone he knew with the sheriff's department who came out to the house and then called the police.  So it was a big story in Memphis, and I had worked on it.  And so Mr. Nipson at Ebony had wanted me to do a follow up story to see how that incident had affected Al Green's life.  And I did, I did that story.  So, and it led to my career at Ebony.  So that was, it was an incredible opportunity.
Story_ID: 613506
Speaker 1: I think you said, we said off camera, it led to a lifelong friendship with Al Green.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.  That, yeah, even to- today.  And that--what was so interesting about that interview with Al Green that really made me feel like, okay, I have chosen the right career, is that he would not let me take notes.  And, you know, that is very unusual.  During that time, most people did not use tape recorders.  We did notes, especially newspaper reporters.  And we--Al wanted to meet him at a certain place, and I got in his car.  I believe it was a Rolls Royce, and we drove out to his farm, not where he lived out in Shelby Forest [Tennessee], but a farm about thirty miles outside of Memphis [Tennessee] in East Tennessee.  It was a rural area.  And he wanted to, the interview to take place out at his farm.  And so when we sat down for the interview, and I took out my notebook, and when he started talking, I started taking notes, which is what a reporter does.  And he would clam up.  He wouldn't talk.  And I said, "Well, what's wrong, Mr. Green?"  "Do you have to write that down?"  And I said, "Well, you know, I'm here to do a story on you for Ebony and normally, we take notes."  "Don't write it down."  And so when he would talk, and if I start writing, he would stop talking.  As long as I wasn't writing, and just listening, he would just talk and talk and talk and talk.  And so that was quite a challenge for me (laughter), you know, but--and my family, we joke in the family that we don't have the good memory genes, okay.  But that day, my memory was very sharp.  And, and it wasn't just one continuous interview.  He would get up, you know, and leave the room 'cause he had people there at the farm.  He had an assistant.  He had workers.  So he might leave the room for a few minutes, go check on something.  Then he would come back.  So every time he would leave the room, (laughter) I would write down everything he had said. Or I would go to the bathroom, write down everything he had said.  And this went on and off throughout the day.  And, of course, I was kind of nervous, and I'm--I was really very young and like how am I gonna deal with this and really do a good job for Ebony.  I didn't wanna like mess up on a opportunity like that.  So I felt like I did a pretty good job of, of capturing what he was saying, even some direct quotes and, and all of that.  And so it was time for us to head back to the city.  And like most writers or reporters, when you're doing a big story that's a sensitive issue, you always save that for your last question 'cause you never know how someone is gonna respond.  They might like completely shut down or might throw you out, you know, I've known that to happen to some people.  So I saved the big question about the grits incident for the end.  And so we were heading back to the city, and pleasantly talking and everything.  And so we were getting near the city, so I said, I have to ask this question.  I, I must get this done now or everything will be for naught.  And so I said, "Well, Reverend Green, you know--." Well, I didn't know if he was a reverend then, I'm sorry.  He was Al Green, Mr. Green.  And I say, "You know, a few years ago, there was an incident at your home where a young woman committed suicide, and I would like to know how did that affect your life?"  So for a while he just stared straight ahead and, and then he started talking and say that it definitely changed his life.  Even though he grew up in the church, which he had told me all about that, but the Lord had come to him and talked to him and told him that he should found a church.  And he was born again.  And he told me then, driving back to Memphis that he had indeed founded a church and he was a minister now.  And that was big news.  In Memphis, we didn't know about it.  Nationally, we didn't know about it.  So I felt like I had a real scoop.  So I listened to everything he said very carefully, asked some more questions, got the information.  Of course, I didn't write anything down.  And as soon as he dropped me off at my car, I sat there, and I had a little yellow Volkswagen, my first car.  And I sat there and wrote down everything he had said.  And then I drove home.  And I was excited.  And Ebony published the story.  They were very pleased.
Story_ID: 613507
Speaker 1: And then Ebony called me to do another story on a basketball player, a female basketball player at a school down in Mississippi.  There were--they had a writer assigned to it.  Something had happened.  The writer had gotten sick.  They wanted me to go at the last minute.  I made arrangements and went and before that story was published, they called and offered me a job.  I didn't expect that.  I was looking forward to a career at the newspaper, and when I did resign, the editor at the newspaper told me he regretted, but he could not compete with the bright lights of the big city.  And, but he made me aware that I definitely had a, a bright future there at The Commercial Appeal newspaper.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So did you regret leaving Memphis [Tennessee] at all?
Speaker 1: No (laughter).  I love Memphis, and I went home often, and I was, I have a very close family.  I have five sisters, of course, my, my father [Alex Norment] and there was my stepmother [Lula Smith Norment].  My father did not--he was very apprehensive about my leaving.  He didn't try to stop me, but all he knew was, you know, it was a lot of crime in Chicago [Illinois] when I was like, still like twenty-four, twenty-five.  So to him, I was still a baby.  And for me to go so far away from home all by myself, but when he came to visit me in Chicago and saw where I lived and that it was a safe neighborhood--I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on the lake [Lake Michigan], he--then he accepted it.  He understood it, and he came to visit me as much as he could.  He didn't ride planes or trains.  He always drove.  But, you know, I, so I never regretted it because I always went home.  And I must say for twenty-five years when I moved to Chicago, I went home every single Christmas, in addition to a few other times.  So I never broke that connection.  And, and working at Ebony, I, you know, we had what they called back then the WATS [Wide Area Telephone Service] line and later you could just call long distance.  So I was on the phone with my father and my sisters, like constantly.  So we had that connection.
Speaker 2: Okay, and now, you went to Memphis State [Memphis State University]?
Speaker 1: I went to Memphis State--
Speaker 2: Okay, and--
Speaker 1: --later the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And you had a uncle here in Chicago at least, right?  Were there any other relatives here?
Speaker 1: What now?  It's--
Speaker 2: Did you have a uncle here in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did, and that is the one who got married (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And had got me to Chicago in the first place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, my Uncle Lloyd [Lloyd Norment] lived here up until maybe three years ago.  He had retired already, raised two daughters who were, you know, very young, when I was telling you he got married very late.  So I was very close to him and his daughters because he divorced when they were like five and six years old.  So I, I helped him a lot.  They lived out in the suburbs, and so the daughters are, are doing exceptionally well now.  And he moved back to Tennessee and that is where he lives now.
Story_ID: 613508
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], the--how--you already knew the Vernon, [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, right, too?
Speaker 2: I met him when I came here.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But then we realized we were from the same part of Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he was from the Brownsville [Tennessee] area.  And I was from Bolivar [Tennessee] and that was maybe forty miles apart.  And I'd been to Brownsville a few times.  And his last--of course, he was a Jarrett and there were some Jarretts in my family.  And we knew a lot of the same people.  So Vernon became my surrogate father and my mentor in, in the media.  He got me very much involved in the journalist organization here, and I became, you know, president of the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter].
Speaker 1: Now, was it founded around the time that you--had it already been founded when you got here?
Speaker 2: You know, my--when I moved here, I think it had been founded maybe about the same time and the organization's second convention or third--second convention was in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I went to here.  So maybe it was founded the year before or two years before.  I think it was founded in '75 [1975].  I should know the date right off.
Speaker 1: Right, I think you're right.  I think you're right, seventy--
Speaker 2: I moved here in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talking about the National Association of Black Journalists and the Chicago Association of Black Journalists--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --chapter.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Vernon Jarrett, who was the founder of the Chicago chapter and the national, right?  He was a--
Speaker 2: Well, he was a founder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one of the founders.
Speaker 2: --of the national.
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the founders of it.
Speaker 2: And he was a great supporter of--maybe he was the founder of the local too.  And that would--might have been right before I got here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then he hosted a, a national convention for NABJ here in Chicago right after I moved here.  And I remember him calling me and wanting--and asking me to come down and accept an award for Moneta Sleet who was, and a, and a Pulitzer Prize winning photographer for Ebony.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I got to know Vernon very well, and became very involved in the local chapter, so I became president, ended up on the board of the national organization.  And then at some point in, in Vernon's later years, we revamped the local organization, started a new chapter and called it the National Association of Black Journalists, Chicago Chapter.  And, and Vernon definitely was a, a cofounder of us, our founding president of that, and I'm still on the board of that group.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so many--there's a connection.  I know we had [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock who is Vernon Jarrett's friend.
Speaker 2: I know Paul, I know Paul Brock very well.  I talked to Paul Brock earlier this week.  We're still in touch.  Paul was the founding executive director of the National Association of Black Journalists.  So I started going to--I think NABJ's third conference was in Washington [D.C.].  I was there, met Paul, started going to all the conventions.  So I, I got involved with the national association when we only had a few hundred people gathering for a convention.  So, and I've been--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with it ever since, but I still know Paul, and he's still very much involved.  And he and I are co-chair of NABJ's development committee.
Story_ID: 613509
Speaker 1: Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes, sir (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think it would fai- probably correct to say--and correct me if I'm wrong, that this is the heyday of Johnson's publishing because of the radio station.  You had Tom Joyner on the radio at WJPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  You had Ebony and Jet were both doing well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was really--
Speaker 2: You know, that is the term I have used a couple of times.  I was there during the heyday.  And it truly was a heyday.  Of course, at the time, we had no idea, but it was the heyday.  And things were just going exceptionally well for the magazine in light of everything.  I know Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was a hard worker.  He always said that he didn't have any hobbies (laughter).  You know, his hobby was his job.  That is what he did.  And it was like he worked all the time.  But I don't feel like he was exceptionally stressed like people now that are workaholics, and they, overly stressed.  But he got great joy from his work.  And the magazine was doing well.  And so at Ebony, I started off, you know, I think the title was assistant editor.  As a writer, we all had a title of editor.  And I worked my way up because I was just, I was a reporter, hard worker, did my work (laughter), and I was respectful.  And I had a knack for writing and interviewing people, making people comfortable.  And that was nourished there.  And, and I was mentored.  So I had a chance to work with, of course, Mr. Herbert Nipson, that I mentioned, Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders], the original gentleman that I had wanted to, to meet that day, and he was out of town.  But he was an exceptionally good writer.  And so he mentored and edited my work, and, and then later I worked very closely with [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett.  When I first got there, Lerone pretty much was closed up in his office writing his books and not as involved in the day to day operation of the magazine.  But later, Mr. Johnson coaxed him out of his office and he became the editor.  And, and Lerone and I became very, very close.  So I, I worked with some incredible, legendary historic people.  And I'm very pleased with that.  But I felt like they really had a great influence on me and my direction and my career and, and Mr. Johnson and Lerone were like father figures to me.  So that was my father and there was [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett.  And there were those two gentlemen.  They meant a lot to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about Era Bell Thompson?  Is she there?
Speaker 2: You know, she was there, but not on the daily basis.  From what I recall when I got there, I know she had an office, but she was not there on a day to day basis.  But I did meet her, um-hm, and I do recall her.  And I can't remember exactly what the relationship with the magazine was, but I know she was still there.  And her name was probably still in the masthead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a--we were, when I first started this job, we were out in North Dakota, and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --black cultural center [Era Bell Thompson Multicultural Center, Grand Forks, North Dakota] is named for her.
Speaker 2: For her, yeah, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think her family is the only black family in town.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I say, in reading and learning more about her, and that's very odd, North Dakota, you know, for a black person.  So, oh, yeah, she was, she was legendary.  But when I got there, to Ebony, of course, there was Mr. Nipson.  There was Herbert Masacor [sic.] and Charles Sanders, the managing editors.
Speaker 1: Oh, Hans Massaquoi, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Massaquoi, um-hm.  And we're closed it with him.  And there was Alex Poinsett.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then there was Lerone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Era Bell still had an office there, but she was not involved in the day to day operations of the magazine.  Maybe she was still doing some writing or--um-hm, but I definitely met her.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause she, she was the only other female that I remember, you know, whose name I remember as a writer down there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's true.  She was at her time.  She was.
Story_ID: 613510
Speaker 1: In 1977, as we were saying, it was the heyday of Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], but I know some--there were people in the black community who were a little upset of the closing down, the year before you got there of Black World.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I heard some repercussions of that.  But, you know, I just had to listen.  You know, I was young (laughter), fairly innocent, but I, I did hear a lot of the criticism, and I heard stories, of course, around the office about, was it Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hoyt W. Fuller, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, I heard stories about Hoyt 'cause he had worked there and Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders], and they all knew him well, and--
Speaker 1: And he was the editor of Black World and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --all the, the founder, one of the founders of the, you know, Organization of Black American Culture was a group of writers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --the OBAC writers, with Gwendolyn Brooks--
Speaker 2: And I'm not--
Speaker 1: --and others, you know.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if I met him, but I know, it's amazing, I remembered his name, yeah.  But he was, he was still--his spirit was still there, let's, let's say.  And I know there was a lot of criticism.  And so I don't know firsthand exactly how that decision was made.  It was, I was about to say, that was before my time.
Story_ID: 613511
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], now, Chicago [Illinois] was going through some changes because Mayor Richard J. Daley--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --had just passed away.
Speaker 2: He had just passed, and I can't recall if he passed after I got here or right before I got here.  But I think I was in, I think I had moved to the city when he passed.  And what was so ironic was during that year, Elvis [Elvis Presley] passed.  So back in Memphis [Tennessee], there was big news.  And I'm saying, oh, if I was still in Memphis, they would've had me out there doing Elvis stories.  And then I came here, and this was like legendary, legendary Mayor Daley passed.  So, I, I never met him personally or knew anything about it, but, you know, I knew all about him.  I knew all about him.  And after that, of course, the, the mayors that we, that we had in the city during that period, including Harold Washington.  So I was very much involved with the, with the NABJ chapter [National Association of Black Journalists, Chicago Chapter] when Mayor Washington was elected, and I was at the inaugural and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now, I wanna get to that, to the activity there.  But I wanted us to walk us through maybe some of your early stories leading up to that, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Leading up to 1983 and the election of Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was it, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 613512
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], you're kind of welcomed and get you get to know the staff of Ebony and--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  Those early years, yeah, just getting to know how Ebony operated, understanding the, the players, you know, Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], Lerone [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett], Mr. Nipson [Herbert Nipson], Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders], how everything worked, what Mr. Johnson liked and didn't like.  So I was just following orders, doing assignments.  But they had me traveling, very soon, doing stories, and, you know, and I was growing and learning and, and getting national exposure.  And the people back home in Bolivar [Tennessee] were like, very happy to see my name in Ebony.
Speaker 1: So typically then--well, let me ask you this question first.  Did, did anything surprise you about Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], you know, coming from the outside, having, you know, seen the publications in the community, and, you know, having a perception of it, did anything about working for Johnson surprise you, I mean, you know, in terms of how they did things or--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say anything surprised me.  I guess and the most surprising is a man of Mr. Johnson's stature was there every day working just like the rest of us and very, very accessible, on the elevator with you, in the cafeteria with you and just there.  He was a very hands on person.  And if you did something wrong, you could hear it from him personally.  And if you did something good that he liked, he would compliment you personally.  And those were highlights for me when he would tell me personally, "Oh, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], did a good job on that story. Lynn, you did a good job."  "Thank you, Mr. Johnson," you know, that, you know, that would make my day, my week or whatever.  And then there were some things maybe he didn't care for, you would hear that too.  But I learned from my mistakes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Could you characterize what his concerns were basically?
Speaker 2: What now?
Speaker 1: What his concerns were on a day to day basis with--
Speaker 2: Concerns?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Putting out a good magazine, selling magazines, getting the stories.  He was very much involved in what the cover story would be and who would do it, how it would be photographed because in that business, the whole thing is, I mean you can put out a good product, but you have to get people to buy it, to pick it up off the newsstands, to subscribe.  So you have to give them something they want that's gonna make them renew their subscription or pick that magazine up and buy it.  So that was a major concern to make sure that we had the, the right mix of stories.  And, of course, with Lerone there, we're also gonna have the meat, some good historical pieces and, and dealing with people in the community, you know, not just the entertainers 'cause people may buy it for the entertainers.  But you wanna have things about regular people in the neighborhood, the doctors, the lawyers, the leaders, what's going on in the political world, the business people, you know.  So there--you know, I was involved in all of it and had a chance to do stories across the board as opposed to working for the newspaper, you pretty much were, you know, were limited to, to silos.  Okay, you either did this kind of story, that kind of story.  You know, and I never wanted to do sports, although I ended up doing a couple of, you know, personality profiles on sports figures.  But everybody knew that's not my forte, but everything else, I had a, I had an opportunity to do.  And one thing I liked about Ebony is, it was up to you to come up with good story ideas.  Of course, there were things that you were assigned to do, but I learned quickly, if you come up with good story ideas and you can get you--you have to pitch your story, and if you sell it to the, to the editors and to Mr. Johnson, and it's approved, then you get to do that story, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And which is very fair, (cough) a very good way to go.  So I constantly was looking for new story ideas.
Story_ID: 613513
Speaker 1: We're just talking off camera about some of the other publications like Ebony Jr! and I think it was a fashion magazine that Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] published too, and, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was--when I came to Ebony, Ebony Jr! was going strong.  I always thought it was a good publication.  I think I did a couple of things for them too.  And I was saddened when they, when they discontinued it.  Um-hm, but I knew the editors there and all, and, yeah, stayed in touch with one of the editors for many, many years after that, yep.
Speaker 1: It lasted for quite a while though.
Speaker 2: For quite a while, for quite a while, and it was very popular with the children.  But the magazine, you know, did not take ads, and it was really being, you know, supplemented by the company.  I guess the question is if they could a found a way to make it profitable, but they just decided to close it.  Of course, I had no part in that decision (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, I can't think of the publication that, that kind of was a spinoff of the Fashion Fair [Ebony Fashion Fair], but I'm not, I can't--but I know they had one that was, that was--
Speaker 2: A publication that spun off from Fashion Fair?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it kind of spun off from Fashion Fair, and I don't know how long it lasted, but there was, you know, a more fashion oriented publication.
Speaker 2: And I know there was a very celebrity oriented publication there as well when I first got there, but it, it also was discontinued after a couple of years.  And then later, Ebony Man was launched, that publication.  So I was there from its beginning until its end (laughter).  Yeah, I think I still have his last issue among my Ebonies and a, and a few Jets that I just keep.  You know, it's hard to keep all these magazines.  But I do have boxes.  It's hard for me to throw away a Ebony or a Jet.  And so I have--would like to think I have almost every magazine, at least ones with, I have stories in.  And that's, that's most of them during the time I was there.
Story_ID: 613514
Speaker 1: Now, can you remember the first major story that you were assigned to do when you were em- after you were employed by Jet [sic. Ebony]?
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's after the Al Green story and the other one. From what I recall, I know I did a story on Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  Way back then, they were coming up on a anniversary, and I know right now they're in their Founders Day, and certainly a historic year for them, and maybe it's a hundredth year.  But I remember doing a story on Delta Sigma Theta, and that kind of story, you pretty much end up doing, you know, on the telephone and interviewing a lot of different people.  And then I remember doing a story on Shirley Caesar.  And I know I had to travel to North Carolina, meet there.  I think we went to a concert, and I rode with her on the bus, maybe to her hometown or to the next stop.  And, you know, it was the first I'd done anything like that.  And I remember that it worked out well.
Speaker 1: Now, she's a famous gospel singer.
Speaker 2: Famous gospel singer, Shirley Caesar.  She's still around.  So she was one of the first people I interviewed when I, you know, when I joined the staff of Ebony.  I remember that and the Delta Sigma Theta story as being amongst the early, early years.  And then I don't know if it was during the first year or two, but back during that time, and I recently ran across this story too, it was on Sisters of the Oblate [Oblate Sisters of Providence], a order of black nuns, think they were based in Maryland.  And they had a historic background 'cause I remember doing the research and, and going there to visit and, and writing their story.  So those were some of the (laughter), my earliest stories, and they were, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're still around and right outside of Baltimore [Maryland], yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see, they're outside of Baltimore, okay.  Yeah, so that was, and I grew up Baptist, (laughter) so, you know, that--getting, doing all the research for that story was, was very interesting to me.
Story_ID: 613515
Speaker 1: I assume that you enjoyed coming up with your own story ideas better than the ones that were given to you, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed coming up with my own--I, I enjoyed being assigned stories too.  But I enjoyed coming up with my own story ideas.  And so over the years I, I worked hard at that, and it paid off.  And they always, you know, appreciated it.  Just say if I came up with ten good story ideas, let's say three of them were approved.  Hey, I was happy.  And then sometimes, I would just come up with something that, might consider, just okay, something wild, out of the box.  Then it would get approved (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, how would you come up with your story ideas?  Did you have a process or just--
Speaker 2: I had a process.  I did a lot of reading.  And it's, it's good for any journalist, and I tell young journalists now, you have to read, read, read.  And now whether you're reading on the Internet--although I feel like you still need to read newspapers and magazines. I would go through magazine, go through newspapers, and, and then see if there was a local story that might be a national angle.  And, of course, always what was going on with celebrities and, and people, I'll say, people in the news, you know, and come up with a different angle, original angle, not just copy what someone else had done.  But if you, at least with me, if I can take a story and read it and then I can see how I can adapt it for the Ebony audience, and to come up with something fresh, something different, and still, until the very end I was, you know, always working on coming up with new story ideas.  And it worked out, it worked out.
Story_ID: 613516
Speaker 1: Of course, as I became more comfortable in the job, more stories were out there.  My name became more recognized.  I began to do more celebrity oriented stories.  And then, end up becoming the, the go to person for a lot of that.
Speaker 2: Now, were those considered the plum stories of Ebony, the celebrity stories?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plum, to a great extent because a lot of times, you're gonna end up with a, a cover story.  So for any publication, you get front page, you get the cover story, that's considered plum.  And those just aren't necessarily handed to you on a silver platter.  And by back in the early days, we had Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders] who was the go to person for celebrity stories.  And he had been there for many, many years.  He was in a high position.  So I wasn't trying to compete with him, but make my own way.  And so what you need to, to do is then you find an artist and you put pitch a story--a new artist, an up and coming artist, and if they became a big star, then you end up being that point person for that, for that particular entertainer.  So now, I'm talking about in the '80s [1980s].  I'd been at Ebony for less than ten years, you know, when Whitney Houston first came out, and we started hearing about her.  And I was able to get that interview.  And so even to this day, I'm the only person at Ebony who's ever interviewed Whitney Houston.  And I've interviewed her numerous times, and that's because I started with her at the beginning of her career.  And that was the case for some other celebrities as well even though I'm jumping ahead, the same thing for Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles].  You know, I'm the only person at Ebony--even though I'm, I've, I left Ebony a couple of years ago, but still no one else at Ebony has interviewed Beyonce or Whitney to this date 'cause I started with them when their careers were just being launched.  And who knew if they were gonna be the big celebrities that they became.  But you form relationships and, and establish a relationship not only with the artist, but with the publicists, the managers, or if their parents are around (laughter).  And not that I did this in a very calculating way, but it was just naturally who I was, being southern, and being open and friendly, even though I was kind a shy at the beginning of my career.  But, you know, doing what I did, I had to put that shyness behind me.  But just establishing relationships and nurturing those relationships over the years really helped me, you know, succeed at Ebony because--and then it became that if, if there was someone that maybe I didn't even suggest, they would say, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], why don't you pursue this."  And it would give me plum stories because I would never come back empty handed.  And only a couple of times, like--did things like go wrong.  So I established a reputation for being able to, to get it done, to follow through.
Story_ID: 613517
Speaker 1: So, for, for instance, if you, if they sent--in the Whitney Houston case, for instance, so you would--would you set up an appointment with her to make sure that, I mean everything is set up?  Would you just go to the location and try to get an interview?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: How do you--
Speaker 2: We set it up ahead of time.  Ebony was very well respected in the community.  So, you know, Whitney having had the family background that they did, they knew all about Ebony.  So when Ebony calls, they respond.  So it wasn't just [HistoryMaker] Lynn Norment.  And then she got to know me.  But being with a publication like Ebony, you certainly will get people's attention and can get them on the phone, get the publicist.  And it may not always work out, but, yeah, so you could, you could get in the door.
Speaker 1: Well, I asked that question because you said, you know, you never came back empty handed.  Was there a chance that you could--I mean in these, in a celebrity interview, even though you set it up, that you would come back empty handed?
Speaker 2: It's possible.  There were times that you would come back, something went wrong, and you'd come back with no interview (laughter), with no story, yeah.  That, that can happen.  Or you could come back and not have a good story, not have anything interesting or exiting.  And, yeah, and that's considered empty handed too.
Speaker 1: Had that ever happened to you, you come back with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I always came back with something, you know, because I did a lot of research.  And I made people very comfortable where they could, they would talk with me and open up to the point that there were a couple of times (laughter), I had entertainers call me and say, "Well, Lynn, I was just telling you that.  I didn't know you were gonna publish it."  You know, but I know they might have become comfortable, but still I never said off the record.  But I never would publish anything that I thought, you know, would be damaging or what--'cause I guess I'm a sensitive, more of a sensitive person too.  And, and there were times I would say, "Now, you said, so and so and so and so.  And dah, dah, dah," you know, to make sure they knew what they were saying or to say, "You don't have no problems with this or do you wanna elaborate on it more?"
Story_ID: 613518
Speaker 1: I even had a--one time someone, a male entertainer said something to me, and I gave him a chance to clean it up.  But, no, that's what he wanted to say.  He said something to the effect, and I'll say, this was Wesley Snipes during the period--of course, I'm sure at some point in his life, he dated black women.  But he was known to date non-black women, and he, and we were talking about relationships and women and what kind of women do you like, and he let me know, he has a problem with black women.  And, and for whatever reason, he went on to elaborate.  I don't wanna put words in his mouth, and I can't remember the exact quote, but he let me know that black women had a problem.  I don't know if he said they were mean or something.  "I can't get along with them, they got issues."  And I gave him every opportunity to clean that up.  He said, "No.  This is what I said, this is what I mean."  Oh, my gosh.  Even the people around the office [of Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], when they read that article, it was like fire shooting out of there.  They were--he upset a lot of women, and a lot of people still come up to me today talking about Wesley Snipes (laughter).  But, so things like that.
Story_ID: 613519
Speaker 1: Now, another time that I had difficulty (laughter) was with Anita Baker.  And she is one that I started interviewing at the beginning of her career, and she would call me her friend and, you know, I didn't, wasn't trying to be friends necessarily.  But she invited me to spend the night at her house.  I never did, you know, things like that.  I mean so but she felt close to me like she could really talk.  And so I'd done stories on her, and then she got married.  She had her children.  So this story was supposed to be on her with her, with her baby, her husband, all of that.  I had set it up.  We went up to Detroit [Michigan], went to her house--at this point, I conclude she was having some postpartum depression issues.  I loved her music then.  I still love her music.  And I like her, and I don't wanna be negative about her, but I know she was dealing with some issues.  I'd been hearing about it.  I think she had fired her record company or if not before my interview but right after, felt like they weren't doing enough for her.  So she was going through a period of turmoil.  But I get up there, and she assumed I was gonna bring another photographer.  She did not want the photographer I brought with me to do the cover shot.  And, and we had a stylist to bring clothes, so she didn't like any of the clothes.
Speaker 2: So really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was not happy that day (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So you're revealing some other things that we didn't know.  We--for instance, we didn't know that when you go to shoot a story that you actually provide the--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  What now?
Speaker 2: I mean I think most people listening to this won't know, as I didn't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when you shoot a story, sometimes you bring the clothes for the--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  I can tell stories about the clothes.  But, yes, and now it's like definitely, you--for the big stars, okay, you work with, you have a photographer.  You choose the photographer.  You talk with them about the stylist, who do they wanna use, the makeup artist and all of that.  Early in my career [at Ebony], it wasn't quite that set.  But later it became--and so, Anita Baker would not--she let me interview her, but she would not let us do the cover story.  And it became a nasty issue.  And so that was the one time I felt like I came back without what I was--what I went out to get.
Speaker 2: So you got the interview, but--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --she wouldn't, she wouldn't allow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let us shoot the cover story.
Speaker 2: Okay, she wouldn't allow--
Speaker 1: See with the cover--
Speaker 2: --you to shoot it?
Speaker 1: She wouldn't, unh-uh.  We did pictures with the family and her husband, all around her place.  They were on a--I think near the--they lived on the lake.  Anyway, we did all these other pictures.  They were great.  She wouldn't let us do the cover shoot.  She would not let us do the cover shoot.  So, you know, I came back with everything else.  I still felt like, oh, I have failed.  So.
Story_ID: 613520
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the '80s [1980s] too, I take it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.  This (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was at the height of her--
Speaker 2: This is in the '80s [1980s] at--
Speaker 1: Now, did the story appear at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, I wasn't gonna like not succeed (laughter).  So we continued to work with her on the phone, after I had to explain to Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and everybody what happened, you know.  We were able to shoot her in Los Angeles [California], with the photographer that she had wanted.  And it was a photographer we use.  It was our photographer, but we weren't gonna fly him--we normally didn't fly this photographer to Detroit [Michigan] and other places.  Now, he would have, but I did not understand that she was expecting that photographer, you know.  She didn't call him by name, but she might a said, "Oh, the photographer that does all those covers?"  And I said, yes, and the photographer I had with me, he did do a lot of covers.  So once we understood that and too, with Mr. Johnson, they say, okay, let's still try to shoot her.  She was gonna be in L.A. shortly after that or maybe she went to L.A. for us to do that.  But we ended up shooting her in the studio, and it all worked out.  And I think it still ended up being on the cover of the [Ebony] issue that we originally had wanted it for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a very, very stressful time (laughter), very stressful.  And, but then it became--all in the media, it was understood Anita Baker is having some issues, you know.  And, and she was going through a tough period there, but, but we made it through it.
Speaker 1: I know she's seen as sensitive, very sensitive.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, very sensitive.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I love her music, I still do, and I love her, and that was, of all the interviews I did and, you know, and all, that was the only one that didn't quite work out.  But in the end, it did.  And I remember one time Mr. Johnson was trying to reach Anita Baker for an event or something that he was involved in.  And everybody had been calling Anita Baker, trying to reach her here, trying to reach her there, and they couldn't.  And I was working late as usual, and he came down to my office and saw that I was still there and say, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], I'm trying to reach Anita Baker, and I know you've interviewed her.  You're close to her.  Can you help me?"  (Laughter) And I feel embarrassed to even say this, but I, I called her, her boyfriend.  Anita Baker was right there, put him on the phone with Mr. Johnson--put her on the phone with Mr. Johnson.  So, that really lifted me in his eyes, you know.  But it just so happened, the first number I called, there she was.  And he was standing right there, was able to hand the phone to him.  And he got what he needed, you know, so, so she was, you know, there were good and bad.  And so most of the Anita Baker, my Anita Baker stories are, are good, are very good.
Story_ID: 613521
Speaker 1: How many did you write, do you think?
Speaker 2: I must have interviewed her [Anita Baker] three of four times.  I interviewed Whitney [Whitney Houston], maybe five or six.  Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], three, four, five, six, you know.  There are some people that I've interviewed multiple times, Tina Turner, probably at least three times, Al Green, three or four times, you know, just--and like Spike Lee, I interviewed probably four or five times.  So there are people that I started with at the beginning of their careers and throughout my career at Ebony I was the go to person.  So whoever their publicist was, you know, I would be in touch with them.  And I just, and I was, I was a connection.  So that really helped me move up at Ebony, but it wasn't just that, but I was a hard worker, and I did a story.  And I did--even when I was doing the celebrities, I might have had two other stories in the magazines about other things.  So it's not like I only did celebrity stories.  I did some of everything.
Story_ID: 613522
Speaker 1: There's one here I know from '86 [1986], and they asked me to ask you about, and that's one called 'Resolve Tensions Between Black Men and Women' [Lynn Norment].  And that was the--
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, I became for Ebony the relationship expert.  People always said back then, "You ought a be writing books about relationships."  And there were a lot of books out.  I never pursued that (laughter), and I don't regret it.  I guess I could have become a relationship guru.  But I wrote dozens, if not hundreds of relationship stories.  So you have one particular title there, but I have written, written about relationships from every angle you can imagine, and earlier I was talking about the research and coming up with story ideas, I did a lot of research to come up with my story ideas.  I could read a story and find one little paragraph, one line, and then turn that into a, a story.  You know, with other interviews and that kind of thing, I would just the idea.  So I had a lot of relationship experts in my, in my rolodex back then, psychologists, psychiatrists, marital therapists, and then real life people.  And, of course, once a lot of black people start writing books about relationships, you know, that too.  So I did a lot of relationship, and I feel like I helped a lot of people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that was a major theme in black life and still is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it still is.
Speaker 1: --especially in a family publication like Ebony.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And because for so many people, you have to think about, of course, there're people in Chicago [Illinois], New York [New York], Detroit [Michigan], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], they have a lot of resources.  But for a lot of people throughout the South like my little town, Bolivar, Tennessee, where there were little towns in Michigan, Alabama, Mississippi, all over, they didn't have a lot of resources.  They didn't have many places to get information about black people and things that could help them live a better life, and relationships is a issue for everybody, whether you're married, single, looking, divorced or whatever, everybody wants information about how to have a better relationship, how to find a husband, how to meet people, how to interact, or how to deal with the problems that they were having.  And, and this is one thing I felt that Ebony did a good job at, and that is, you know, providing that service.  And it's something that even today is a part of what, what Ebony offers, you know, because back during the, the time, during the heyday, we recognized Ebony provides a service, information, and entertainment for people who may have no other place to get that kind of information to stay up to date on what's happening.  And we got a lot of positive feedback.  I remember, you know, interacting with a lot of journalists, and maybe it was at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I was with several Essence, editors, Essence magazine.  And I knew them from NABJ.  They weren't friends, but they'd say, "Oh, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], you all are kicking butt.  You're doing those relationship articles and you all are doing, you are doing a good job."  And it was like coming from Essence, you know, I thought that was a, a pretty high compliment and, because they did relationship stories too.  But they felt like we were keeping up if not outdoing them.  So they were trying to get up to snuff too.  So--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was important.
Story_ID: 613523
Speaker 1: In terms of relating to celebrities, I guess the difference between Ebony and maybe some of the white publications or mainstream publications was that rather than approach it from a sensational aspect of this is a big crisis in this celebrity's life like the National Enquirer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or something like that, you--Ebony seems to model the celebrity's lifestyle for aspiring, an aspiring community in some (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We always found a different approach to the celebrities, even if the story came during the time that there might have been sensational headlines and people wanted to know more about what was going on in relation to that particular incident, we would approach in it, I guess now they would say in a more holistic manner.  We wanted to offer our readers the perspective from that celebrity, not just reporting so and so, so and so, you know, had a breakup with their spouse or got into a fight here or got kicked off this movie or that.  We wanted to offer their perspective, how they were feeling, what was happening in their lives.  And, and a lot of people would come back to us and say, now, they feel like they had the real story 'cause we would let the celebrity tell their story.  You know, you wanna--and they, and people trusted Ebony and they felt that if they read it in Ebony, then this is the truth, that we weren't sensationalizing it, making it up or putting words in the celebrity's mouth and forcing them to say something that may not have been true, you know, and saying they said something when they did not.  But we always dug deeper and got another perspective, and when we did stories on celebrities, we also talked about their families, and whether they were married, their children, got everybody involved in the story, their parents, like Whitney Houston's parents.  I've--I did a Mother's Day story after Whitney had her daughter [Bobbi Brown].  Her daughter was like a little toddler, and it was a pretty cover too.  It was Whitney, her mother [HistoryMaker Cissy Houston] and her daughter.  That was for a Mother's Day issue.  There was another year we did Whitney and her father for a Father's Day issue.  You know, we wanted to offer other sides of the celebrity, and, of course, when Whitney got married, we did her and Bobby [Bobby Brown] (laughter), you know.  So we wanna offer more about what's going on behind the scenes with the entertainer.
Story_ID: 613524
Speaker 1: And I know a minute ago, we talked about--or some minutes ago, we were talking about the wardrobe, attire, and that was new for me because--and that was the first time when I did my first story on Whitney [Whitney Houston]--I think it was back in '85 [1985] or '84 [1984], Whitney was just coming on the scene.  I was assigned to go do the story, and one of the managing editors had been the one--even though I had set it up and done this for--I can't remember why he got involved.  He had talked with the manager and this and that.  Okay, and I was told, you just need to be at a certain place, you know, when--and, et cetera.  I get there.  Whitney has no clothes.  She's expecting us to bring clothes.  No one had ever told me that I need to arrange to have wardrobe there for Whitney.
Speaker 2: So is this--had it been a practice at Ebony to bring clothes before--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) prior to that time?
Speaker 1: No, it really had not.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was wondering how that got started, you know?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.  And, and that was the first time I personally had, headed a story, written a story, been on the shoot, and I was responsible for also getting the wardrobe.  I knew nothing about that.
Speaker 2: So was this a practice of, say the leading mainstream magazines to bring the clothes?
Speaker 1: Yes, for the big, big celebrities.  And also, you have to keep in mind, Whitney's background is as a model.  So Whitney had been a model before she became a recording artist.  So models always have had their clothes provided, okay.  This was the first shoot she was doing for Ebony.  And this was our first shoot with her.  And she's assuming we're bringing clothes.  We're assuming she's bringing her clothes 'cause we had done shoots with other people, they bring their own clothes.  We photograph them, but they bring their own wardrobe.  And, but Whitney thought we were bringing it, and we assumed that whatever, she was bringing it.  But we worked it out.  That was a, that was a very tense day because I was in New York [New York].  We're at a studio.  We got the photographers there, Whitney's there and her people.  And we realized nobody, nobody has the clothes.  So I called back to the office.  They called someone in New York.  They're out getting clothes, pulling clothes, 'cause you know with, when they pull clothes, they go to specialized places, designers, get some items, you know, and then bring them, rather than just pulling them from stores.
Speaker 2: Is it costly or do the designers do it for the credit or what?
Speaker 1: Oh, we don't pay for it, but we have to pay for the stylists.  That's, that, that can be costly.  But the designers do not charge.  They get credit.
Speaker 2: And the stylist is the makeup and hair person--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we have to pay for makeup, for hair and all of that, but see, Whitney had her own hair and makeup people at this time.  All she didn't have was the clothes.  But later shoots, we know we had to do it all.  I mean not only for Whitney, but for everybody.  All the--when it's a cover story.  Now, if we're just going to someone's home and do a shoot on So and So at home, and it's not a cover story, we don't have to do all of that.  But when it's a cover story, then you have to do, provide hair, makeup, wardrobe.
Speaker 2: Now, suppose, it's a cover story on say, Mae Jemison.  She's not a actress or anything.  You still have to have that same kind of--
Speaker 1: No, if she doesn't request it.  We always make sure they're covered, that everything is fine, but, no, they didn't.  It was just the celebrities (laughter).
Speaker 2: Celebrities are the real--
Speaker 1: Just the celebrities (laughter).
Speaker 2: What about sports figures?   Did they have similar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they didn't require that either.  But, of course, now, if--in later years, if we're doing a story on Serena Williams, then you gotta provide it all, 'cause she's a celebrity.  And that's fine, and we did that.  But, but if we just doing a story on a sports figure, no, and for the men, no.  But any, but now because they all have these publicists and these managers, and this is how they're treated, but, and so now, almost anybody you're doing a cover story on, you have to do the whole nine yards.  And it's just a part of a cost of doing business.  And it has evolved to that.  It wasn't like that at the very beginning.
Story_ID: 613525
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about some of the other celebrities that you interviewed [for Ebony]?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What about Tina Turner?
Speaker 2: Tina Turner.  I've interviewed Tina Turner several times and we really connected.  She's from Nutbush, Tennessee which is not far from my little town of Bolivar, Tennessee.  Of course, we didn't know each other.  My aunt, my dear Aunt Ora [Ora Norment Robinson], still always say, "You should have asked her about So and So and So and So."  She knew her by another name.  I think her name was Anna, Anna Mae Bullock or something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's it, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my aunt knew her by that name, and at some point way back then, she and Tina were together somewhere.  Or she knew, she and Tina were dating, liking the same man or someone she knew.  There was something, some history there with my Aunt Ora.
Speaker 1: That's the Ora from Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: From Dayton, and Tina Turner, but I must say, I think I've interviewed Tina Turner at least three or four times.  And sometimes, it might have been by phone.  But my first time was after she had left Ike [Ike Turner], you know, 'cause she just was out of the limelight for a long time, she was living in a very modest home.  But, you know, it was still a very nice home out in California.  And, and I think she already was, had been to Europe because during the interview she told me how, for some reason, black people here didn't seem to really have an appreciation for her music.  And she really thought that her career was over.  She went to Europe, did a couple of performances and people loved her.  And that really revived her career.
Speaker 1: I remember now, I think this was about the time that this came out, but the movie 'Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome' seemed to be the, with the song 'We Don't Need Another Hero'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that seemed to be the real reassurance of Tina Turner.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it, and I might have interviewed her before then, but it might have been about that time.  But there must have been some reason I was there at that time.  But I don't think she had made 'Mad Max,' but she had done something to bring her to our attention.  And, and our story was really about how had she survived over these years?  What had she been doing?  And she admitted, she had been at a certain point--not when I saw her.  She had been cleaning people's homes.  And she had lived off charity because she also was also very down and, you know, mentally, you know, depressed after that whole thing and her leaving Ike with just, no money, just the clothes on her back, you know, that kind of thing.  But at this point, she was in a good mental state.  She was telling me how she was a Buddhist and that people here really didn't seem to appreciate her music.  And she had no problems with that, but she couldn't quite understand it.  And, but over there, they still loved her.  So for her to make a living, she had to go where she had an audience and appreciation.  And then she evolved and became this rock star.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was 'Blues Brothers' was first before 'Thunderdome.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think that was a big appearance, 'cause she did the number in 'Blues Brothers,' remember the movie.
Speaker 2: I saw 'The Blues Brothers.'
Speaker 1: Shot, shot here--
Speaker 2: I know Aretha Franklin did.
Speaker 1: Oh, Aretha Franklin, right.  Oh, that was Aretha Franklin (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, I've seen 'The Blues Brothers,' both of 'em--
Speaker 1: Okay, you're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Erykah Badu did the second one ['Blues Brothers 2000'] (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but she might have been in something.  She might have been in, in something.  And I must say, I can't recall right off.
Speaker 1: But I remember the Buddhist shrine though.  It--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and in her home, we took a photo of the, of the Buddhist shrine, and, and then so she--and, and her, I think Roger Davies was his name.  He was her manager.  I think he was an Australian guy, and he and I hit it off well.  And so we stayed in touch.
Story_ID: 613526
Speaker 1: And so another time, I did a story on her [for Ebony]--I did a number of stories, and, of course, at the office, the men in charge were fascinated by her legs.  And so it was always, what can we do on Tina Turner.  I remember one time, we did it, and she just had on a, a white shirt that showed off all her legs and all this, and it was--what I found interesting from Tina Turner's perspective is that--and she says that she didn't think anything about her legs.  She never thought they were pretty or beautiful or, or whatever.  She said, now, she appreciated them, but, and because now people make such a big deal out of it, but she said, "When I was growing up in Tennessee, they always thought my legs were too slim, too little."  And she said, "The men back then, they liked women with big legs."  And she said, "And my little legs, nobody ever thought anything about them."  And she, well, she didn't even think, you know, she talked about her body.  And she just, because she felt like she was too short, too squat.  She would love to have been taller and slimmer, you know.  But she was, she was cool with it, but, you know, it was just that her perception of her did not mesh with the public perception of her.  And she was comfortable enough to openly talk about that.  And I know one time I did a story on--she had a home on the South of France by then, so--'cause when I first interviewed her [for Ebony], she had this little house in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Then she went off to Europe and became a really big star.  And she had a home on the South of France.  And so we did a story on that.  Now, the last story I did on Tina Turner, she had--when she did the thing for the James Bond movie ['GoldenEye'], and she was performing in Germany.  You know, this is how it works.  It's not like I said, "I wanna do Tina Turner while she's in Germany."  We wanted to do a story on Tina Turner, and this is when she said, this is, this is the time that would be good for her.  So I traveled to Germany.  They lost my luggage, and I went to the show, and she was at this huge, outdoor venue.  I mean like, tens of thousands of people.  And I'm down there with the photographer I'm with, and maybe somebody from her group.  And we're in a place in the middle of the--so, and then they--all of her show is projected up on screen.  But that woman performed two solid hours nonstop.  And it was just amazing to me.  And she was not a spring chicken at that point.  She looked great, had that classic Tina Turner look and everything going on.  But she performed nonstop and I might have been one of ten, maybe twenty people out of thousands and thousands and tens of thousands of people there.  I mean so these were all white people going crazy over Tina Turner.  And I enjoyed the show.  I think I danced my way through the show too.  I could still be objective, but enjoy my work, you know.  And then we flew to Copenhagen [Denmark], and that is where I actually sat down and interviewed her.  And, of course, my luggage was lost.  I think my luggage caught up with me in Copenhagen, finally (laughter), you know.  And I had a, a very good interview with her there, and we talked more about, you know, her growing up in Tennessee, and her success, and, of course, she was dating this particular gentleman at that time.  He was a music industry executive and all.  But we always got along very well, and I always felt like she was very, very forthcoming.  She always said she held no grudges against Ike [Ike Turner].  She didn't hate him, and, of course, they had children together, but then his children were still like her children, you know.  And she was very much involved in their lives.  She was still like mother to a large clan and everything.  So I really liked her.
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was definitely at her heyday.  And I was right there with her.
Story_ID: 613527
Speaker 1: What you describe sounds like it would be a lot of fun, you know, going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of what?
Speaker 1: Fun.  Going to the South of France, going to this huge concert in Germany, going to Copenhagen [Denmark]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or the travel--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but like what, what is it like for a writer, you know, like you, you know, in terms of the deadlines and, and how to get the story in and that sort of thing?  I mean what kind of pressure are you really under when you're doing that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fun.  That was the good part.  But then you had to get back and actually do the story.  And even though I might have had a great interview, it seems like it was always--whenever I got back to the office [of Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], it was time for the story.  It was needed then.  So I was always under pressure to get the story done and in a hurry.  And sometimes, you might have been just tired or not feeling your best.  And you're not as motivated, even though you've had a great interview.  But it was, sometimes it was always hard to get those first words on paper.  And my approach always was to read through my interview notes.  I always, you know, had it trans- later we were able to have them transcribed for us.  Most times, I had to transcribe my own notes, read through my notes, mark stuff, read through everything I could find that had been written about the artist, so it's a lot of reading.  So once, I'm saturated with all of this information, then I would start writing with all my notes around me.  Now, different people had different approaches as to how they wrote.  I knew there were certain things I wanted to include.  I never had an outline per se--well, maybe it was my personal kind of outline.  I knew the things I wanted to include, and, but sometimes I didn't know quite how to get started in getting those first words on paper, the lead, the next couple of paragraphs.  Then I felt like I could go.  Even if I went back and changed the very beginning.  But once I got a hundred words down, and then I felt like, okay, and then the story started writing itself, you know.  Then it became easier.  So I would always write a draft, edit, perfect that draft, edit and then go through that process a couple of times.  And depending on how much time I had--sometimes I didn't have a lot of times for revisions.  And then I would get feedback from the editors, you know.  So, I had a process and it worked.  But that was, that was always the difficult part, getting back to put it together because then you're also working with the photographer, looking at the photos 'cause it was always up to the writer to go through the photos and, and do an initial selection and also to, to get the writing done.  But some stories were easier to write than others.
Story_ID: 613528
Speaker 1: Now, just as a consumer, just observing Ebony and Jet and especially those, it seems as though there's a--and this is true for all publications to some extent, that there's really a policy to make as provocative a lead as possible, even though the story might not be like an Enquirer [National Enquirer] type story, the headline, the lead might be or the, the headline might be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and that's for, any writer, any publication, this is what I learned in journalism school and the newspapers.  If you can't--you have to get people to read your story.  The lead is what pulls them in and keeps them going.  And if you can't hold them at the beginning, then all your work is for naught.
Speaker 1: It seemed to me that, that--and I don't know if it's Mr. Johnson's [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] idea or what, but that the, the leads for Ebony were, were always really provocative.  I don't know if he spent a lot of time talking about them or going over them, or what, but it seemed like they always were, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I've--I've never had Mr. Johnson personally give me input about how to write a story.  So, so I can't say that was Mr. Johnson, per se.  But my other editors would, but having--after you were there for a while, then you know how to write the kind of lead that's gonna pull people into your story.  And I never felt like people edited me too heavily or told me how to do it.  But we always knew the reason we wanted to do the story, okay.  So, and if it was like 'Tina Turner Turns Sixty' ['Tina Sizzles at 60'] or something like that, I think that was one of my stories.  But, yeah, that's gonna part of the lead, maybe how young she looks, maybe how she was dancing on the stage for two hours, but yet this woman is sixty years old, you know.  But that gets people into it.  Then you tell all the other stuff.  It all depends on, you know, your purpose for doing the story and the lead.  So it could be provocative but that's, it's a shame to have these great interviews and these great photos and nobody reads your story because you lose them in the first paragraph.  So you have to get people to read the story.  But I don't feel like anything I have written or even Ebony was like overly provocative or scandalous with the lead or that the, the lead made a promise it couldn't keep.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know.  But maybe all the juicy information would come right up front though, you know.  Sometimes, you only gonna get so much from the person and maybe all of that really provocative stuff was gonna be in the first few paragraphs.  And then you go into the background and how you got to that point.
Story_ID: 613529
Speaker 1: Now you did a series of articles on Queen Latifah, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they provided sort of a evolution.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started interviewing Queen Latifah a long time ago as well.  And I've interviewed her numerous times.  You know, she started off as a rapper.  And when I started interviewing her, she was primarily known as a rapper, but she had started doing some acting.  And she was kind of rough around the edges.  She'd grown up in New Jersey around the Newark area.  And she and I always could hit it off.  And I remember one time she came to have lunch at Ebony, and this was, I think, even before I interviewed her, or maybe I'd already met her at this time.  And, you know, she was just in jeans, and just looking like the girl from the hood, okay, 'cause in essence, that's who she really was.  And she'd had her, her posse with her and all of that.  But then I've, I've seen her evolve because still sometimes when we would, you know, do shoots in New York [New York], and we're at the studio.  We're providing clothing and the makeup and the, you know, all of that.  It's funny about Queen Latifah, though, when you get here, it's gonna take you a while to get it off because she gonna have a manicure, pedicure, go through a total transition.  And I noticed that about her, and, and I don't blame her.  If she wasn't doing all that on a daily basis, you know, then she wanted to look good.  And why not enjoy it if somebody else is paying for it.  But even I would be amazed sometimes, 'cause you would see her come in, just looking like, okay, the girl from a hood, from the hood.  So they might spend a few hours getting her together.  When she would come out, it's like, whoa, is this the same person?  And we did some incredible covers that I was involved in with Queen Latifah where she just looked astounding.  And people have told me that other publications like, even they have, still--I don't know if we have beat--anybody's beat that particular cover.  She just looked incredible.  And, of course, it was the lighting and, and the, the background, how the photographer did the whole thing.  And, of course, with my assistance--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause I always worked with the photographer.
Story_ID: 613530
Speaker 1: How to do it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wondered how much input you had in that, in that process of shooting--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the cover.
Speaker 1: On the cover shoots that I worked on and produced or whatever, 'cause I had been that for so long for Ebony.  Now, there are people who work for magazines, that's all they do is produce these shoots.  But, you know, at Ebony, we did everything, so I learned it from the, from the ground up.  But I was very much involved.  And I would talk to the stylists about the attire for the kind of theme, the shoot that we wanted to do, the kind of look.  This was also in conjunction with the artist too, you know.  I would get feedback from them, but they would always wanna know, well, "What is it that you all are looking for?"  And then they may say, "Well, let's try something different."  And we usually would have a selection of attire.  The stylist would pull--could have--bring as many as thirty outfits.  Maybe you would shoot three or four.  You might would end up using photos from two of them 'cause we were always looking for the cover shot and then, a nice shot in a different outfit for the lead page, at the very least.  So we might get more than that out of it.  So we would look through hundreds of, of takes on the, on the photo shoot to find just the right shot.
Speaker 2: What, what makes the best cover shot?
Speaker 1: Of course, with the artist looking good or looking natural, looking like themselves, but where their personality would come through, okay.  When you really get the essence of the person.  So they would have to be comfortable, you know.  And the photographer works to make them comfortable.  In later years, you, you know, we would get feedback from the artists on what photographer that they have worked with or sometimes, they would even say, "We only want So and So to shoot."  And we might would argue with that, but if they were too adamant, then and if you work with the photographer and get the price within our range, then we would work with that photographer.  And then the artist, the celebrity, you know, was comfortable with that photographer 'cause you want the artist to be comfortable.  That's the most important thing, and if you got a photographer that they're comfortable with, whose work they know and respect, then you're gonna get a better shoot overall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's why usually they work with their makeup artists.  They work with, a lot of times a stylist that they've worked with before, someone who knows them, knows their body, knows their sizes, knows what they like to wear, what they don't like to wear, and that's where it has evolved to today.  Now, when I first started doing cover shoots, it wasn't always like that.  But now, the big celebrities like a Queen Latifah or Janet Jackson or a Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], they know the makeup artist, the photographer, the stylist that they want to work with.  But they have to come into the price range that, you know, that we would want to pay.
Story_ID: 613531
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite photographer with Johnson [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: With Johnson?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, starting with Moneta Sleet, I loved working with him, and he did some, some incredible covers for us.  And he did some Whitney Houston covers I know I worked with him on and some other things.  And then next would be Vandell Cobb who did a lot of shoots with me, some cover shoots as well as just stories.  He has retired from Ebony as well, and he and I are still close friends.  I just think he's a, an incredible photographer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yes, so I always enjoyed working with him, and I think he traveled with me for the Tina Turner story.
Speaker 1: Well, what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of them.
Story_ID: 613532
Speaker 1: Tell us about Spike Lee?  I think you had the interesting interaction with Spike Lee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, you know Spike Lee is incredibly talented, and he can be a pain in the butt, and I think he'll smile hearing that.  I started interviewing Spike way back when his first movie came out.  So he was just an incredible story, just the fact that he used his own credit cards and financed his movie, it became big.  So I started with Spike way back then.
Speaker 1: This is 'She's Gotta Have It.'
Speaker 2: 'She's Gotta Have It,' um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: 'She's Gotta Have It,' but in fact, I had interacted with Spike even before that when he was, and he was a graduate student at New York University [New York, New York].  He was already making a name for himself.  And that was when we--and I say we because I was instrumental in Ebony starting a, a long time feature we called 'Young Leaders.'  We would canvass the country looking for talented young people in the various disciplines and various professions.  And they can--anywhere from college age to thirty.  And Spike was in, I do believe, the very first 'Young Leaders' story that we did.  And we talked about his--he was in it because of, of film they had made in grad school at New York University.
Speaker 1: That, 'Joe's Bed Stuy Barbershop' ['Joe's Bed Stuy Barbershop: We Cut Heads']
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he had made a name for him--won some award.  So he was in then.  And there's some other people who go back that far.  It's like [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley.  He was first in the 'Young Leaders' feature.  So therefore--and then I interviewed Spike when he did that first movie.  And I'm gonna say then he and I became, I guess what you would friends, 'cause he would call me.  Every time he had a movie coming out, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], y'all gonna do a story on this movie?" Dah, dah, dah.  "Come on, Spike, you have to give me something to work with here, you know."  And, but as he became bigger and bigger, he became more difficult (laughter) to work with because, you know, he's demanding.  He's a very busy man.  And he wants you to do the story.  If he can't have a cover, just a story.  But then he didn't wanna sit down and take time for you to interview him.  It's like, come on.  And there was one time I interviewed him, and it was for one of his movies.  And he was in the recording studio mixing the soundtrack.  But if you're trying to record the interview, you need a quiet space, and you can't have that music in the background.  You can't--, "I can't interview you, Spike, in the recording studio," (laughter).  So it, you know, it got to be annoying and difficult.  And I love him, I love him.  And he's very talented.  I'm very proud and pleased at what he has accomplished.  But and they used to, you know, send me some--the people at Ebony, they would, I mean the, at 40 Acres and a Mule [40 Acres and a Mule Filmworks] when, when Spike started out, and that was the name of his company in Brooklyn [New York], and all.  And I'd been there.  I've been to his home in Brooklyn.  When he had a, just a little empty apartment.  Did I sit on the floor to interview him?  But I just remember the apartment being pretty empty and I remember interviewing him.  I don't remember sitting in a chair.  But whatever.  I was young and agile then and so I could handle sitting on the floor.  So we've been through a lot together.  And I remember, yeah, we would joke.  He would--and I--then after that, when he really started making money and had nice homes, it's like, "Spike, let me do a story on you at home?"  "Oh, no, no.  I know how you all do us in Ebony and show people's homes and stuff."  I said, "Yeah."  "Oh, no, no, no.  I don't want my home in Ebony though."  He was, he was, you know, private like that.
Story_ID: 613533
Speaker 1: As I alluded to earlier, I mean people would, would look to Ebony to, I guess, to find out what they--how celebrities lived and how the black middle class was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --supposedly to model what they were aspiring to achieve (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but if not they wanna see how the big folks are living.  And so we always--
Speaker 1: And there would always, there would always be pictures of the homes and the interiors of the homes--
Speaker 2: We always would, we always would.  Like with Anita Baker, we had been at several of her homes.  And I--and I covered Whitney Houston's wedding so I was at her home.  Then, and another time I was at her home, whenever we could get them at home, we certainly did that.  I was at Beyonce's [Beyonce Knowles] home, her home in Houston [Texas] with the family.  That was a story because she got bigger and then she married Jay Z, you know, or they decided they didn't, you know, they haven't exposed that part of their lives to anyone.  I was at home with Tina Turner, yeah, so our people love seeing how others live.  Now, sometimes we would do a home shoot where we would showcase their homes, and we've done a lot of those with various celebrities.  And we would work the story around that.  But other times, the home was simply the setting for the story.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that was good too.
Story_ID: 613534
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, there's another young genius you interviewed was Wynton Marsalis, the music genius (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Wynton Marsalis, and, of course, he's an incredible talent, incredible talent. And I had an opportunity to go to his home a couple of times and interview him.  I remember one time, he was sitting at the piano, and I was sitting there with my tape recorder.  And he's just such a wonderful, intelligent person.  I always enjoyed being with him and interviewing him.  And, of course, I love his music.  And I met him, and I met his sons one time when they were very young, and they were saying, Daddy this, Daddy that.  They had come by, and, you know, it's, "Okay, I gotta finish my interview."  You know, so Wynton Marsalis is a, is an incredible talent.  And I truly enjoyed that.  And that was a story that I truly pushed for.  I always loved the jazz artists too, and where Wynton, of course, got plenty of publicity, but see, many of the jazz artists didn't get that much publicity.  And so my latter half of Ebony, I was doing the music column, and I always gave the, the jazz artists a break, featured them to tell something about them so they could get some exposure too.  'Cause that's where my heart was.
Story_ID: 613535
Speaker 1: Well, we were talking about Wynton Marsalis.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: We were closing that out, and you, you really like jazz, and you--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but now, I'm no jazz expert.  Don't ask me no hard question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a, really a listener, and I particularly love the saxophonist.  Who was the saxophonist who was just honored at Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]?  And he's someone I've been listening to for years and years and years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry, I can't--I don't know which one was just, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay (unclear), was it Henderson?
Speaker 1: David Henderson?
Speaker 2: No, is there a Joe Henderson?
Speaker 1: Well, Joe Henderson is a singer [sic.].
Speaker 2: No, no, it's a, a saxophonist, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have these fleeting moments like we all do (laughter).  And it's like, what is his name, yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Now, what about Denzel Washington?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I've interviewed Denzel.  Um-hm, we can talk about--I've interviewed him a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Denzel Washington and, now, you said you had like a, kind of a glitch with Wesley Snipes when he insisted on giving his critique of black women.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was, that's all I have to say about him, all I interviewed him, maybe once or twice.  But that time he came by the Ebony office, and we did the interview, and the photo shoot in the studio.
Speaker 1: But Denzel Washington is, has a black wife.  And a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --black family and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --he's been married for years.  And--
Speaker 2: For years and years and years.  And I've interviewed him several times, so bring him up.  And one of them was a joint cover with Spike Lee, the one for that Spike Lee movie 'Mo' Better Blues.'  And then on other occasions, I've interviewed him too.
Speaker 1: Okay, Will Smith.
Speaker 2: And Will Smith, I did interview him a couple of times.  I have a couple little stories about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he's evolved--I guess his status has evolved over the years into, you know, from--
Speaker 2: I've seen that evolve too.
Speaker 1: --a teenage rapper to--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  He's big time now.  It's hard to, be hard to get him now.  But we, I did--I guess something, I did something with him when he was up there in his heyday.
Speaker 1: And did you start when he was a teenage rapper?
Speaker 2: See, I never did rap.  By the time I started doing him, he was already doing movies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was always related to a movie.
Story_ID: 613536
Speaker 1: You mentioned Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] already (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --but how did you first get an interview with Beyonce?
Speaker 2: Beyonce's publicist reached out to me personally.  She was the publicist for Mariah Carey, and I'd done Mariah Carey several times.  Then she became Beyonce's publicist as Beyonce and them were about to be launched.  And I had a very good relationship with the publicist, end up having a very good relationship with Beyonce and her, and her mother.  And so I've done Beyonce a number of times.  So would like to talk about that a little bit.  Matter of fact, that was my last, the last story I did for Ebony was Beyonce.  I finished the story, and I was retired.
Speaker 1: And when was that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: Thousand and nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, 2009.  I'm trying to think what was--was it based on something in particular or whether it was music or the, whether there was a movie?  That was 2009.  Are we recording now?
Speaker 1: Yes, correct.
Speaker 2: I thought we were on break.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I'm--we're recording, right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought, yeah.
Speaker 2: Gotta edit that out.  So with Beyonce I, I started with her when she was very, very young.  I think the first time I interviewed Beyonce, she was like fifteen years old.  And she was with Destiny's Child, the four--they had the original four in the group.  And, and she was the youngest.  I think the other girls were sixteen and she was fifteen.  And I remember going out to Houston [Texas].  We had a studio set up, but, you know, this was one time--because, you know, Mother Tina [Tina Knowles] was involved and Tina did the hair, did their makeup, and they even brought their own clothes 'cause Tina was like designing performance outfits for them.  And she'd been doing that since Beyonce and the girls were like kids.  So we just went out with a photographer and did a very nice shoot with them.  And I remember the outfits and, and everything, and I did a little sidebar on each of the girls to tell who they were, you know.  Then we had the cover shoot and the shot of them all together.  And they were just nice, sweet, young ladies.  And, and that's when I, I think I first met Tina then.  And she was working hard 'cause she was doing their hair, the clothes, the makeup.  She was doing everything, and, and that was the beginning of a very good relationship with me and Tina and Beyonce.  And I know that was their first cover story for Ebony.  Whether it was their first cover story, period, I, I can't recall.  It might have been, you know, in a major publication.  And then the next time I did Beyonce, it was after the two other girls had broken up with the group.  So then it was Beyonce and Kelly [Kelly Rowland] and Michelle Williams.  And we did another incredible shoot.  I just, I--in my mind, I, I see them, and they looked very, very nice.  And, again, they handled their own outfits too, which was, (laughter) you know, different for the times then.  And so I've interviewed them over a number of years.  And then I've done individual stories on Kelly and on Michelle as they launched their solo careers.  And, and then I did individual things on Beyonce, and, you know, I officially retired from Ebony in 2009.  And my last story for Ebony was a cover story on Beyonce.  And because I literally interviewed her, came back, wrote the story, and that was it.  I think I was already at home by the time the story actually hit the newsstands.  But Beyonce and I, you know, always had a good relationship.  She was comfortable with me, and she would take her shoes off and curl up and just talk, you know.  And we would--ideally, for any interview with me to get away from everybody else, even if we were on the, the set where we did the photo shoot.  But for me to--everybody else is away, just me and that person interacting.  And that way I often--they would forget, I guess that I was interviewing.  It was like we were just chatting.
Story_ID: 613537
Speaker 1: How long does it take to get a typical article for Ebony?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?  How--
Speaker 1: How long does it take, how long is it--do you interview a person for?  Now, I'm interviewing you now, and we're going, we're probably gonna go a couple hours--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two, three hours.  Now, how long does it take you to get a story?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I might have had a couple of hours over a period of time if we were at their home, and then the studio, and, and that would be ideal to be able to interview them, and then talk a little bit more here, a little bit more there.  You know how you think of things as they come up.  But that was ideal.  Most times, there was a, a set time period, and a lot of times, it would be maybe for an hour, you know.  And so if you give me an hour though, I can get a story.  If you give me half an hour, I can get a story too, but I always felt like if, if I can get them to agree to an hour or even forty-five minutes, I have what I need.  And so that might have been on top of actually doing the shoot and some other interaction.  So, but this last interview with Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], I think she had agreed to an hour, and I might have gotten an hour and fifteen minutes because, you know, their people would come in at a certain point and say, "Okay, she has another appointment," even though she may wanna keep talking.  So, yeah, but I always prided myself.  I can get a good interview from anybody in an hour.  And there was a time that I even got a cover shot in like three minutes, you know.  You have to work with what you're given.
Story_ID: 613538
Speaker 1: I interviewed Michael Jordan a number of times.  The first interview I did with him was with his wife, Juanita [Juanita Vanoy Jordan].  And then I think I did something else.  And then there was a Mother's Day story that I was really under pressure to get at Ebony.  They wanted Michael and his mother, and this is something also that his mother wanted to do because I had met her by then.  She knew me, and she wanted to do this.  So I was really going through her to get the story set up, and she had told me to be at a particular game for the Bulls [Chicago Bulls], backstage, back, you know, the locker room area in a room.  The camera is set up ready to go.  So when Michael got dressed after the game, she would get him through.  We'll take this shot of them.  Well, it turns out that--I don't know if Michael didn't know anything about it 'cause I'm following his mother's directions.  And then and working with the people at the Bulls.  They had a room for me set up.  And, and then I found out that Juanita didn't know about it, and I knew her, and I felt bad.  But then it's, then, but at that point, it's like, oh, but I gotta get this story done.  I can't go back empty handed.  And his mother was there with the photographer, where we're set up to do the shoot.  But she said, "Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], you have to go get Michael though."  It's like, oh, my gosh, "Ms. Jordan, I thought you were gonna get him and bring him."  I literally had to go in the locker room--I'd been in there a couple of times, but that was not a place I like to hang out, in the locker room.  And as Michael was emerging like, I said, "Michael, please, your mother is waiting for you here.  Your mother is waiting for you."  "Lynn, I didn't know and what--?"  I said, "But your mother made the arrangements, and I assumed that she had worked this out with you."  And he was literally gonna walk past the room where she was waiting, and then he stepped in for a moment.  The photographer was able to click, click, click, and that was it.
Speaker 2: And he left afterwards.
Speaker 1: We got the cover.  We got the cover shot, so when I literally saw what the photographer had shot, I said, (sigh). 'Cause you never know how it's gonna turn out.  He was smiling.  His mother was smiling.  You know what I mean. I--I'm sorry, I'm reliving that moment, but it's like, (makes sound) I was so happy that we got it.  And, of course, my interview was mainly with her, the mother, his mother, Mrs. Deloris Jordan, about a mother's love, mother's pride, Michael growing up.  And I knew that would be the story, but getting that shot of them together.  So that was a close call.
Speaker 2: So did he give you any time at all for an interview?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know if I even need--no, not, not that night.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know after the game that night, I didn't get--unh-uh, anything.
Speaker 2: But you did interview him at other times, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd interviewed him other times.  And, and maybe I already had quotes that he had--things he had said about his mother, and I might have referenced the other article.  Right now, I'm--or maybe I was able to get him to send me a statement, you know, 'cause how can you not cooperate with your mother (laughter).  So I got it, but that was a close call.  That, the Anita Baker thing, you know, there were a few times like that, it was like, "Oh, is this gonna work out?"  I'd kind a forgotten that story, but that was a, that was a--yeah, it had my adrenaline going.
Speaker 2: Now you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I got it.
Story_ID: 613539
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't know we were rolling when I asked you about Denzel Washington and Will Smith (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't know we were rolling.
Speaker 1: --so I'm sorry.  I, I should have made, you know--
Speaker 2: That's okay.  I thought we--
Speaker 1: So, but did you have anything else to say about them as--
Speaker 2: About Denzel?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Will Smith.
Speaker 2: Yes, I've, I've interviewed Denzel several times [for Ebony].  And even though I always admired him for his work and all, I was not like all giddy, you know.  I knew how to compose myself and be professional in his presence.  The first time, I know I did a cover story.  It was for the Spike Lee movie, 'Mo' Better Blues,' and it was Spike Lee--we had Spike Lee, Denzel and the young lady who starred in the movie.  I'm, I can't think of her name right now.  And it was in New York [New York] at a studio.  And there was some tension on the set between the players.  But they all came together for the shot.  So Denzel, Spike and this young lady, and we got, we got the cover shoot.  And I think that was a cover that Moneta Sleet did too.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the young lady from Chicago [Illinois] that was in, that starred as the other love interest 'cause Spike Lee's sister, Joie [Joie Lee] was one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And the other one, I know her name too, and I--she's been in other things.
Speaker 2: I, I regret I can't call it right now.
Speaker 1: She's a singer.  She, she sang in the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the movie.
Speaker 2: But I, I remember the song she sang in my mind.  It was a beautiful song, but also, and this is--
Speaker 1: Cynda, Cynda Williams.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Cynda Williams.
Speaker 2: Cynda Williams.
Speaker 1: C-Y-N-D-A (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was C-Y-N-D-A, Williams.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And she was in another movie (laughter) I saw once, and I don't know if I've seen her in anything else.  But there was another movie--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Caught Up,' she had a big role in 'Caught Up' with--
Speaker 2: And I think 'Caught Up' is the one I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Bokeem Woodbine.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I'm glad to, to know she's out there and doing things, but Cynda Williams.  She was very sweet.  I had a interview with her, and--
Speaker 1: So there was tension on the set, you say?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't--but it was between her and Denzel.  I will say that.  But I don't know--it's like they weren't talking.  But what was behind it, I'm not quite sure.  And I'm not one to spread gossip.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause she went on to marry Billy Bob Thornton, remember, back in--
Speaker 2: Okay, she did?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She got a good one.  Yep, Cynda Williams.  And one thing, and I, and I think about that situation all the time and that day because sometimes you're doing test shots.  And, and I felt like it was historic to have Denzel and Spike.  So when Cynda was getting her makeup done, I got in a shot in her spot so I have the shot in my living room, Spike on one side of me and Denzel on the other.  And I, I had my kind a wild, Tina Turner hair look at that time, so, yeah, so, so, that was good.
Story_ID: 613540
Speaker 1: Another time I know I did Denzel [Denzel Washington], I was out in Los Angeles [California], and we were in a, in a office suite.  And I know there were posters that he was signing.  He had done that science fiction movie at the time, let me see.  What was it called?  A very--it's something like velocity, veriosity, virtuosity--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Virtuosity.'
Speaker 1: 'Cause it was like, 'Virtuosity' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Virtuosity,' right.
Speaker 1: --because it was when the, the virtual movies started coming out, virtual situations, so it was called 'Virtuosity.'  And he was signing posters, I remember.  And, and then I sat down, and I interviewed him.  And he was in a very introspective, interesting mood that day.  And, and I remember for some reason, I had a pimple.  And, you know, no woman wants to have a pimple and or whatever.  But he made an example of how, if there's something negative inside of you, it's gonna have to come out.  And he used my pimple as an example.  I didn't appreciate that, but then I realized in retrospect, he really was using, you know, as an example and how true enough, if you have a pimple, there is something negative that needs to come out.  And that's what it's all about.  And I remember that point he made.  But also, I remember that was when he told me--we talked about his wife and his family a lot.  And his wife, Paula [Pauletta Washington], well known, and a strong woman in her own right, a very talented woman.  And they've been a long, long time.  And he was saying how often he's out in public situations and they were at some major event and people disrespect his wife.  The women just run over her just like she's not there.  And he was telling me about an event--I think it was something to do with Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause he was very supportive of Morehouse and maybe his son [John David Washington] went to Morehouse.  I'm trying to remember now.  And he and Paulette were there, and, and people were just running over his wife, and he had to like say, "Hey, this is my wife.  You gotta respect my wife now, you know."  And I remember that because that just stood out in my mind because he was a family man and talked about his children and fatherhood and the pride he has, what he, what he wants to instill in his children and talk about his love for his wife and how people need to respect his wife.  So, of course I have great respect for Denzel.  He has a movie coming out now that's gonna be a, another high action thriller.  I'm not sure if he's a good guy or bad guy, but I can't wait to see that.  And then I just saw, again, the one about the runaway train ['Unstoppable'], and I think he just did an incredible job.  I probably have seen almost all of his movies.  And, you know, and as he matures and, and gets older, you know, his career is still going strong, which is all--usually the case for a talented male actor whether they--white or black, you know, at least with, you know, the men seem to have a longer career, longevity than, than the women unfortunately.  But Denzel, I feel like has a, a long ways to go still.  He has a lot to offer as far as an actor and a, and a role model and an example.
Story_ID: 613541
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's extremely popular, and he's one of the--he's probably the most popular black actor I would guess, when you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, of all times, yeah.  And I remember back in the earlier days at Ebony, and we were in meetings and Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was involved, and we were saying, "We need to do a story on Denzel Washington."  Mr. Johnson said, "Why, why we gotta do a story on him?"  "Mr. Johnson, he is the most handsome, the finest black man out here."  And he said, "I don't know what you women see in him.  I don't know what y'all see in that Denzel.  Well, if y'all think we ought a do it, let's do it then.  All right."  You know, and I just always think that was funny (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think he was teasing you all or what?   Did he actually--
Speaker 2: I would like to think he was (laughter).  I would like to think he was, but I tell you, at the time he said it, I didn't get the feeling, you know, I got the feeling Mr. Johnson was speaking from the heart.  But he was a man, and, of course, he wouldn't see in Denzel what we did.  But, of course, we weren't talking about just because he's such a good looking man, Denzel, I mean.  But because the man by then was making these movies and, and he was really a rising star.  He, he should have been on the pages of Ebony.  So I'm glad that's one thing that I fought for, for, and we got him.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --and from then on, bam, you know, 'cause we were right, 'cause he sold too.  Women would buy the magazine for Denzel.
Story_ID: 613542
Speaker 1: One of the recurrent themes in Johnson publications [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], be it Ebony or Jet is interracial marriage.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seems like if a celebrity has a interracial spouse--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they, on the cover.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you say you did a lot of the stories--
Speaker 2: I did, I did a lot of the stories.  Of course, Ebony and Jet, we were doing stories on interracial relationships and marriages long before I got there.  And then I was assigned some.  I don't think I originally suggested some, but as I moved up and had more responsibility, you know, I started suggesting stories too.  Or they would say, "Okay, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], we should do another interracial relationship story."  And then it was up to me to come up with the angle, to come up with a new approach.  And, and I would.  And I wanted always to do a story that wasn't just so superficial and just about black and white marriages, but behind it, the numbers, the history, why.  I interviewed white women.  Why do you like black men?  Interview black men.  What is it, you know?  And try to make some sense out of it.  But, of course, black women were, were not happy.  But then I, (laughter) I started doing it and had to fight for this.  I wanted to show both sides.  Okay, so what about black women who date white men and that relationship?  So I started doing it from that angle too and sometimes got some pushback because all my editors were men.  They didn't wanna play up that as much and even one time, and because I did a lot of relationship stories period, and was doing interracial relationship stories, I wanted to do a story on--and this was during the time when there were all these stories and all these statistics and studies out about not enough black men for black women and how single black women might not ever get married, and, you know, because we just didn't have enough black men.  Of course, we did stories on all the reasons why and where the men were.  So I wanted to do a story on white men and men of other ethnicities being an option for black women who could not find a black man to have a relationship with.  But that didn't go over.  Lerone [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett] wasn't gonna have that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he didn't like the idea of doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not as an option, you know.  I think it would a been a good story.  It would a been solid.  And he felt like we would have been encouraging women.  I said, "No.  We're not encouraging women.  But rather than spend the rest of your life by yourself, you know, you need to open up your mind."  And here is somebody who's never even dated a, a white man in my life, so it wasn't like a personal experience for me at all.  But I felt like, should offer a sister some options.  So why should she be alone and, you know, when--then, okay, maybe she should accept a date from the white coworker or somebody else.  So anyway, but that didn't get approved.
Speaker 1: Now, those kind of stories were on, featured on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show' and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, now. Yeah, later.
Speaker 1: In Essence magazine.
Speaker 2: Yes, later.
Story_ID: 613543
Speaker 1: I was wondering like, now, how, how much--I know we always, I guess, could read in Ebony that [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett was the senior editor of Ebony magazine.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did that really mean that he had a lot of editorial control at the magazine at all or did it--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, even though--
Speaker 1: I mean aside from him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, he was senior editor for many, many years.  But that's when he was writing his books.  Now, when he became executive editor, that's when he had--and I worked with him on day to day 'cause I mean he was the boss.  And then there was me, managing editor, and then we had Walter Leavy, who at the time--well, he was managing editor, but he did more of the production end of it, okay, whereas I did more of the stories and, and from that perspective.  But, yeah, Lerone Bennett, yeah, he had a lot say.  It was Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and Lerone, you know.  Those two could veto (laughter), you know, if they didn't want it in.
Speaker 1: Did they often, did they agree--well, they had a long relationship, but it just seem like they're two really different personalities.
Speaker 2: They're, they're very different people.  Oh, but they agreed, and they were very good friends as well over the years.  And Lerone had a great influence with Mr. Johnson, probably more so than anyone else.  And everyone in the company [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] knew it, and not everybody appreciated that fact, you know.  But, no, so, but with that relationship story, it wasn't like I was gonna try to go around Lerone to Mr. Johnson to do it, you know.  So if Lerone felt that uncomfortable with it, well, I just moved on.  There were other things I would fight him about, but, you know, I know Lerone and his sensibilities about the black community and about black people and the diaspora and all of that.  So, but I knew I was gonna get pushback on that.  But that still didn't mean I was not gonna suggest it.  And there were other stories that I knew Lerone probably wasn't gonna go for.  Sometimes I would talk him into it, and sometimes he felt so strongly.  There was a time I even wrote a story and then he just say, "Oh, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], I just don't think we need to run this."  It was a story on couples who decided not to have children, not that they couldn't.  But they made a conscious decision, and I had found three or four couples, you know, if you find three of our couples, that's just, you know, an example of, of many and had interviewed them and was ready to photograph them.  But Lerone just couldn't wrap his, his brilliant mind around that.  He felt like it would be encouraging people not to have children.  And, of course, that was not it at all but just another perspective.
Story_ID: 613544
Speaker 1: I wanted to bounce back to maybe some of the political activities and things that went on in Chicago [Illinois], you know, after you got here, like the Harold Washington campaign and, and such.  Now, when you got here in '77 [1977], you know, there was a, a growing, you know, movement to draft a black candidate for mayor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], every day--and I think he was even, he was carried on JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] as well as the other black stations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He used to say--
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: --"We will see in--," or, "We shall see in '83 [1983]," right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As a response to what he felt was a disrespect of the black community by the Jane Byrne administration.  So, did the jour- what did the journalists, the black journalists do, and what did you do in that regard?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, many of the, my colleagues in the media were part of the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter].  I mean they were working for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], for the radio stations, and so they were professionals.  And I was a professional, but they didn't have the, the freedom or the liberty that I had being with Ebony and dealing with the national issues.  So we still had to conduct ourselves very professionally when we interacted with our black candidates.  And we did, and I know we had forums.  We had debates, and, and it was a, it was a wonderful time.  A lot of news was being made.  And, and I think at that time before Harold Washington was elected mayor, he was in [U.S.] Congress.  And, of course, we all knew that.  And I know I was delighted when he was gonna run for--(laughter) I was about to say for president, for mayor of the city.  And, and I remember being very involved. Not campaigning, you know, 'cause even--as a journalist, we didn't wanna do that and cross the line.  We didn't, we didn't campaign.  But we would invite the candidates, all sides, to forums and have debates and we would sponsor.  So we were delighted though behind the scenes as individuals, that Harold Washington won.  And then I got to know him very well because I was president of the Chicago Association of Black Journalists at the time.  And I met with him often.  He participated in various events that we did, and I have a, I have two photos that come to mind with Harold Washington.  One, I'm dressed up in my suit with the little, we used to do these little scarf ties and all.  And it's Harold Washington, and I'm on one side, but all together, about six or seven men in the pictures.  And they were all media leaders like [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson who was over a radio station at that time, Charles Mootry [Charles Mootry, Jr.] was in the shot, Sherrell [Charles Sherrell] was in the shot, and some other media people that--whose names I just can't call right off.  So I guess we had had a meeting with Harold Washington and then we took that shot.  And I was the only woman in there, and I was there because I was president of the Chicago Association of Black Journalists.  Another photo I have of myself with Harold Washington, I'm all dressed up--I wish I could still get in that nice little dress, nice little gown, and, and it's Harold Washington and, and myself.  And I know it was an event that the CABJ had.  And Harold Washington spoke.  Maybe it was a fundraiser or a dinner or something.  And so I have that shot too, and I'm, I think that shot went out to my family, all over.  They, I sent them the shot, you know, the first black mayor.  So they were happy to get that.  But he was a wonderful man.  I know--I also was on the board of the national association [National Association of Black Journalists] concurrently with times I was president of the local chapter.  So I was very busy.  And there was a convention in, I think it was Florida.  I guess it was Miami [Florida].  I'm trying to think where--I guess we were in Florida.  And I arranged for Harold Washington come down and speak at the convention.  And so I was very happy about that, very happy.  And I think Mr., Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] came to the same convention and spoke on one day and Harold Washington spoke on another day.  So it was a big convention for Chicago, even though it wasn't here.
Story_ID: 613545
Speaker 1: Harold Washington, I guess, like Mayor Coleman [Coleman Young] in Detroit [Michigan], or, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and other previous, you know, black mayors, Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.], other people in the, in the country, you know, was, you know, revered by the population, but what made Harold Washington to you special?  Was it just because he was a black mayor or, or what was it about him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, because of the politics in Chicago [Illinois].  You know how tough that was.  And it was just a very tough city.  Chicago was a very racially divided city when I moved here.  Now, you know, I came from the South.  I came from Memphis [Tennessee].  And that was bad, but, you know, 'cause Chicago, I mean I was told there were neighborhoods I should not go through, certain areas, and don't accidently end up there.  And I took that to heart, you know.  And I would hear about things still going on, and black people being beat up here, beat up there.  And, you know, in the South we didn't think of Chicago or any of the big cities in that way, although I know that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came here, and he met a lot of resistance in those same neighborhoods that I was told, all those years later, don't go there.  So for us to get a black mayor, it was, it was, it was phenomenal.  It was historical.  And, and he was just such a good guy.  You know, of course, he was a politician, but that was not what came to mind first.  It was like he had the interests of the community and the people of Chicago at heart, and he was just a good person.  I just--that was the feeling I got.  And at the time, I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] in a high rise, and right across a park from me was where the mayor lived.  And I was very proud to even live in the same neighborhood that he lived in.  And that was, and he was still in the hood.  It's not like he moved to some big fancy place downtown, you know.  I just, and I was just so saddened by, by his death during that second term, and it was just, it was just way too short.  He was here with us just--you know, I felt like he could have--he would a been around a long time, yeah.  That was, that was just so unfortunate.  But I was glad and pleased that I had the chance to even like rub shoulders with such a historical figure, in addition to Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett and some other people.  But our first black mayor.
Story_ID: 613546
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard it said he [Harold Washington] made for good copy for--
Speaker 2: What, now?
Speaker 1: He made for good copy for journalists.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--he did.  I guess he did.  I hadn't thought of it that way.  But, but, yes, and I was at his inauguration [as mayor of Chicago, Illinois], I think the first one and the second one.  It was just a, a lot of pride.  I mean I would compare it to, you know, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] being elected to the White House 'cause I had the good fortune of having met the president, you know, before he got to the Senate, and he, he had seen me on the street a couple of times, and would say, "Hey, Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment]," before I realized that he was there, you know.  So and this was after he was in the Senate.  So, and for Ebony, just when Barack was about to announce--we knew he was probably gonna run.  It wasn't official.  But we did a cover story on him.  And I did the story 'cause I'd interviewed him before, and I had met him, and I had met his wife.  And they came down to the Ebony offices, and we did a cover shoot right there in the building.  Of course, we had wardrobe and the hair and all of that.  By this time, that was all a part of it, although, although Michelle [Michelle Obama], you know, with her hair done.  And she didn't want all the clothes and the fancy stuff.  But we had something that, that was more, you know, to her liking.  She didn't wanna be all glammed up.  She wanted to be herself.  And I think Barack just came in his, in his blue suit.  And that's what he wanted to do.  And then by the time that issue came out, he was announcing.  So we had them on the cover at the time that he announced.  And so I had a very good interview with each of them, separately, for that.  I interviewed Barack right there in the lobby of, of Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois].  And I interviewed Michelle later.  So I'm just very pleased that I had a chance to interact with them 'cause now, you know, it's hard to get close to anybody, you know (laughter) and all.  But I, I really relished the fact that I had a chance to do that.  I even got invited to an event at their home.  A friend of mine was a good friend of Mrs. Obama's, and Michelle was hosting a birthday party for her, a fiftieth birthday party.  And I was invited to that, and Barack was coming in on a Friday night from Washington [D.C.], the Senate, you know, so, so at that time, it didn't seem that significant.  But now that (laughter) they're White House, I say, okay.  Well, at least I had an opportunity to be one on one with them.
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to observe them informally.
Speaker 2: In, in real life as concerned parents and as a couple because I had, what I--even then, when I interviewed Michelle, and she talked about Barack just being the regular person, yeah.  Yeah, and he drops his clothes on the floor, and have to make him pick his stuff up, his towel, you know what I mean, just--it was just regular family stuff.  And some of that I heard later when they were interviewed on the way to the White House, at the White House were the kinds of things that she had, she and he both had shared with me, and, you know, and how they met.  And, of course, he a--he adores his wife.  He loves his wife and his children [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama], but his values and he's just a wonderful family man and a good friend for those people that he know who are his friends.  So, you know, they're just good people, and I'm glad I met them then. And I had a fundraiser for an organization that I, I'm still very much involved with, Habilitative Systems, Inc. [Chicago, Illinois].  That year we were honoring Tom Joyner, who is a friend of mine too, and that was a very successful event for us with Tom coming in town and a, and a big event fundraiser.  And I remember getting a call from then state senator, Barack Obama, asking if he could come by.  And I said, "Of course, you can come by."  I'm glad I was nice at that time, you know, and I--'cause I didn't really know him until later.  And he came by the event and socialized, and I think he had to move on.  He couldn't stay through the whole thing, but we remember that he was there and was very, and very pleased.  And I think from that point on, then he knew who I was, and when he would see me, we would talk, and, and say hello and everything.
Story_ID: 613547
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you think during, when he ran in 2008 of the critique that some people had that he wasn't black enough or didn't know the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just thought that was the most ridiculous thing I have ever heard in my life.  And, and I know that came a lot from people who had not met him, who didn't know him.  But, of course, I guess some people still wanna say that.  But he is very proud of his African American, African heritage, and I know that because I met him before it became an issue.  So his mother [Ann Dunham] happened to have been white, but he's always identified with the black community.  That's--and he came to Chicago [Illinois] to be a community organizer, working in the trenches, in the community.  So I always knew where his head was, where his heart was, and they were then there with the black community and they are now still with the black community.  I don't understand the people who--I mean everybody's open to criticism.  I know how politics is.  But to criticize him because he's not--they feel like he's not doing enough for the black community.  Everything he does is for the black community.  You know, but they want him to say, "I'm a black president."  He is our president, and he is black.  He's a proud, black man, and he is doing something to better the lives for all of us here in America.  And I, I don't understand a lot of the criticism.  I feel like a lot of it is jealousy because these people may have been nationally known before people knew who Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was.  So they feel like, maybe they should be the ones who made it to the White House, but--and some of them might have aspired to the White House.  But they didn't go that route.  He is our president.  He is there.  And I don't feel like Barack Obama or anyone else has to be endorsed or ordained by certain people in our community before--and get their blessings for him to go on and do what he did.  And I think in some cases, it's simply that.  Here's another black man of my generation who has achieved this and so I'm gonna put him down or he needs to bow to me.  If not, I'm not gonna bless him.  So if he bows to me, then would these same people have, like endorsed him or whatever?  I, I just don't, I don't understand it.  I think it's a very narrow minded, selfish perspective.  And, of course, Barack Obama is not perfect.  He never claimed to be perfect.  There were times during the election that even I said, when Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]--you know, and I love the Clintons too, when she was looking like she was gonna get the nomination, I said, oh, just let her have it.  It's gonna be such a mess to get this country back in order, to correct all the problems that have created that maybe it's best to let Hillary Clinton go in, clean up the mess and Barack would come behind her.  He won.  I'm very happy, and I think he's doing an incredible job.  And there was a big mess that he is still trying to clean up, and people forget how things were before--let's say when Clinton left the White House, the budget was balanced.  Everything went to pot by the time Barack Obama got there.  They had started these wars and, and so he had to go in and deal with the issues at hand.  And it has not been an easy job.  It has not been.  And I never expected it to be.  And I think he's handling it all very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not a political person (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's, it's true.
Speaker 2: That's from my heart.  This is my opinion, and, and what I truly, truly believe, so.
Story_ID: 613548
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois], when you got here and it still is, I guess, a powerful place for people in the media and for journalists.  You got Jesse--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I can't--
Speaker 1: No, I'm saying Chicago is a powerful place for people in the media and for black journalists.
Speaker 2: It is indeed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You got Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You've got--when you got here, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Clarence Page--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all of these national media figures--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --are here.
Speaker 2: Emanated from Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And with Johnson Publishing Company and Ebony and Jet being headquartered here too--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yeah, it is a powerful, media center.  Back then, we were considered the number two media market.  I still can't get over that.  But I understand that now Los Angeles [California] is a larger area, and so Chicago's considered number three.  But as far as preparing a, a number of national figures, journalists and politicians, Chicago has a lot to offer, and I think it is still an incubator for many businesspeople, people--political people, community leaders and journalists as well.  I think that tradition continues.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I think it's significant that you became like a leader in, in the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter] in this, you know, high profile, high powered kind of environment.  So, and you said yourself, you don't consider yourself a political person as such--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --but NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] is--
Speaker 2: You know, and, and you could--what you're saying could be correct, let's say, 'cause, you know, I come from a very humble background in the South.  I considered myself shy and introverted.  But when I became a journalist, I had to put that shyness behind me because you can't get things done because all doors aren't open.  You have to be aggressive.  You have to be assertive.  And even in interviews, you have to conduct yourself a certain way to get people to open up and talk to you.  And somehow I've had a knack for people opening up and talking to me.  So that has helped me to succeed.  But I've had to, to come out of my shell and, but even in the--getting involved in the local group and this, this happened to me in Memphis [Tennessee], that we had a, a Memphis association of communicators.  And this was before '75 [1975], so before NABJ was founded, there were a lot of local organizations, right.  I never intend to be in the lead position.  I simply join to serve.  But in Memphis, I ended up being president of the group.  Then I come to Chicago, and I join the group, and I end up being president.  And then I end up being on the board of the national.  And it's not like that is my goal.  I'm not trying to put myself in the limelight or to run an organization.  But a lot of times, if you go into a situation and you want to serve, and even with Ebony, or if you just want to do a good job, you end up in a leadership position.  And then I feel like if this is how it turns out, then I certainly should step up to the plate and lead and have something to offer and to offer some, some guidance, some integrity or another way of thinking, you know.  And it just seems to have been how it is, but--how it has turned out in, in these situations that have been so important in my life because next to my family and the influence that Ebony has had on me, you know, anybody that knows me, they know that NABJ has always been close to my heart.  And it continues to be, and sometimes I say, you know, I gotta step back.  There are some things I wanna do on the personal level.  But I continue to be very involved and active in NABJ on the national level and on the local level because I'm still on the local board.  And I've been very much involved nationally too.
Story_ID: 613549
Speaker 1: And that's why though I was very pleased and proud and surprised when right as I was leaving Ebony, NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] inducted me into its Hall of Fame.  I never expected to get any kind of award from NABJ.  That was not, you know, I just didn't feel like it was my calling.  It's not what I do.  You know, even though I feel like I, I do--I've done good work, but it's not Pulitzer Prize winning stuff because we never even pursued prizes, you know.  That's not what we, we necessarily did.  So I was just like very honored and humbled by being inducted to NABJ's Hall of Fame.  And it's just ironic that it would come at that time because within a few months of that in 2009, I also was honored by the University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee], honored as an outstanding alumni.  So that like really--it just made me feel good, you know.  So I'm, I'm satisfied (laughter) on that level.  I mean what more could I ask for, my school and my organization and, of course, my little hometown of Bolivar [Tennessee] invited me back and presented me with a key to the city.  So, I know I made my--when my father [Alex Norment] was alive, he was very pleased by, by some of the things that I had accomplished.  And if it made him happy, I was happy, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to please him and carry on. Because he, he's, he's the reason I am who I am.  He made me into the woman that I became.
Story_ID: 613550
Speaker 1: Now, there, there may not be much here, but I think I have to ask about what the working relationship was between Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Chicago Defender.  They're, they're less than a mile away from each, at least they were when you--but was there a very strong relationship between Johnson, say, and people like [HistoryMaker] Theresa Fambro Hooks and [HistoryMaker] Earl Calloway at the Defender--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --around celebrities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm friends with all of them.  I consider Theresa one of my dear friends.  If there were any problems there, I know nothing of it.  So I don't, I don't really know.
Speaker 1: I'm not fishing for problems, but I'm just wondering what the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --what the working relationship was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on a day to day basis?
Speaker 2: It was, it was--
Speaker 1: Did you all call each other--
Speaker 2: --always good.
Speaker 1: --up and get, you know?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was always good.  Of course, growing up in Memphis [Tennessee], in the Memphis area and working in Memphis, I knew about the Tri-State Defender, and then when I moved here, there was the Chicago Defender.  Then I understood, you know, how the Defender played a great role during the Great Migration and with the trains from Chicago [Illinois] taking the, the Defender down there and enlightening the blacks down there, what was going on up here.  And so many people got on the trains and came north.  And directly from Memphis through St. Louis [Missouri] to Chicago seemed to have been a direct route.  So there are many people in Chicago who have roots in Memphis and, I guess beyond Memphis in Mississippi, whereas people in other parts of the South might have ended up in New York [New York] or some other places.  But it seemed like Memphis, Jackson, Mississippi, they came straight up, I guess because of the railroad.  And they ended up in Chicago, and then some of them went on to Detroit [Michigan].  So, I've always had a great appreciation for the Defender and, and its role and importance in our lives and as a media institution.  You know, many changes have been made since I have been here in Chicago, but I have been considered some of the, the Sengstackes among my friends and acquaintances and, you know, being over the Chicago Association [Chicago Association of Black Journalists; National Association of Black Journalists Chicago Chapter] I had a chance to meet everybody, and--which was a blessing for me, people I might not have met.  And so I got to know some of them, and, and other ways.  I met others of them, and as the Defender has evolved and the ownership and all that has changed, you know, I was always good friends with [HistoryMaker] Roland Martin.  I was on the board of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] back, you know, when we were both much, much younger.  And so I saw him at the beginning of his career also, and then he moved to Chicago, got involved in the local organization, but also became the editor of the Defender.  And then Lou Ransom, who was an editor recently, I knew him very well.  And before that, I think David Milliner was publisher, and David happened to be a friend of mine.  So I hadn't even thought about the connection, but I've always been closely affiliated with people at the Defender.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask about them 'cause--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we hadn't mentioned them yet.
Story_ID: 613551
Speaker 1: I know one article that you wrote in '95 [1995] they--that is called, '50 Years of Progress in Corporate America' [Lynn Norment]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --by black business here and Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] considered a business mecca, I guess, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what that, that story was about because, you know, that, that was a story that we updated from, Ebony had done many, many years ago about businesspeople.  And as I said, at Ebony, I did stories on everything.  And I, especially, enjoyed the stories on people in the business community.  And I took great joy in finding people 'cause--just like I did the 'Young Leaders' feature that was the first time that Spike Lee or [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley got some national attention and some other people came from that too, but we would annually do stories on the top businesspeople around the country.  And often, I ended up doing that, and it just made me feel good to connect with the people, to read about them, to learn about them, and to feature them in the magazine.  And so that particular article that you mentioned was not one of our, you know, like annual features, but this was more, a broader, overall story we did talking about the, the history of blacks in the business community and how far we had come and where we were at that point.  So, of course, from '95 [1995] to now, we've made a lot more progress.
Story_ID: 613552
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about the black publishing business today?  When you started there was Sepia, and there were lots of black publications that don't exist any longer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, whereas, we've lost a lot, we have some others that have come on the scene, but--and some of them have come and gone so fast.  And then a lot of the major cities, they may have local black magazines that I've found.  I know Memphis [Tennessee] has one, and, and some other major cities too.  But publishing is a tough, tough business.  Being a journalist is one thing, but if you're trying to publish a magazine or publish a newspaper, it is not an easy task.  And not only do you have to get in place the editorial, but you have to get the ads.  You can't survive without the advertising, and that support, and even today, major corporations do not want to support black publications in the manner that I feel that they should or that they deserve because this is your main conduit to get to your consumers in the black community.  This is where you should put a fair share of your dollars.  But in recent years, I have found that many of major corporations, they feel like they can reach the black community through the People magazine or through other ways.  And, and it's not gonna be the same as reaching through your black magazine.  And, of course, you have Essence, which is now owned by a white company [Time Inc.].  So they purport that to be a black publication, and a lot of people in the hinterlands of the U.S., black people, they don't realize.  It's not owned by black people anymore, you know.  And that's one way I feel like they're trying to erode the significance of black publications, you know.
Story_ID: 613553
Speaker 1: Tell me, what interviews and stories that you've done have had the most impact on you?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, the most impact.  I think I've talked about most of them.  But a couple of more that come to mind is Will Smith is one.  And I've interviewed him several times.  But just to see--he is such a big star now.  When I first started interviewing him, he wasn't like the big star he is now and rather difficult to get to.  But he is a, he's a good person.  And maybe people know that, but he's just a good person with a good heart, grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], very family oriented, and now he has his own family.  So I'm not surprised that, you know, that he has, is a great father and family man.  But one thing about Will Smith that impressed me, that stuck in my mind, is how nurturing he is to his children.  I was on a photo shoot with him and his son [Jaden Smith], I think after they had done the movie about, you know, going from poverty up in, high up in the finance world ['The Pursuit of Happyness'].
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: And so him--he and his son, you know, we were doing a photo shoot out in Los Angeles [California].  And even the mother, Jada [Jada Pinkett Smith], came on the set, though, and (unclear) you know, she didn't even look like herself.  But it was interesting to still notice even with her there, Will was the one that I felt was nurturing his son and being attentive and all. And, and that just stands out in my mind and that he is, he is a good person and, and still involved in business with, with a childhood friend, you know.  And now he's like a big, big, big super star.  And one thing also about Will, I remember on another time I interviewed him, that his first son by his first marriage--this was before he married Jada, but he and Jada were still, I think they were dating.  But the, and Will's son by the first marriage obviously was a little boy, and obviously, he was in love with Jada.  And he couldn't understand why I was there.  He felt like I was a threat to either his mother or to Jada, and he kept trying to shut me out of the camper, the, the trailer, that, (laughter) you know, you do, that--it was on the set of a movie.  But he was just trying to shut me out, wouldn't let me in, and Will kept saying, "I don't why he keeps acting like that with you."  But he felt like I was a, a threat.  Of course, I was not, but he didn't understand that.  It was like that little boy, locking me out, pushing me out, telling me to get away, you know.  So, but those things stand out.  He was a family man, always has been a good guy.
Story_ID: 613554
Speaker 1: And another interview that comes to mind is Lenny Kravitz.  You know, his mother is a legendary black actress, Rocky--Roxie Roker.  And, and at that time--well, we always, Ebony has always been interested in getting and doing stories of people at home.  And so the publicist, you know, there was a publicist I worked with on other things.  And he was the publicist for Lenny Kravitz' record company at that time.  And he wanted me to do a story.  He say, "You know, Lenny Kravitz has a home down in the Bahamas.  That's where his mother is from," and whatever.  And so we want Ebony, you know, we'll allow Ebony to go down and do a story on him at his home.  And so that's how I sold the story to Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and to Lerone [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett].  We're gonna do a story on Lenny Kravitz at home in the Bahamas, right?  I was just as surprised as anybody that it was not a big house.  It was just like a shack, but, you know, Lenny is kind of a bohemian kind of guy.  He was then and he probably still is (laughter) now.  And he had his dreadlocks and all of that.  And so it was really a shack, but he was clearing off land to build his house.  And, but I went on and did my story.  But that was one time I heard it from Mr. Johnson when I got back.  "You said he had a house down there.  This ain't no house.  This is a--." I said, "Okay."
Speaker 2: So he had a problem with showcasing a--did you have pictures of the shack when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did.  We shot (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had pictures of the shack.
Speaker 2: So you said that he just didn't consider that like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a model for--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --black--
Speaker 1: And I thought it was gonna be a real house too, you know what I mean?  I mean, and I didn't ask all the details 'cause now, of course, since then, whenever someone say, you know, yeah, you can do a story on him at home, and let--I'll be asking many questions about the house.  But then, and we were just so excited, "Oh, we're gonna do Lenny Kravitz at home in the Bahamas."  And so in our minds, we had a certain image, but it wasn't that.  So they didn't lie.  It's just not, wasn't what we expected.  And I'm sure by now, Lenny has built his dream home down there perhaps.  And he wanted to build recording studios and all of that, but this is the island Eleuthera [Bahamas], Eleuthera, and he has mentioned Eleuthera in some of his songs, I've noticed.  But this is where his mother was from, where her family lived, and we were all over the island, meeting his relatives and stuff.  But it wasn't like a big, fancy place.  And, you know, but we did go to a little hidden beach and took some photos--and that's another photo I have that I love, me and Lenny Kravitz on the beach (laughter).  I was much slimmer back then, younger.  And it's a great picture of me.  I recently put it on Facebook, and I got a lot of responses from my friends (laughter), "Wow, go Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment]."  I said, "It's old, but it's good."  And he's a good person.  And I know since then he's hooked up with Prince.
Story_ID: 613555
Speaker 1: Prince is another one that I sort of got (unclear).  But I, I did stories on Prince before he was doing interviews.  So I did my research.  I went up to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  I found his father [John L. Nelson], interviewed him.  I interviewed other relatives, people--and I must say, I did a pretty decent story on Prince, more background than had ever been put out before.  And I did that story, and I did another story.  And the next thing I know, I get a call from Prince's people saying, "He'd like for you to interview him now."  And I said, "Oh."  And that was when he was doing this movie 'Under the Cherry Moon' which came out after 'Purple Rain,' which is the one I really, really love.  And he was doing it in the South of France, and that's where he wanted me to do the story.  So, again, I had a, a wonderful place to go to do a story.  And even though I only interviewed Prince for forty-five minutes, but I've told you, it doesn't take that long for me to get what I need to get.  And even though my interview was only forty-five minutes, I was over there six days 'cause he always said we were gonna have another session.  And then in the end, I say I don't think that's gonna happen.  But I was around the set, and I had a--that was my first time going to that part of Europe and spending some actual time.  So it was, it was a interesting experience.  But since then, I have sat down with Prince in Minneapolis twice and had detailed interviews.  And he even wrote a song for me.  So, and for someone who is still so introvert or out of limelight, I know he's had a very active life in many areas--
Speaker 2: What was the song?  What's the, what's the name of the song?
Speaker 1: Well, it's 'For Lynn' [ph.].  I know it had the, the for and, you know, it was for Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], love for Lynn.  Um-hm, it's on a tape.  And that was before they started doing all the CDs [compact disc].  He recorded it in the studio, sang it to me, performed it and gave me the tape.  And I say, okay, he did a song just for me 'For Lynn.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  And that was, so that was nice.  And just to, for him to show me around the studios, I mean 'cause that's just really like his home, and it was, it was very interesting.  The first time I went he had one wife, and the next time I went, he had another wife, you know (laughter).  So I got to meet with him and his wives and, and everything, and it was interesting.  He was vegetarian, telling me why I shouldn't eat pork, and all of that kind of stuff.  Not that I was eating any, but, you know, I admitted I did eat pork.  But he was telling me all the reasons why I shouldn't and that kind of thing.  So it was interesting that, that we've had a good, you know, relationship.  And that was something I forged 'cause he obviously read the story I did on him and felt it was on point.  And then he wanted to actually sit down with me.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, when you're sent on a trip like that, say to the South of France, and you're waiting, does the company [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] like suggest maybe you interview someone else that's out there too or look for someone on that, in that locale or--
Speaker 1: No, not in that situation.  And I don't know who else would have been in the South of France for us to interview.  It's not like spending six days in New York [New York] when you have a lot of options.  But I don't know anybody who for the Ebony audience that would have been good.  Now, Jerome, you know who was with The Time, Jerome Benton.  He was in the movie with Prince, so I hung out with him a while.  I had an opportunity to go up to Prince's house, take a look around, look through his stuff, see he had a, all these little boots, high heel shoes like that (laughter), you know, within his closet and stuff.  So it was quite an adventure.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a interesting experience.  It truly was.
Story_ID: 613556
Speaker 1: What advice would you give young, aspiring, black journalists today?
Speaker 2: That you really have to be serious about the business more so now than ten years ago.  Now, when I came into the business, you had to be serious too because there were black people, but it still was a hard way to go.  And you had to be good at what you did.  Of course, in coming to Ebony, it was--and I didn't deal with those kind of racial issues.  But today, there's a lot of competition, and I feel like you have fewer options. Now, I came at a time when you didn't have many options.  Then I was around during the time when you had many, many options.  But now, it's gotten to the point you don't have a lot of options.  But so young people getting into the business today, you still have to read.  And no matter what area you're going into, you have to know how to write.  And, of course, you have to be computer savvy, social media savvy.  You have to be a tech wiz.  That was not necessary when I came along, but I'm, but, you know, when we went from typewriters to the computers and stuff, of course, I got into all of that, but now, it's another whole world beyond just the computer and all, you know, tweeting and Facebook and, and all these other things, and blogging and, and all these other things.  And you have to be technically very savvy.  So no matter what area of life that you wanna go into, you, you have to get that together, but you gotta be on top of the news.  You have to have a desire, an actual lust to learn and for news because no matter what story you do, you gotta learn everything about that.  And that's why journalists, you know, you're multifaceted in many, many ways.  You know, every story that I do, I have to become an expert in that subject matter before I can start writing, whether it's an individual or whether it's an overall subject.  So you have to constantly open your mind to learning.
Story_ID: 613557
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any opinion about the, I guess the magazine type websites like The Grio and theroot.com and--
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  They, these are very necessary.  And we, we have to embrace them.  I'm still a paper person, and that is my preference. I still like newspapers and magazines.  And I'm not one for reading online that much, although I do.  But then, now, the stories that you find online, they aren't that long.  And I still like long form.  I like to know a lot of background information.  So I still read newspapers and magazines.  But, no, The Grio and The Roots and, and other publications and websites, you have to, you have to be out there and, and get involved in that.  And for young people, that's a natural.  A lot of times, they don't read newspapers or magazines.  That's all they do.  They, they're surfing the Internet to get their information.  And, of course, I feel like that has been part of the, the demise of the publishing industry.  I won't say of journalism, but that has led to the demise of the publishing industry, and that's Ebony, Essence, the white publications, the newspapers, they all have been hurt by the Internet.  Now, we knew it all was coming, but it got here a lot quicker than many publications thought that it would.  And some of them have gone by the wayside.  They haven't been able to keep up.  They just haven't.
Story_ID: 613558
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That we can be more tolerant of each other and present more of a, a united front.  We talked about the, some of the criticisms of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], some of the harshest criticism has come from some of our own brothers and sisters.  And we have to embrace each other more, be more tolerant.  It's not like we can't criticize each other, but some of it has been just very bitter and very personal and totally unnecessary.  And some of my other concerns is that we develop ways to make ourselves fiscally, economically strong.  This has always been a struggle for us, and, but we must do that more so now than ever.  And in the current economic climate, and they say it's getting better, and I sincerely hope that it's getting better.  But so many of us have lost jobs, and we're losing ground.  I mean people who were middle class and thought they would always be middle class, you know, they're slipping.  They don't know how they're gonna send their kids to college.  They don't even know how they're gonna pay their mortgages anymore.  But a lot of us are becoming independent, independent businesspeople, and some of us are succeeding at that.  Others are not.  But we have to start in our communities to teach ourselves, our children how not to rely on other people to make us, you know, economically strong.  We have to do a better job.
Story_ID: 613559
Speaker 1: You retired in 2009 [from Ebony], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have any plans, any business plans yourself for the future (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, I haven't been sitting down and doing nothing since 2009 (laughter).  I have been working for Carol H. Williams Advertising, doing a lot of different things.  And I always thought that journalism, the profession I was in was a crazy, hectic profession.  Oh, advertising is crazy.  It really is, and the, the same kind of Internet, economic factors that affected the publishing industry is also adversely affecting the black advertising companies.  And I do work for a black advertising company, and there are many, many challenges.  But I enjoy what I do, and I feel like I can make a contribution there.  But I'm, I'm also now branching out and doing other things.  And I'm also, I'm also--I've always known I'm gonna write a book or some books, but that's something you can't force yourself to do.  But now, I'm ready, and I've actually written the first chapter.  So to me, that's a milestone (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's your subject matter?
Speaker 2: Some of the people I've met and places I've been.  And I'd just like to leave it at that because I've had so many wonderful experiences.  And I met so many interesting people, so I wanna write about how they affected my life, what I've learned from them and therefore, how someone else can, you know, to share these lessons with, with other people.
Story_ID: 613560
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your career and, and all the things you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Nothing significantly different.  My experience at Ebony, I mean I have no regrets about being there.  I didn't like some things that started happening at the end, but I was already, you know, ready to move on, to make a transition because I knew the business was making a transition.  Plus, I'd been there for so long, you know.  And I, and I was ready to leave, definitely, and we wanna do some other things.  But I have no regrets about my experiences at Ebony.  I wish I had written a book or some books earlier.  But it just did not fit in with my life and my work at Ebony.  I mean whereas [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, of course, he did his books, but I didn't have the luxury as he did in his early days of being there and also having time to write a book 'cause I was actively and in the end running the magazine on a day to day basis.  And that is not a easy task.  So I needed to step back and think on how I wanna pursue.  So that is one thing, and although I feel like I'm--and the people always tell me, I'm--I know more about the Internet and social media and all of that than many, many people.  But there are some things there I would wish I had gotten into earlier than I have.  But, I'm good (laughter), you know.  And so I don't have many regrets in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess I, I could be rich.  I'm not that, and there are things I could have done to benefit and, and make money throughout my career, you know, but I have no regrets about that either.  But I've had a rich life, a good life, and a good career.
Story_ID: 613561
Speaker 1: In terms of the time that you were actually running Ebony, what things did you try to change and implement, and what do you think is your legacy?
Speaker 2: And I'll give you my legacy as a person, as opposed to just being at Ebony.  But Ebony, my legacy is quality work, quality journalism.  I was there when the magazine was the big format size.  So I've been there through transitions, and I feel like we put out a good product, and, and even like in the '90s [1990s], we were--we had circulation numbers that were like doing exceptionally well.  And by the time I left, when other people were really at the top, running the magazines, those numbers were down.  But it might have been just the time, you know.  And the magazine industry and publishing, period, making a transition to social media to the Internet, so, but I think my legacy would be that I was there and led Ebony or was a part of Ebony during its heyday when it was the biggest, the best and a quality publication known throughout the world.  So I feel like I am a part of that legacy.  Of course, there was Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], there was Mr. Bennett [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett], and there were other editors.  But that was my time as well.  I didn't know it when I was in that period that this was the hay day, that Ebony was at its best, and it spoke to a specific audience that we had great love and appreciation for.  And that Ebony audience.  But now I realize that was it, and I felt like I always had--my mission in life was to give back to my community.  And through Ebony and some other work I've done in the community, including through NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].  I feel like I have given back to my community.
Story_ID: 613562
Speaker 1: Now, tell me something about your family.  Are your, are your, are both of your parents deceased?  Are they--
Speaker 2: Both of my parents are deceased.  My mother [Esther Morrow Norment] passed when I was ten years old.  And my father [Alex Norment] passed, oh, a few years ago, right about the time [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett passed, within a couple of weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lost two great people at the same time.
Speaker 1: Do you have any children or do you have an extended family you--
Speaker 2: I have a, a great extensive family.  I have been in a long time relationship for many, many, many, many years, and so I have family.  I feel like I have children.  I have grandchildren (laughter) now through that relationship, and I have five sisters and two brothers--three brothers who, have a stepbrother, half-brother.  You know, I have a great extended family, including my sisters.  They all have children.  So I'm Auntie Lynn [HistoryMaker Lynn Norment], I'm Aunt Re Re.  And now I have great nieces and nephews.  So I have a, an extensive, loving family.  And I have, I feel like I have children.  I mean they're just like mine.  My sisters' children are just like my children.  I have been with them, and they have been my babes in arms when they were babes in arms for their mothers, you know, and I'm very close to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm very fulfilled on that, that part of my life.
Story_ID: 613563
Speaker 1: All right, now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Okay. One thing I would like to say is that, and I mentioned that it's important for me to give back to the community.  I've always felt that, and through Ebony, I feel like I have accomplished that.  But I also have been working with Habilitative Systems, Inc. for the last, probably fifteen years.  It is an incredible social service organization here in Chicago [Illinois], and it delivers numerous, much needed services to people who need it badly on the West Side of Chicago and in other areas of Chicago.  And I've been on the board, and I've headed up the fundraising committee for many, many years.  And I have launched a series of fundraising events called Jazz with Pizzazz [Blues/Jazz with Pizzazz Cafe] that I would, that we would honor people but also bring in nationally or internationally known jazz artists to perform for the organization.  And we have raised, you know, hundreds of thousands of dollars with that.  So I, I feel strongly that everyone should do something to give back to their community.  And even if it's just making a donation, if you can't actually, you know, be on the board and do more.  But we have a lot of people hurting, and if we don't reach out and help our own, then why would we expect other people to.
Story_ID: 613564
Speaker 1: Now, you said earlier, you're, you were inducted into the Hall of Fame of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and that Hall of Fame includes Ida B. Wells, Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, these greats.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question at the end of an interview.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who loved her family, loved her community, loved her country and wanted to give back and did give back, but one who overcame a lot of obstacles.  One who would not accept no.  One who, despite humble beginnings, you know, didn't let that hold them back and just forged ahead and tried to be basically a good person, not perfect, but also one who strove to deliver quality work, you know, my life's work.  I feel like I, I did my best to, to write well, to edit well and to deliver a good product to the community.  So I guess it boils down to like, trying to do your best to living the best and setting a good example for others and reaching out to others and helping them come along, whether it's in your family or outside your family 'cause I've--you know, I mentor people outside my family, but I have all these nieces and nephews that I feel like I've been mentoring over the years as well.  And so that's what I want my legacy to be, one who reached back to help, but one who also strove to be her, her best.
