Story_ID: 18867
Speaker 1: Good evening, Dr. Norris.  My name is Samuel Adams.  I'll be the interviewer.  Behind me is Scott Stearns.  He'll be the videographer.  I'd like to begin by you giving us your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is Virgil C. Norris, V-I-R-G-I-L, C., Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: What does the C stand for, sir?
Speaker 2: C stands for Croom, C-R-O-O-M.
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April the 18th--April 17th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Delray Beach, Florida, 3721 Sherwood Boulevard.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a general surgeon.
Story_ID: 18868
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Cereal, cereal, probably, probably, All-Bran.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Work hard and pray hard.
Story_ID: 18869
Speaker 1: I'd, I'd like for you to tell us and spell the name of your mother and father.  Give us their names and the spellings of their names?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillie Mae Smith Norris.  My father's name--the spelling is L-I-L-L-I-E, M. Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And your father?
Speaker 2: My father's name is William Edgar Norris, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Edgar, E-D-G-A-R, Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And your siblings?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any siblings.
Story_ID: 18870
Speaker 1: My mother's [Lillie M. Norris] father was a farmer, and he died in a farming accident when she was four years old.  As I said, they lived in Jonesville, South Carolina, and at an early age, my grandmother moved to Hendersonville, North Carolina, where she was employed as a cook.  And she reared her three children and, of course sent them to school, and she moved to Hendersonville, North Carolina, which was a tourist time, and because of the employment opportunities in contrast to Jonesville, South Carolina, which was primarily agricultural.
Speaker 2: What type of--what kind of woman was she?
Speaker 1: My grandmother?  Well, I would say she was a very industrious lady.  She believed in education, and she worked as a cook and sent three children to college.  This was back, I guess, say, in the '20s [1920s].  I know it was in the '20s.  And she worked at a hotel in Hendersonville, North Carolina and sent her children to school.
Speaker 2: And did she ever remarry after--,
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --passing of your grandfather?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And your father's [William Edgar Norris] parents?
Speaker 1: My father's parents were, my father's father was from Gainesville, Florida.  His name was William Norris, and my, my father's mother was Virgie, V-I-R-G-I-E Robinson Norris, and she was from Tallahassee.  And I spent a lot of time until she passed with my grandmother on my father's side.  She was a registered nurse at--and she was a charge nurse at Florida State College for Women at that time.  And so all that's now Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida].  She went to nursing school out in New Orleans University [sic, University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], at the turn of the century.  It was in nineteen--early 1900s.
Speaker 2: And her husband, your grandfather on your father's side?  What did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: He was a farmer also.  And he lived in Gainesville for the most part.
Story_ID: 18871
Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My mother [Lillie M. Norris] and father [William Edgar Norris] met when my father and mother were at South Carolina State College [sic, University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And do you know the story of their--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have a story of it, no, but I gather he was a star football player, and she was a young lady down there from North Carolina, and they got interested in each other.  That's the, that's the story I heard.
Speaker 1: Now, what type of woman was your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was industrious, academically, over a period of time, I can tell you she was a strict disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: Any examples or anecdotes about her disciplinarian skills?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, she would say, if you can't--and one of her staunch quotations, "If you can't hear, you can feel."  And she would back it up.
Speaker 1: And what type of relationship did you have with her?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any brothers and sisters and she, we spent a lot of time together, throughout the years.  And she was my number one backbone, always with me.  And I would say she was demanding, and she taught school in Leon County, Florida, and another one of her quotations--I remember talking to her on the phone when I was at Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], she said, "I'm tying my clothes up on me so you can stay in school, and you'd better get them lessons."
Speaker 1: So education, she made sure at a young age, that education importance was stressed?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did she do that?  How did she do that when you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, she worked with me in the evenings.  And when I would, I hate to say it.  She was--she--I wouldn't say she was right, one level below demanding.
Speaker 1: And your father, what type of man was he?
Speaker 2: Well, he was mainly in business.  He had a newspaper in Tallahassee [Florida].  Let's see, yeah, I think he had the first newspaper on our side of town called the 'Capital City Post'.
Speaker 1: And how did he go about starting this in the city?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a little boy when he started it, so I can't really tell you.  But I gathered that his mother helped him a lot, helped him get it started, and I had an uncle that was a barber in the late eighteens [1800s] and early nineteens [1900s] in Tallahassee, and he created resources on that side of the family that made things a lot easier.
Speaker 1: So was this a thriving newspaper?
Speaker 2: It did very well, very well, very well.  I imagine it had some problems in the early '30s [1930s], and at that time--not in the early '30s, but say mid-30s.  And then my father moved away to Connecticut to work in the, in the, what they called the, in the factory during World War II.
Speaker 1: What type of relationship did you have with your father?
Speaker 2: Ah, well, we were close, but not as close as with my mother.  I'd have to say that the primary rearing was left to my mother.
Speaker 1: So what examples of your father being in your life, though, are there, of his being there and such as things you two would do together?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd fish together some time, swim together, played football, touch football, passed and so forth and so on.  And then when he was living in Connecticut, I'd go up there in the summertime, and this was primarily when I was in, a senior in high school and in college, and work in the factories in Connecticut.
Story_ID: 18872
Speaker 1: What were your responsibilities in the house?  Since both your parents [William Edgar Norris and Lillie M. Norris] were working, what responsibility or chores were given to you to help make the house go?
Speaker 2: The biggest thing I did in the wintertime was, and remember during that time, you had, we had fireplaces in Tallahassee [Florida], and I had to prepare the, as they would say, the lighter wood for the fire tomorrow morning, and have them ready to go and make things, sure things were ready for heating my house in the morning.  I mean the woodwork was there, but I had to get it ready.  That was the biggest responsibility I had as a child, at home.
Speaker 1: Now, did you see--being an only child, did you experience--what types of experiences did you have, specifically being the only child in the household from the older adults, since you're the only child in the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just got attention, I guess until I went to North Carolina to visit my maternal grandmother, and there were--I'd go up there in the summertime, when I was in middle school, and, in fact, all of her grandchildren would be there in the summertime.  And that's when I--we had, that was a like a little small community because she would have all her grandchildren at one time.
Speaker 1: Now how was that, not being the only child or is that fun?  Was that, did you feel--how did you feel, how did that make you feel, not being--?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it. I didn't feel--and I felt welcomed, and she, it was just a good experience to be with my cousins in the summertime with my cousins in the summertime, and looked forward to it.  And my grandmother was a very warm lady.  The most important thing I remember about her is how she could spoil one with the dishes that she prepared.
Speaker 1: What type of dishes?
Speaker 2: Mainly dessert.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite one?
Speaker 2: Strawberry shortcake, and then you know, strawberries, I guess, there were a lot of strawberries in North Carolina in the summertime.  You know, I--and she had apple trees in the backyard.  That meant apple pie.
Speaker 1: So she was a pie maker?
Speaker 2: She could cook.  She cooked for a living too.
Speaker 1: Now, the fact that you're an only child, and you would have those experiences during the summer, did that make you like kind of miss not having brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I had good friends in the neighborhood in Tallahassee, and I don't think I really missed having brothers and sisters.
Story_ID: 18873
Speaker 1: Now, what was the Tallahassee [Florida] community like, that you grew up in?  What was the community like there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Tallahassee is a college town.  And I went to elementary school out at Lucy Moten Training School, and were a lot of parents that were pushing their children to do well in school.  So I think it was a, it was a good community to grow up in, and in retrospect, you can see today that most of the kids in my neighborhood did finish high school and college.
Speaker 1: Who were like the, the pillars of the community in Tallahassee?  Who were the--?
Speaker 2: Well, across the street from me, it was a dentist.  His name was Dr. Allen.  And down the street was an undertaker.  His name was Laster (ph.), and he used to give us money for running foot races to the winners, and across the street from me was Dr. James Robert Bate who was my idea at the time, at the time, and I always wanted to, said I wanted to grow up to be like Dr. Bate.
Speaker 1: And what was he like as a man, Dr. Bate?  What was he like?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you this, he was a Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] graduate, and he took care of the people in the community.  He--good heart, he was, people could always look forward to him being dependable and if you were sick, he would see about you.
Speaker 1: So those were two medical people you've come across there, your aunt?
Speaker 2: My grandmother--,
Speaker 1: Your grandmother--
Speaker 2: --was a nurse.
Speaker 1: --was a nurse.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now the doctor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how did he--when you talked to him or just seeing him, what would you notice about him that really impressed you?
Speaker 2: Well he, people found him to be dutiful.  He set a good example for any young man to follow, and he was a man of firm principles, that is, he couldn't be persuaded to do things that--if he thought he was right, he'd stand on his principle.  And that's the way it was.  And he would not back down or compromise in his duty to take care of sick people.
Speaker 1: Now, was he the doctor for the--pretty much the entire community?
Speaker 2: There probably were two other doctors on the outside of town.  There was a Dr. Foot and a Dr. Baker.  Dr. Foot finished Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and Dr. Baker finished Meharry.  So there were two Meharry graduates--also, Dr. Abner (ph.) who was a dentist across the street, finished Meharry.
Speaker 1: So there were a number of professional blacks in the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I said, you know Tallahassee is a college town, and it was a good town to grow up in.
Story_ID: 18874
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Childhood memory.
Speaker 2: That's kind of difficult, but I can remember being in the dining room at my aunt's house.  Some times I can see or I have visions of it even now, and spending time with my grandmother out at her house on North Macomb Street in Tallahassee [Florida] and then the experiences at my grandmother's house in North Carolina.  And I said before, is, how she would spoil you with her good dessert, but those are, to say what my earliest childhood, there are, there are several, but that's--those are the things that I see in my mind now.
Story_ID: 18875
Speaker 1: So your elementary school, what was the name of your elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Lucy Moten Training School in Tallahassee [Florida], and it's still there.
Speaker 1: Still there today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right there on the corner of boulevard and, right north--it's on Florida A&M's [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] campus.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of the teachers and the other people who, at that school, who influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, there was Mrs. Irene Decorsi (ph.).  She is deceased.  I think all those people are probably deceased now.  And there was a Mrs. Robinson who taught me in the fourth grade.  Mrs. Decorsi was my sixth grade teacher, and Mrs. Holmes was my second grade teacher, and, of course, Mrs. White was my first grade teacher.  I remember them very well.
Speaker 1: So what was the school like?
Speaker 2: Well, in a sense this would, this is demonstration school for Florida A&M, and the teachers were very well prepared even in the early '30s [1930s].  Most of the teachers went away in the summertime to study at schools like Columbia University [New York, New York].  Most teachers had their Master's even in the '30s [1930s], and Mrs.  Rob--Miss Robinson, who was my fourth grade teacher used to go to the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France] in the summertime.  And they were skilled teachers and very well prepared.
Speaker 1: And how did that reflect on the students?  How did they challenge you in--?
Speaker 2: Well, the classes were small, as I said.  And I gather that it was not supposed to be a private school, but you had to pay a minimum amount of tuition to go, and I gather that the parents who sent their children to Lucy Moten Training School were at that time pushing them to succeed.
Speaker 1: And your high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to high school at Florida A&M University, which was Florida A&M College at that time.  That was a continuation of the demonstration school for Florida A&M until I was in the tenth grade.  And, of course, they didn't have a football team, and therefore, I went across town to Lincoln High School because I wanted to play football.  And the academic program was a little bit different but--and the emphasis on different things were--there is a contrast, but, and I enjoyed going to high school, played on the Lincoln High School football team, which was a good team.  And I finished and went to Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].
Story_ID: 18876
Speaker 1: Now, what type of child were you growing up?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say I had some academic orientation, and I worked as a child.  I saw guys around me making money shining shoes.  So I decided I wanted to shine shoes, and I did that.  And guys--I used to sell the papers that my daddy [William Edgar Norris] published ['Capital City Post'], and then I started hopping bells at the hotel downtown because I liked--I would say I thought it was a certain amount of--I was interested in trying to make money and save money.
Speaker 1: And where did you learn that from?
Speaker 2: I guess I got it from my mother [Lillie M. Norris] and my father, you know.  But I saw the advantages of saving and to help you accomplish objectives.
Speaker 1: And so football.  Were there any other extra curricular activities you were in involved in, in school or were there any other--?
Speaker 2: Played on the basketball team of course.
Speaker 1: So athletics were an important part?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.  You know, during that time, you had several championship teams at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], that is the, in the, in the late '30s [1930s] and early '40s [1940s], and, as you know, even today Tallahassee is a college town and a football town or a sports town.
Story_ID: 18877
Speaker 1: In your school, what are your--in high school [Lincoln High School, Tallahassee, Florida] now, what are some of your, who are some your--who are some of the teachers that are having an influence upon you and making you think, I might want to do this or I might want to go in this direct--what teachers are really looking out for you and are being kind of a mentor?
Speaker 2: There was a man named Smith who taught me sociology in high school, that said a lot of worthwhile things.  Then there was a lady named Alice Holly who taught me business principles that was rather--influential.  And that's about it.
Speaker 1: What did these individuals impart to you, Mr. Smith or Mr.--Mrs. Holly, what did they--what did you gather from them as people?
Speaker 2: Mr. Smith just set a good example as a man, and the advantages of giving strong thought and, and looking at options before you act.  And another teacher that I didn't mention earlier was a lady that mathematics.  Her name was Willie B. Stewart.  She taught algebra one and two, and she was really dramatic in her teaching also.
Speaker 1: And all these individuals were helping nurture your character along the way?
Speaker 2: I suppose so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, going back to Dr. Handy, and your grandmother [Virgie Robinson Norris] who was the nurse, what made you have such a great respect, not only for them, but for the medical field just in general at that young age?  What made you curious or--?
Speaker 2: I said Dr. Bate.  In Tallahassee, well, the bottom line is the physicians on our side of town, as you know, they were self employed, and they had to lead the community and come to the defense of a lot of people.  And they were principled men, and they--I guess the big thing about it is they worked for themselves and could not be influenced by, or being pressured with I'll take your job.
Speaker 1: And why was that important to you?
Speaker 2: Because of the--not being, being economically, being economically secure in some aspects dispenses fear.
Speaker 1: And now you--?
Speaker 2: Or dispels fear.
Speaker 1: Now, your father [William Edgar Norris] worked for himself also?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did he have--did he teach you any of that, of--when you saw that, how'd did that influence you?
Speaker 2: Not as much as the physicians around town, yeah.  Well, the newspapers thrived on advertising and so on, and so the business income from--and even today, you can see that advertisers can influence what newspapers print.  Advertisers can influence what TV programs put on TV, that is today.  And I don't have to make any examples of that, but you can, you can tell by some of the influences that advertisers have with newspapers by contract for their commercials, they will modify what they write.
Speaker 1: So did Dr. Bailey know--?
Speaker 2: [James Robert] Bate, B-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: Did Dr. Bate know that he had this influence on you?  Did you, were you questioning him?  Did you talk to him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I used to spend a lot of time with him.  I don't think I questioned him.  I just in a sense, and I might have questioned him, but I just spent a lot of time with him.
Speaker 1: Just observing him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what type of things were you picking up in his behavior and how he carried himself?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I'll say this, he was always neat.  And he would go the extra mile to see about patients.
Story_ID: 18878
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, sounds?  If you're talking about music, I grew up in, in a time when 'Tuxedo Junction' was popular, the jitterbug was the favorite dance.  And it's amazing that I look back when I was a teenager, knob-toed shoes and, and jitterbug pants were popular.  This is when I was a teenager.  By the time I got in college, that was, had passed.  And that lets you know that fashions come and go.  That's about it.
Story_ID: 18879
Speaker 1: At your high school [Lincoln High School, Tallahassee, Florida], what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I gather that I was a, a good student.  Somewhere along the way, I heard some people that if you were smart you didn't have to study.  I don't know where I got that from, but, and I guess, I was a crunch student, that would come in right on time and I really didn't start to excel academically until about my sophomore year in Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia].  I never was behind.  I made good--I always had good test scores.  I didn't push myself, but at Hampton I--in the sophomore and junior year, senior year, I got the idea that I--I found out that if I wanted to go to medical school, you had to turn it on, and I tightened up and turned it on.
Story_ID: 18880
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Norris, you said that, early on, that your father [William Edgar Norris] went to Connecticut at some point in time, and how did that affect the family, the separating of your father and mother [Lillie M. Norris]?
Speaker 2: Well we, I guess they accommodated for it.
Speaker 1: How, how did they do that?
Speaker 2: I can't really tell you that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he went up there--when you went up there for your visits, how was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I enjoyed it.  I enjoyed living in Connecticut in the summertime, in the summertime.  But around Labor Day, when the leaves started turning yellow, I knew it was time for me to go home.
Story_ID: 18881
Speaker 1: Now, you're, you're a senior in high school [Lincoln High School, Tallahassee, Florida].  What's the--you want to go to college?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What motivates you to go--to choose the college you attend?  What are the factors that go into you choosing what institution you will attend?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in Tallahassee and I guess it was an idea that you just want to, you want to get away from home.  You know, I don't say that I wanted to be liberated, but when you grow up in a college--I grew up in a college town.  And a lot of children who could go away to college, did go away a college--go away to college.  And I just wanted a different, a change of scenery, and that's--and I said I wanted to go to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And then my folks said, that's fine.
Speaker 1: And so what was the experience on, at Hampton University?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a good, uplifting experience.  The dean of men there was rather influential.  Of course, they had a good academic program, and they emphasized that they wanted you to be, that you would--you'd go back to community and make a contribution, as they say, as a Hampton man, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose your major at Hampton?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I really took pre-med, and I majored in biology and minored in chemistry.  And that was your standard at the time.  It probably still is.
Speaker 1: And that was because of Dr. [James Robert] Bate--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, mainly, mainly, Dr. Bate cause my grandmother died when I was a little boy.  And I just remember, I remember my grandmother [Virgie Robinson Norris] who was a nurse vaguely, not very well.
Speaker 1: So Dr. Bate was the influence that made you choose the pre-med mainly.  How were the, how were the courses?  How challenged were you?
Speaker 2: Interesting and stimulating.  You had to study.  You cannot get organic chemistry by osmosis.  You can't get physics by osmosis.  You have to study it, but I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: So did the amount of studying you had to do cut down on the social activities you might have wanted to participate in?
Speaker 2: I don't think it cut down any social activities, but you just have to use your time wisely and budget your time, you know.  You--that's it.  You have to--you don't cut down on your social activities, but you discipline yourself and get the job done.  In fact, I guess that's the first time I, I made a schedule on what time I would get up and how much time I'd spend studying.  And I follow that principle today.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you get that discipline from, to do that?  Where do you think you got that from to do that?
Speaker 2: One thing I talked to a guidance counselor at Hampton that helped me make the first study schedule.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: This was a lady.  I don't remember name right now.
Speaker 1: And so that was the first study schedule you'd ever had before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And was it, was it easy to follow that?  Was it simple?
Speaker 2: It wasn't hard to do.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any people, while you were there, professors or friends or other individuals who had an influence on you while you were at Hampton?
Speaker 2: A lady named Anita B. Hall primarily.  She taught comparative anatomy.  That was--and she had a, a--she was a good teacher, and she had a tremendous personality.
Speaker 1: What type of person was she like, what type--?
Speaker 2: Just warm and motherly type, and kind of pushed you on in a, in a warm manner.
Speaker 1: Now, all of your education and your experiences at this, up until this point, besides a few visits to Connecticut, are in the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What types of experiences did you have outside of your community when you went into the non-black areas?
Speaker 2: I don't think, I don't recollect having any, any real bad experiences because, you know, like I say, I didn't go out in non-black area, not really, unless I was--like I worked at a hotel, and I worked as a bell hop.  And I did my job, and took the tips that I made, and that's about it, you know.
Story_ID: 18882
Speaker 1: Back to Tallahassee [Florida] for one moment, the church you attended there, what church?
Speaker 2: I was an acolyte at the, at St. Michael's Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Now, what role did the church play in the black community there in Tallahassee?
Speaker 2: Well, I was also a Boy Scout.  And I believe in these Boy Scout--I believe in the Boy Scout oath today, and I tried to emphasize it to my boy.  I said, I believe in the Boy Scout oath today.  And the first cub pack that I belonged to was at the Episcopal Church.  And as I said, I was a acolyte in that church, and I think it was rather influential during my life.
Speaker 1: And was the church attendance an entire family thing, your entire family went to church together?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My folks were Baptist, but the Episcopal Church was right around the corner from my house.  And I went over there to Sunday school, and I'd go to the Baptist church with my mother and really, no reflection, but they stay in too long (laughter).  And you go to the Episcopal Church, and you could go in there and you'd be in an hour, a hour and fifteen minutes.  And I felt like they were serving the same God, and so that's where I joined.
Speaker 1: And did they have a lot of programs and things for the kids and for the young people in the community?
Speaker 2: Well, they had Sunday school--no, they had more programs at, at the Baptist church, like BYPU [Baptist Young Peoples Union], and they sponsored me.  And I did go to the daily--daily vacation bible schools and so forth and so on.  They, but I, I did join the Episcopal church at a very early age.
Speaker 1: And how do you think that influenced you, the Episcopal Church?
Speaker 2: Well, you have guided prayers, you know.  And you, you learn some of them by rote and you practice what you learned.
Story_ID: 18883
Speaker 1: So, while you're at Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia], you said there was a moment that came where you realized to attain your goal, you had to buckle down.  Explain that time where you realized that?
Speaker 2: Well, you find out that getting in medical school is competitive, and you have to have the academic grades.  And you have to have the scores on the medical aptitude test and the graduate record to back it up.  And that's when I turned it around, and turned it on, that's all.  And it tickles me, when I laugh about it, how, how I amazed some people who, you know, who thought that I was not competitive.
Speaker 1: Now, did--were there any, was there anyone around you at that time that didn't think, ah, he's not gonna get into medical--did you have any of those people around here, any of the doubters, that probably didn't think you could make it?
Speaker 2: Ah, I'm not too sure about that, but it just tickled me about how some of the guys who had been leading the pack, when they looked at me, they were threatened.  It just, just tickles me, that's all.
Speaker 1: So, what type of student were you at Hampton?
Speaker 2: After I started turning it on, I was a, I--the record speaks for itself, that I was an outstanding student.  And I don't like to, to, to make a lot of noise about it, but you just have to--after I turned it on, I surprised a lot of people.  That's all.
Speaker 1: But did you surprise yourself?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 18884
Speaker 1: So you're about to graduate at Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia], and you want to go to medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you want to attend the same medical school as, did Dr.  [James Robert] Bate?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What thoughts are you having about medical school, just on a whole, paying for it, and things of that sort?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and I mentioned my Aunt Celestine, these were my backbones, and they knew I wanted to go, and they wanted me to go.  And I knew I could go.  I just had to get admitted, that's all.  And I was admitted--I finished, as you know, that, in 1950, you had a lot of guys returning from World War II and the, the seats at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] were, I guess they had, sometimes they say they had fifty applications for one seat.  And so I didn't get accepted in class, the beginning of September of 1950.  I got accepted for a class starting in September '51 [1951].  But in the meantime, I got drafted in the service.  So I didn't really go to Meharry until 1955.
Story_ID: 18885
Speaker 1: So being drafted, where did--what were your thoughts on that when that occurred, when you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I regretted that I didn't take ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], that's one thing.  The second thing is I wanted to go to the Air Force and I passed all those examinations except the eye examination, so they told me I could be a, a--what is it?  The guys that, that taught them how to--the guys--?
Speaker 1: Orderly?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Orderly?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  They--navigator, they told me I could be a navigator.  And that didn't interest me.  So I just went on in the--I got drafted, did my two years in the United States, and got out and went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Where did you go to serve your two years?
Speaker 2: I served about one year at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, one, one year at Camp Stewart at Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now, how were your experiences while you were in the military?
Speaker 2: I had good experiences.  After basic training I was in the headquarters' company at, at Fort Jackson, and headquarters' company at Camp Stewart, Georgia, and I was really working in what they called an information and education section.  So I had good duty, got an honorable discharge, and came home.
Speaker 1: But the military experience wasn't good enough for you to say, I might want to make a career of this?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So at any time, you never--?
Speaker 2: I did a, I did a good job, but I didn't want to make a career of it.
Speaker 1: So when you're getting out, what are your thoughts of where am I gonna go now?  You come home?
Speaker 2: Came home, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you do when you came back to Tallahassee [Florida]?
Speaker 2: I taught school for one year and worked in the post office in the summertime, and the next year I went to medical school.
Speaker 1: Now, how was it?  Once you first get up there to medical school now, and, I guess you, you were a little more mature than I guess some of the other incoming students.  Do you think you were better prepared after some of the other experiences?
Speaker 2: I probably was, and I, by--there were a lot of young men in my class who were just getting out of the military.  So, in fact, I would say that surely fifty percent of the class were people who had been not necessarily in combat, who had been in the, who had been drafted in the service during the Korean War.  So I was not really, really considered being a old guy in my class.  We were, I was right in the middle I have to say, of median age in that group.  And one thing that I think helped me was, more discipline in the service and endurance because you, you had some very long hours.  And I did not know that I had that kind of endurance before I went in the service, like forest marches, and went on, went to a leadership school at Fort Jackson, and got some good ideas on planning, and allocation of time, as I had mentioned before.  So, and I got one saying out of that.  If I could work that hard for Sam, I could work that hard for myself.
Speaker 1: So you applied that discipline you got there and took it into medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 18886
Speaker 1: And how challenging was the medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] experience for you?
Speaker 2: It's an, it's academically and physically challenging.  It was at that time, and I, I can imagine it still is because even as a, as a resident down, after finishing medical school, it is physically challenging.
Speaker 1: So did you see a lot of your classmates fall by the wayside?
Speaker 2: Not very many.  A few people fell out of the class, out of the class, not many.  I think that they do a pretty good job of selecting them.  There were not many guys--.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, at Meharry, was it a nurturing environment to produce more black doctors?  Was that--.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't say that it's nurturing.  It's challenging.  And I don't necessarily think it's nurturing at all, and nobody that mistreat you, but you have to stand up and be a man.
Speaker 2: Now, while you're there--and this is something we heard from Dr. [Audrey Forbes] Manley, that they really were putting that emphasis on, we need more black doctors, more blacks in the healthcare field to go out into these communities to make a difference.  Did you feel that type of responsibility on you?  Did you feel that type, sense of, I need to go and make a difference in some of our communities?
Speaker 1: Well, even today, then and today, we have to take care of our people, you know.  And because if we don't, and we, we--you're response--we take on the responsibility of trying to see that nobody is neglected.
Speaker 2: Now, up until this point, and I don't know if you had or not, were you ever aware of inequity in the medical school, like the hospitals in Tallahassee [Florida]?  Were blacks and whites getting both equal care or anywhere growing up?  Did you have the knowledge that you could go to the hospital and get adequate care?
Speaker 1: Well, when I grew up, as you're probably aware, that there were--number one, I know you know that the hospitals were one hundred percent segregated.  There were black hospitals, white hospitals.  Some cities there were no black hospitals.  In those hospitals, they had sections that were set aside for black patients.  Tallahassee, where I grew up is different in that they had--to my knowledge, they always had a black hospital.  Now, what the facilities were at the white hospital, I don't know.  When I came to Delray Beach [Florida], they had a new Hill-Burton hospital, which had federal funds in it, and this was 1962--1961, and the hospital facilities was one of the primary reasons that I came to Delray because there were hospital facilities.  The hospital was segregated as this is South Florida, and at that time, the system was segregated, and the civil rights law didn't go into effect until 1964 or 1965.  And there begin to be some changes then.  I cannot say concretely that practicing in Delray Beach that I was overtly segregated by the hospital, no.  You have personalities and even today you have some personalities that some people get along better than others.  And I could always find somebody, if I had a problem, I could always find somebody to help me.  And like even today, I have to mention there's a doctor in town named Frank Kucera, that even surgery, say if it was 8:00  in the morning, and I need him to help me, or 2:00 in the morning.  There's another doctor named Fred Schwartz.  If you call him up, say, what's the problem; I'll be over there in a few minutes.  You can't beat that, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, as you're going through Meharry Medical School [sic, College], did you have any idea or were you starting to think of what type of practice or what type of doctor I wanted to be?
Speaker 1: Well, there was, the chief of surgery at Meharry at that time was Matthew Walker, and he had an influence on me.  And I got, and I can say he did, he did influence me by--he set a good example for a lot of fellows.
Speaker 2: How, how did he do it?
Speaker 1: Well, he was an academic giant.  And he had a, a very good sense of humor, and, and affable personality, you know, and a good teacher, you know.
Speaker 2: So how did this play in what type of doctor you wanted to do, what type of healthcare area you wanted to enter into?
Speaker 1: Well, it's just a--you want to be able to help people.  And in order to be able to help people, you had to be prepared, you know.  That's about it.
Story_ID: 18887
Speaker 1: So you graduate Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and you're starting to choose on where to go and do your, go next.  How do you come to decide what your next step is?
Speaker 2: Well, I interned in [Winston-Salem] North Carolina, at Kate Bitting Reynolds [Memorial] Hospital for about a year.  And then I practiced for a little while in (unclear) Georgia.  Well, in fact, I came through Atlanta [Georgia] and took the Georgia board a few days after I finished Meharry, and I got a Georgia license which gives you reciprocity in a lot of states.  And as soon as I could take the Florida board, which is in two sections, I took the Florida board, and when I--you take the first part in December and the next part in June.  And when I got the Florida board, you probably know Simon Barnes, who had a drugstore in Delray Beach [Florida], he called me up and asked me to come to Delray.  And I came down here, and I was impressed, and I liked it.  And I came and practiced.
Speaker 1: How did he hear about you?
Speaker 2: I guess he--they probably put in some newsletter about people who had recently passed the Florida board, and he was in Tallahassee [Florida]--I mean he was from Tallahassee, and so--and I had--he was one class behind me in high school.  And I guess he was looking for, the people in, in this community were looking for a doctor to come to Delray, and he helped them.  And he, he knew me well from elementary school--not elementary school, but from high school.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any African American doctors here when you came here?
Speaker 2: I was the, I was the first one.
Speaker 1: Now, how was that experience when you first come here, and there's no African American healthcare professionals, doctors, in the area?
Speaker 2: Well, I took care of a lot of people.  I was welcomed.  I took care of babies, I took care of pregnant ladies, I delivered babies.  In fact, I was in general practice for about four years, and there was a tremendous need for, to take care of the people, people who lived in the city, people who lived in the farms.  And I would make house calls as needed or go out on the range line to see people from time to time; meet people at the office at 2:00 in the morning to check 'em down on Fifth Avenue.  And I was young and had a lot of endurance and energy, so it was exciting, and I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get--were you able to grasp that--what had been going on before you'd gotten there?  Did you have any idea like what did these people do for medical services before you'd come there?  What were they--.
Speaker 2: There were doctors in Delray who, who took care of black people.  And I think that they did a reasonable job.  Sometimes, I guess, with my being in town, I could see them sooner than they could be seen before because they were my first priority.
Speaker 1: And how did the black community welcome you?  Were they--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I got a very good, warm welcome.
Speaker 1: Now, during this practice, while your practice is building up in your almost twenty-four hours (laughter) non-stop with the services, how did the hospital interact with you?  Were they welcoming as well as the other, were the other healthcare professionals, non, the white professionals, were they as accommodating to you?  Were they like welcoming to you?
Speaker 2: I mentioned before, not all of them.  I don't recollect having any, any serious problem with but one individual.  The rest of them were, were from cool to cordial.  And the hospital--this was in 1961.  As I've said, I mentioned to you that a local attorney named I. C. Smith, and a local citizen named C. Principape (ph.) went with me to get my application and to take the application in.  And, as I say, one of the primary reasons that I came to Delray is because they had a Hill-Burton hospital which meant you had federal funds in it.  It was not a private hospital.  And I don't--I do not recollect having a serious problem.  Of course, every doctor has to abide by the bylaws of the hospital, and I did that till today.  And I cannot rightfully say that I've had a--I haven't, haven't had any problems with the administration of the hospital.  That's till today.
Story_ID: 18888
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Dr. Norris, you were explaining to us that another attractive feature, besides being asked to come here by your friend, your childhood friend, was the fact that there were federal dollars at the hospital.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Explain what that means?
Speaker 2: Well, that means that, that there was, there was a decreased chance of being segregated in trying to get staff privileges.  That's about it, that, you know, that if they, if you were segregated in privileges at the hospital, that they, anywhere in this area that, or anywhere in the United States, they would know, the administration, the people giving you problems would know that they'd be violating federal law.
Speaker 1: And what would that be?  That means the--?
Speaker 2: That, that if you were discriminated against, you can take action against them.
Speaker 1: Now, were the blacks going to the hospital here in Delray [Beach, Florida]?  Were they--.
Speaker 2: I'm sure they were, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you first start working with the Delray Beach hospital, at the hospital?
Speaker 2: At Bethesda Memorial Hospital [Boynton Beach, Florida], in January of 1962.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your experiences like there, being the--were you the only black doctor on staff?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: We just admitted people, took care of them, no--I had good experiences.  People--the hospital was little and new at that time, and they didn't have an ICU [intensive care unit], and you had to make rounds.  In fact, I was, I was pretty young and energetic, and I used to make rounds about three times a day or every eight hours, to make sure that people got--if you wrote an order, you'd want to make sure it was carried out and people got the best care that you could possibly give.  You have ICUs now, and you have better monitoring systems and the, the keener nurses that are on top of the problem, and you can depend on them to make you aware of changes in the situation.  And they are better prepared to, to tell you what's going on.
Speaker 1: Now, as a child, you said you looked up to Dr. [James Robert] Bate who was in your area and how he carried himself and things of that sort.  Now that you are the quote, unquote Dr. Bate here in Delray, being the only black doctor, were you always cognizant of how the young blacks were looking up to you and how did you take that responsibility on?
Speaker 2: I really wasn't aware of it, but I--even today I try to carry myself in a manner that, that will be worthy of a young man emulating.
Speaker 1: And while you were in the community, were young people coming up to you and like asking, like, how did you become a doctor? Were they seeking you out?  Were they--your status in the community being the only black doctor?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've, on occasion I've been to what they call, the little meeting that they have, career days at the schools and various fellows in the community would just talk to me about different things.
Story_ID: 18889
Speaker 1: Now, during this time, you're here from--your first stint here is from '61 [1961] to '65 [1965].  The Civil Rights Movement is really picking up--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at that time.  How is it manifesting itself here in Delray [Beach, Florida]?
Speaker 2: During that particular, the restaurants that had been previously segregated--and this is a tourist town, were opened.  And I had the opportunity to visit restaurants that I had never been in before.  As I say--then the, they had a segregated wing of the hospital.  And around 1965 black patients started to being, put in, all over the hospital.  The, they obliterated the previous black wing of the hospital, and black patients didn't necessarily come in the back door as visitors anymore.  Those were the big changes you could see.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that affect you before then, when blacks had to come in the back doors, and had to go to one section of the wing?  Did you ever attempt to say anything or did you hold it in?  What was your response to this?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you.  I don't think it was a big adjustment for me because as you see, I did grow up in the South.  I grew up in a segregated society.  Tallahassee [Florida] is a, is a, a bit different because Tallahassee, you could get most anything you wanted in Tallahassee without going across town, if you wanted to.  You didn't have to go across town if you didn't want to.  You could get just about anything you wanted, you could get in your own community.  So, as I say, I didn't have a problem with hotels because I didn't go to hotels, and, but the public accommodations act of 1964 [Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964] opened up all the things that were previously segregated, and you could just--you had, in essence, the full range of things.
Speaker 1: Now, now, at what time did you start receiving Caucasian patients?
Speaker 2: Occasionally, I had Caucasian patients all along, not many.  Even, even--now, today I don't have many Caucasian patients, but I never have segregated patients.
Speaker 1: Now, did any of them have--were they leery like this is a black doctor or did they treat you any differently or did you have any experiences that were--or any anecdotes or stories in regards to--?
Speaker 2: Not the ones that came to my office.  Occasionally, after the, after the, after the Civil Rights Act, until it went in effect, I would get a Caucasian patient through the emergency room that didn't want to have a black doctor.  So it wasn't a problem.  I'd just get him a white doctor, that's all.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't--did that concern you or?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't, didn't a bit.  And occasionally, you'd have a patient who, or a black patient who would see me and ask to have me as their doctor.  So, and I do believe a patient has a right to have a--a patient has a right to choose his own doctor.  I like that.
Speaker 1: But did you have any thoughts on--now, that choice.  Should that choice be on the merit of the doctor or the color of the doctor?  Do you feel, or do you feel that should play any role in it or if--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that a person's choice should be the number one priority.  The merit of the doctor should have something to do with it, but that is even a problem with the HMOs [Health Maintenance Organization] making an effort to assign patients to doctors who they want, the doctor to go to, but regardless, I think a patient should have a right to choose their own doctor because that is a personal piece of chemistry.  It doesn't have anything to do with the color or anything like that, just personal chemistry.
Story_ID: 18890
Speaker 1: Now, you go to Dayton, Ohio to the VA Center.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, talk about that.  And what, what takes you there?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I told you I wanted to be a general surgeon, and that my model for that was Matthew Walker.  And I don't mind telling you that I, I decided to go to--as you know, the VA [veterans affairs] hospital is a federal hospital.  And I picked that in nineteen--I was accepted--I signed a contract in 1964 to go in 1965.  I got accepted at several more hospitals, but at that time, the country being where it is, I chose a federal hospital because it would--as I said before, it came under federal law, you know.  And I thought that that was the safest place to go, a federal hospital, whether I went to the VA in Dayton, Ohio or whether I went to the VA in the Bronx [New York, New York], you know.  I also got accepted at Harlem Hospital and several other hospitals, but as I say, I, in 1964 or '65 [1965], I thought the best place to go was probably a federal hospital.
Speaker 1: And you went there for general surgery?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how was that experience, when you're attempting now to become a surgeon?
Speaker 2: A tremendous learning experience; wide range.  It's, this program was sponsored by Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] and had a lot of experiences, rotation through a trauma hospital in, in Dayton called, they called it St. E's, but it's St. Elizabeth, rotating through Ohio State University's Children's Hospital, which was a, a tremendous experience.
Speaker 1: And you were there for four years [1965-1969]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And are there any experiences that you still carry--what were the largest influences during that four-year period for you, that you still carry with you, during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, in trauma you have to be able to make a timely and accurate decision.  Things have changed a whole lot since I was in training.  For example, you have the CT [computed tomography] scans now that can make you, help you make a more accurate diagnosis.  And this even happened in Delray.  A patient is living today that had a ruptured aneurism that we were able to make a diagnosis of a ruptured cerebral aneurism and get her out of here to Jackson Memorial without a CT scan of her head.  But you had to do a lot of thinking and, and things have moved on.  But this, just a tremendous experience in taking care of a lot of people with a lot of big problems, and you had to be able to do it on a moment's notice and do it well.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first, what was your first surgery like?  The first time you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, you start out with little things like hernias.
Speaker 1: Were there any nerves?  Were there any--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I was nervous because I had been, I had been helping people a long time.  I guess it's like--and then you have, you just change the sides of the table where you're not the assistant, you're the surgeon, you know.  So it's, it's kind of, it's a, it's not a perfect analogy, but say rather than--you can bring it back to driving a car.  You can sit in the, next to the driver as long as you want to, but in order to drive the car, you have to get in the driver's seat.  That's all.
Story_ID: 18891
Speaker 1: So, now, when you come back to Delray [Beach, Florida] this time, there's another first.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're the first--?
Speaker 2: General surgeon.
Speaker 1: In the county?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: African American, so, now, was there a big deal made of this?  Was it noted?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  It was kind of like welcome home.  I knew a lot of people and I just went on.  That's all.
Speaker 1: And the amazing part of it is, now, you were doing something--you were running your general office and you're a surgeon at the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Talk about that and how uncommon that is.
Speaker 2: At that, it may be uncommon now, but it wasn't really uncommon then because I was, there was one more black doctor in town, a doctor--one more black doctor, I'll tell you his name in a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir.
Speaker 2: Melville, Dr. Melville (ph.) and, of course, he couldn't take care of all the black people.  He couldn't take care of all the people that wanted to see him.  And there were people who wanted to see so you just have to put your, put your shoulder to the wheel. And, of course, I took trauma call at the hospital.  So I took care of all the patients that came to my office, regardless of what's wrong with them.  I took referrals in surgery from Dr. Melville, and a few doctors across town sent patients to me, and there were some doctors in West Palm Beach [Florida] who sent patients down here to me for surgery.  But it's just a matter of taking care of the people.  That's all.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you balance the time between surgery and your office visits--?
Speaker 2: Well, I operated in the morning, starting at 8:00 in the morning, and I operated till I got through.  And I'd get to the office about 2:00 in the afternoon and work until I saw the last patient.
Speaker 1: And what were your--what was your average day like, time wise, when you did both?
Speaker 2: About a twelve hour day, twelve, fourteen hours, but that's not new.  That's been going a long time.
Story_ID: 18892
Speaker 1: And still, as you're going, and the longer you're in the medical field, now, you've been in the medical field over, for over ten years?
Speaker 2: Forty.
Speaker 1: No, at that time, at that time.
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Are you seeing--are you seeing a greater presence of African American doctors coming along--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what, what are your thoughts about the equity at that time, when you come back, and you're the first surgeon in Palm Beach County [Florida]?  Are you, are you seeing equity come up between the services provided for African Americans and for Caucasians?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, the biggest thing is to see people and find out what's wrong with them.  And if I find out what's wrong with a person, I will--and I'm not a ophthalmologist, and when I say if they use the word I too much, forgive me, but I will by and large see that he gets what he needs.  Medicine is highly specialized now.  Now, I can tell you a black patient needs somebody who will look out for his interests, or any patient needs a person who'll look out for his interests.  Medicine is more highly specialized now.  If I see a patient that need an operation, I will see that he would get it.  And if he had a quarter or if he had insurance, if he didn't have any insurance.  That's been my position all along, that I will make a living, and I will live okay.  Today, never I took--I never took HMOs [Health Maintenance Organization] because I didn't think the insurance company had a right to tell me what needed to be done for a patient.  Now, when I say that a patient needs somebody to see about him, to find out what's wrong with him and see that he gets it, a very specialized area, for example, you see in the papers about cardiac bypasses, angioplasties, well, if you find out what's wrong with a patient, most of the time you can find a way for him to get his angioplasty or, or a coronary bypass.  I just happen to know people who will get these things done for you.  Now, you, you might have to go to this agency some time or that agency, and you will find people who will, who will get it done for you.  That's all.
Speaker 1: Now, on the insurance and the HMOs and the battle that's going on, why is that your stance in regards to the HMOs who control, who say they're actually helping their clients?  How do you--are they more of an enemy to blacks or to what, whomever, or are they their friend as it, as they portray themselves?
Speaker 2: I don't think that they are necessarily more friendly towards blacks, just helping--I think that blacks are, a large percentage of them are economically deprived or they don't have the same resources.  And they will therefore, some of them will--there are a lot of people who will contract with an HMO.  And then some doctors are--in a sense, say, if you order too many tests, prescribe some, well, for example, take, take what you call a proton pump inhibitor or for example, Prilosec, that's used for, for duodenum ulcers or Zantac.  Well, Prilosec costs considerably more than, which was--came out in the late '70's [1970s] and Prilosec came out a few years ago, Prilosec or a proton pump inhibitors are about seventy percent more effective than the Zantac.  Then they're effective and they're more expensive.  Okay, well, the HMOs do what they called economic credentialing, and they say if you prescribe too many expensive drugs or you prescribe, or you ask for too many tests, then you're an economic liability to them.  So they'll tell you, and they'll fire you, so you--if I don't have a contract with you, you can't fire me, you know.  So, and people--I have patients that come to me, they are HMO patients, but they come to me when they get sick.  That's about it.  And as I say, they, they have to look out for the executive, you know, that's about it.  Their primary interest is not the patient; it's their profit.
Speaker 1: And how can the medical--how can doctors right this?  Or is it too or are they too large of an organization to fight and win?
Speaker 2: Oh, they can fight it because--but they won't, I guess because, well they have doctors who just don't participate.  They, they--there are doctors who don't accept HMOs, and that's becoming increasing so.
Story_ID: 18893
Speaker 1: Now, another question I do really want to ask you, as regards to African Americans and their healthcare, in regards to many African Americans feel very apprehensive about going to doctors, seeking medical care, preventative medical care and things of that sort.  A, why is that?  And B, how do you change it?
Speaker 2: That's a very difficult question.  There are a lot of people who are afraid of preventative medical care.  Some of it's education, and I guess the biggest part of it is education.  For example, people who are hesitate about, or ladies who are hesitant about getting Pap Smears for cervical cancer, hesitant about getting mammograms.  Some of them don't want to know.  Men who are hesitant about getting the test done to rule out prostate cancer.  Now, some of them don't know.  Some of them are afraid.  But the biggest factor is to overcome it and let them know that they can be helped and their lives can be saved or extended.  They can avoid in essence of being sick.  Let's say, for example, prostate cancer in a man, if you get it before it, while it's with--confined within the capsule of the gland, the--disease can be eradicated, but once it get out of the gland, it's, you, you decrease your chance of surviving.  And there's just men who don't know that they can, this can be diagnosed early, and that's about it.  And that's education.
Speaker 1: So you think that's the root cause of African Americans who don't, who have fears of hospitals and--?
Speaker 2: Nah, I'm not sure that's the root cause, but it may be beyond me.  But there's, a large percentage of it is education.
Speaker 1: So what is the, what are the roles of African American doctors to change that?  What do they have to do to get the healthcare--?
Speaker 2: Educate your patients and educate the community.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you--in exact--how would you go about telling other black doctors to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think they come about it in, in organization and then they have groups that out, and they have health fairs, things of that nature, a few different organizations.  Organizations put together the healthcare, you get--and you invite people in, and you go and talk to them and give them, give them presentations.  But it's not a one-time thing.  It's an ongoing thing.
Story_ID: 18894
Speaker 1: And the manner in which the AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] epidemic is ravaging the African American community, what is, what are--what can the healthcare system do, African American healthcare providers do to attempt to combat what's going on with the AIDS epidemic in our community?
Speaker 2: It gets back to education, education, education.  And it's--you asked me specifically about the health community, but the health community cannot do it by themselves.  It has to be schools, churches, homes and the, as you know that is, is a horrendous task, and it's not confined to the black community.  It's wide spread in the black community, but it--this thing crosses races, crosses social strata, and it, you have to have a, a one hundred and, or rather two hundred and sixty degree effort on it from all sides.
Speaker 1: Do you think the, the battle against AIDS is, is starting now?  Do you think it's working and making inroads?
Speaker 2: I think there has been some inroads.  I think it has, that there have been some inroads, and as you know, the treatment of AIDS has improved tremendously.
Speaker 1: What, what would you prescribe right now as preventative medicine, as preventative steps that can be taken by the African American community to fight against AIDS?
Speaker 2: In the fight against AIDS, I would say, and I preach this all the time, no drugs; sex, as you say, safe sex.  That's about it.  Education, you abstain as long as you can, and you have safe sex when you do have sex, and you leave the drugs alone.
Speaker 1: And you think--do you think that message can be carried within the--I mean could you go to black churches and schools and bring that same message?  What, why is that message not getting out or seeping through the community as it should?
Speaker 2: Well, I cannot answer that really.  I'll give you my best effort.  Some, well, the big, big reason is some people are in denial.  That is to say that, for example, people who say, no sex.  Well, that may be just fine, but it's better to say, no sex, and then safe sex with a condom or what have you, when you, when you, when safe sex--when abstaining doesn't back it up, that's the best.  And, and that'll take care of the teen pregnancies and the, take care of the, the, the teen pregnancies and the, the AIDS.
Story_ID: 18895
Speaker 1: --behavior, you know, but most times, or own sexual partner, you know.  If you get out of your own confines, then you can contaminate your own nest, in essence.
Speaker 2: Now, do you feel that the African American church and the African American community is seeking the answer, sincerely to prevent AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome]?
Speaker 1: I don't think so.  I really don't think so.
Speaker 2: And why is that?
Speaker 1: They just simply ignore it.  I haven't heard it mentioned, and I don't--I go to different churches.  And I don't think I've heard it mentioned.
Speaker 2: Have you ever approached any of the ministers to tell them that you'd be more than happy to--?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't.
Speaker 2: Do you think they'd be willing to have you speak opening about the prevention of AIDS?
Speaker 1: I believe if I approached them about, I could, I could arrange it.
Speaker 2: Now, the African American community, especially when it comes to health care, African American doctors, you've--over your forty-year career, you've seen, I'm sure, the improvement of the healthcare system.  Is it where it should be for the health care of African Americans?
Speaker 1: The, the facts demonstrate that the life expectancy of African Americans is not as long as other people.  The infant mortality rate is lower.  Death rates from cardiovascular diseases, cancer, higher.  So Afro Americans are lagging behind, okay.  And I do think that this can be approved--improved upon and it is, it's the primary responsibility of black doctors, and you have to have black doctors going into these areas who can do these jobs, that's all.  And the ones who are not in these areas have to lean upon other people to get it done.
Speaker 2: Are medical schools doing enough to put out African American doctors?
Speaker 1: Well, the black schools, yes.  But the seats in the minority schools--I mean majority schools--I think that, for example, the black enrollment at the University of Florida has decreased.  I don't know what it is in other states, but the black enrollment at University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] has decreased.
Speaker 2: Now, if their--if, if the level of black doctors that are produced drops, what types of effect would that have on the health care for African Americans?
Speaker 1: I imagine a number of the services rendered to African Americans will probably not be improved.  They will probably drop.
Story_ID: 18896
Speaker 1: And so how, what can black help--what can black doctors who are already doctors do to ensure that there are more black doctors in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, they can encourage them to go to medical school.  I guess they to get black lawyers to help them get in, have to--have, help them in the, in the schools.  They have to work on the legislature at all levels.  What is your take on, the number of black doctors and the type of black doctors that you've seen come across recently?
Speaker 1: I think they are good doctors.  I think they are dedicated.  Sometimes I think they might bend a little bit too much to insurance companies.
Speaker 2: And is that for livelihood or is that, I mean the pressures that are put on at--why do they bend?
Speaker 1: It may be livelihood.  That's a long story.  And if I can say that, and this, this, this applies to any young person.  I think that you should make every effort not to borrow any money that you don't need, and therefore, you can limit your debt load and increase your independence and the closer you come to not, or being debt free, you can reserve the right to stand up on what you consider to be right.
Speaker 2: Now, is that a meth--is that one of the methods that are keeping African Americans out of medical school, that fear of, the expenses of medical school?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure about that.
Speaker 2: Now, what is your impression of the doctors that you've nurtured as Dr. [James Robert] Bate had that impression upon you.  I'm sure you--there a number of young men who've become doctors and have used your mentorship.  How do you feel that other African American doctors who are in your generation or even older should use their mentorship to bring more into the fold?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm very proud of the young men from, from this community who have gone to medical school, and there's a young doctor in California named Ben Monroe.  He was the first doctor from this community that I believe went to medical school.  Born and bred here but he went to California to do an internship and never came back to Florida other than on a visit.  He's done very good work out there.  I see him from time to time at national meetings.  There's a young doctor who's finishing his fellowship in vascular surgery this spring at the University of Wisconsin, and I understand he's coming back to the state and going to Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  And I'm sure he will render a tremendous service to the people.  He was well, reared by an unselfish family.
Speaker 2: Now, do you feel that many of these African American doctors that are coming out and that are--do you think they are willing to make what could be a financial sacrifice to help their people who are in sometimes financially desperate situations?
Speaker 1: I don't think, I doubt that a good black doctor would refuse to treat a patient because of the lack of funds.  I--.
Speaker 2: Is it--?
Speaker 1: I doubt that.  You know, it may be so, but I would be fooled, you know, and it's never been a problem for me.  And I'm pretty sure you can some witnesses to back up what I said.
Speaker 2: But unlike when you began in '61 [1961], there are areas, very rural areas here now today where there wouldn't be maybe some of the financial resources that exists for a doctor to thrive.  And how do you train a doctor to put that monetary thing out of his mind and just commit to helping the people?  How do you train the mind to be that way?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't think that--well, I've just observed that doctors made a good living.  Every one I ever saw made a good living, and I was just taught to, to just keep working and money was not the issue.  Now, exactly how it is today, I'm not sure.  But the thing is, see, as I mentioned the insurance companies before, the insurance companies make every effort to, to influence where patients go, even now to the hospitals, and they try to influence, as you know, there've been issues where they withhold pay to hospitals, withhold pay to doctors.  And this gets into the picture which was never there before.  In fact, I can say about Bethesda Memorial Hospital here, before the issues came to where they are today, it was more forthcoming and more forgiving with the charity care, but now you have the Palm Beach County [Florida] Health Care District and you have Medicaid.  Some, Medicaid helps some and in the long run, if people don't have resources the Palm Beach County Health Care District will help them.
Speaker 2: What can be done to bring about better health care for African Americans in the future?  What concrete things can be done to improve the health care services that African Americans receive?
Speaker 1: Number one, you have to first get people to what they might need and make them come, and encourage them to go and ask for medical service.  For example, you can even start with prenatal care.  Some people stay out with pregnant, before they start prenatal care too long.  And some of them will come up to be delivered and haven't seen a doctor.  That's not good.  And then we mammograms, Pap Smears, and then most physicians, excuse me, more health, more health care services, nurses, so forth and so on, which is educating black doctors, black nurses.  And that's to improve the health care picture over all and more people specializing in the, in the sub-specialties.  It's an overall education effort.  And that can, that--I guess some of that will start in elementary school or start almost before you start school to, to encourage them, that is to say, what do I want to make out of my life.
Speaker 2: What, now, the second question is, what should the role of black doctors be in providing these health services?  What do they need to do to bring these health services, services to African Americans?
Speaker 1: Just make a dedicated effort to serve your people.
Speaker 2: Now, Dr. Norris, two more questions.  One, tell us about the young man you most had influence on who also graduated at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] institute?
Speaker 1: Well, that, that's--you're talking William E. Norris, that's my son.  I really didn't know he wanted to go to medical school until, I think in his junior year he wanted to go up to Meharry to do a externship in working there, working a project up there, upcoming his senior year.  And then I think he went down to Miami to work in some program.  I wasn't aware that he was interested.  But I'm glad he did, and I hope he'll make a worthwhile contribution.  And he seems to like what he's doing and work hard at it.
Story_ID: 18897
Speaker 1: Now, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said a long time ago, I always say I'm just a hard working, country doctor.  Said it a long time, been saying it all the time, you know.  I'll, if you call me, I'll be there.
