Story_ID: 646217
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	Yes of course.  [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols, N-I--N, like Nancy, N-I-C-H-E-double L-E, N-I-C-H-O-L-S, Nichelle Nichols.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Nichelle?  Because you know everybody's heard of Michelle?
Speaker 2:  	I know because I, I always wanted to be named (pronunciation) Michelle and I went to my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and I said, "I didn't want my name that--," which was the name my dad [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] gave me, which was named after his favorite aunt, but I didn't want that name so I go back to him and said, "I don't want to go around with this name."  And he said, "Well I can understand that.  What do you want?"  And so I said, "Well I like the name Michelle, but I don't want the name Nichelle--Michelle."  I said, "I want my initials the same, so would you give me a--" he said, "Well, Nichelle, that sounds good to me.  That's pretty good." And I said, "Ooh wow, I love it."  So I've been Nichelle Nichols since I was about twelve years old.
Speaker 1: From age twelve okay.  All right.
Speaker 2:  	Or younger even.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I think it was about twelve.
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm glad I asked that question.  So no middle name?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: No middle name at all?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2:  	I used to have one, but I don't have one now.  I don't want a middle--I want N.N.--wanted N.N.
Speaker 1: All right, so what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	My date of birth?  That's awfully--you don't want me to say that on camera?
Speaker 1: It's oral history.
Speaker 2:  	I'll write it.
Speaker 1: You'll write it?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It's the 28th of December, 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay and where were you born?
Speaker 2:  	Chicago, Illinois.  No, I was actually born in a little town that my father just before, just south of Chicago, where my father was--grew up, who was first mayor and he was in politics.  They, they--he wasn't in politics, they kept, they kept drafting him and, and so that was just outside of Chicago named--called Robbins, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I don't remember it at all because I was born there.  My two older brothers [Samuel Nichols II and Frank Nichols] and then then me and right after I was born, I think they said about three months, they moved to Chicago for his, his work.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2:  	My dad's?
Speaker 1: Yours?
Speaker 2:  	My occupation?
Speaker 1: Yes, this is oral history.  I mean it's obvious but go on.
Speaker 2:  	Well, my father was a physicist and I almost grew up to, to become a doctor because I wanted to be anything my dad was you see and--but apparently I was always entertaining them and I, I'd go off and I'd never entertain them, you know I never sing for them or dance for them until I had worked out a--an act, and so I go to my mother and dad and I had two older brothers and at that time just a little older than I, and I had worked this act out.
Speaker 1: I didn't want to get you there so far into it; I just wanted you to identify yourself as an actor.
Speaker 2:  	And then I'd go to my parents, I said, "I wanna show you my new act, what I've done with this," and I'd sing for them and, and dance for them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --and they encouraged me--they were wonderful encouragement.
Speaker 1: Now we're just identifying you.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: So I just wanted you to say--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --that you are an actor.  I want you to say it rather than us assuming.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, okay.  So it's Nichelle Nichols.
Speaker 1: Yes and you are, your occupation?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I have many occupations.  No, but you know me as an actor and--
Speaker 1: Writer.
Speaker 2:  	--but most--and a writer.  But most people--but many people know me also as a singer and dancer.
Speaker 1: That's fine, that's fine.  Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	The 28th of December, 1932.
Speaker 1: No, what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I have no idea (laughter).  I have no idea what today's date is (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So would you agree that it's December 17, 2013?
Speaker 2:  	Okay, it's December the seventeen- 17th of December, twenty thirteen [2013].  Twenty thirteen [2013], wow.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we're in your home in, in--?
Speaker 2:  	You're in my home in Woodland Hills, California [Woodland Hills, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 646218
Speaker 1:  	And it's a home that, when I found it--I had lived in Beverly Hills [California] and in South Side of Chicago [Illinois]--I mean Los Angeles [California] for many years and I was visiting over here in the--on the, on this side of town and I took a walk and I came to this street and it was a dead end street and at the end of this street was this house that was for, it just said for lease and I came up the walkway and there's a little house before I got to it and I said, "Hm, if I buy a house out here, I'll have to buy that one too," and then I went on up the driveway and turned the corner and there was this house and I said, "This is mine."  And I went inside and I picked my bedrooms and what I was going to do to the house and how I was going to extend it and how I was going to go up and within, within less than a year, that's exactly what I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	It's amazing you know and everybody said you, "You're leaving Beverly Hills to go to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California]?" (Laughter) I've never regretted it.  Now everybody's coming over to the Valley.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Story_ID: 646219
Speaker 1: Before we get into the interview there are five lightweight questions we always ask that--
Speaker 2:  	Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) only require a short answer.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	Do I have what?
Speaker 1: A favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	Oh god, I wish I had known you were gonna ask me that.  I don't think so.  I just like food.
Speaker 1: All right.  What about a favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2:  	Brown like me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	Well, now that I live in, in California, it's almost any time of year.  I'm from Chicago [Illinois], and I only had one season that I could bear in Chicago and, and, and then I moved out here.  I, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm honest when I tell you, I love all the seasons out here.  There's the, the deep summer that's very hot and then there's winter, fall, which is absolutely marvelous, which is the only season I liked in Chicago, and then there's winter, which they euphemistically call winter (laughter) and, and spring.  I love, I love all the seasons here and, and that's why, that's why I moved here by accident.  I was booked in Hawaii and I had an aunt who lived here and I had to to fly from Los Angeles [California] to Hawaii and so I stayed with her and she took me around and showed me everywhere and I said, "This is where I'm gonna live," and then I--she took me to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California].  She says, "Well, no one lives in the Valley," and I--and she said at that time you know everybody lived over on the other side of town and I said, "Well I'm gonna live in the Valley.  I'm gonna buy a house in the Valley, that's what I wanna do."
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	I travel so much that I don't even know what a vacation is.  I, I--my well, that's how I moved to, to Los Angeles is that became--this became my favorite and I was determined that I was gonna live here and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	Again?
Speaker 1: Do have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	Or saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2:  	I talk to so much, as you must know by now, I don't know (laughter), I don't think so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I'll think of--if, if I think of it I'll say, "Oh, that's my favorite phrase," I guess.  I, I really don't think I do.
Story_ID: 646220
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separately from your father's [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] side; and then we'll put them together, okay.  So can you tell us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	Lishia Parks Humphries Nichols [Lishia Parks Nichols].
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2:  	N-I-C-H-O-L-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's one of them.  All right, we'll leave it as that.
Speaker 2:  	Humphries is, H-U-M-P, you know H-R-I-E-S, I guess and I believe her maiden name, her maiden name was Parks, so it's Parks Humphries Nichols.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	Whose date of birth?
Speaker 1: Your mother?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) My god, she hasn't been with us for quite some time, but I think we celebrated her--I don't know.  It'll come to me in the middle of our conversation somewhere down the line maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she born in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	No, she was born in Texas [sic. Oklahoma].  I used to know the town, but I don't anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well what do you know about her side of the family?  What were the--her people doing in Texas and you know?
Speaker 2:  	I, I had never been to Texas until I was grown but I had, had aunts and, and family who also had, I think she moved to Chicago because she had aunts there, had relatives there who lived quite well.  They came to Chicago and became very well off and they--and when my mother came, I lived with my aunt, Aunt Hunt--she lived with her aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Who's, we called her Aunt Hunt [ph.] and last name was Humphries.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I hardly could remember any of that, most of it, so.
Story_ID: 646221
Speaker 1: So are there any stories about your--?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about growing up that your mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] shared with you?
Speaker 2:  	My mother is a very interesting woman.  She was college educated and I used to sit and, and listen to her and my--both my father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] and my mother were--and they met in Chicago [Illinois] and they had similar backgrounds, but they met quite by accident, and he took one look at her and said, "I'm gonna marry you." And, and she said, "Well, I think I should have some choice in that," and he says, "I'll give you a choice, it's called 'yes'." And I guess they had a wonderful relationship and and she finally said yes, and thank god here I am and they had seven children together, six children.  Mother had one son and he had three daughters so we come--I have a family of ten sisters and brothers somewhere.
Speaker 1: Now you said your mother went to college?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where did she go and what did she go for?
Speaker 2:  	I, I don't know.  She is from Dallas, Dallas, Texas, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did she go to college before she came to Chicago?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you think she went to college in Texas?
Speaker 2:  	I know she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 646222
Speaker 1:  	My father was from Illinois, from Robbins, Illinois, it's a little town just south of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: --of Chicago--
Speaker 2: Now what's your father's full name?
Speaker 1:  	Samuel Earl Nichols [Samuel Nichols, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And now he has a family history that has something to do with a white southerner who married a black woman, right?
Speaker 1:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Your father's father [Samuel G. Nichols] was white?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Is that your--yeah.  He was a southerner who married a black woman [Lydia Haverson Nichols]--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and moved to Robbins?
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	My father's father married a black woman.  He was from a mixed family and they moved from the South to Robbins, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Do you know what part of the South they were from?
Speaker 1:  	It's in my mind somewhere.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	If I, if I think of it before I'll just shout it out.
Speaker 2: You know you shouldn't feel on the spot if I ask you a question, if you just--
Speaker 1:  	No, no I don't.
Speaker 2: --if you don't know--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, if I can think of it, I, I, I will.  Yea.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But I'm asking them because we have to ask them so.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, yeah.  I know, I know it because I grew up knowing it, but it just escapes me now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, now your father, did he go to school in Robbins and everything?
Speaker 1:  	No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	No, he, he became mayor and um--no, he had, he worked downtown Chicago and traveled out every day all the way to Robbins, which is on the other side of, of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Now, does a train go out there from downtown Chicago?
Speaker 1:  	Eventually they were.
Speaker 2: Okay, in those days you don't know.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, but by that time I think he had--he drove to, to work and I think about that time they had a railroad thing.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so was your father able to finish high school out there?
Speaker 1:  	Oh he's educa- he was college educated.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So where did he go?
Speaker 1:  	I have no idea.  It may come to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 1:  	He was a physicist.  Um-hm, and he also was a chemist and he worked at Hydrox Chemical Company [Hydrox Chemical Company, Inc.], oh my god, it come floating back so fast.  Chemical company in Chicago and as a matter of fact, my father actually created peroxide, that was the company that first came out with peroxide [sic.], and my father was always tinkering and so forth and he was--he couldn't, he actually created peroxide.  He never got the credit for it, but they paid him well.
Speaker 2: That's interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, he created or came up with a formula for what we use now, what we call hydrogen peroxide?
Speaker 1:  	Hydrogen peroxide, yes.
Speaker 2: Um, okay.  All right.  That's something and you can't remember where he went to school, where he went to college?
Speaker 1:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: You can't remember where he went to college, right?
Speaker 1:  	They both were from the South, my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and father; and I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	(Speaks in a deep voice) It's been a long time (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 646223
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) I'm sure somewhere in my mind, it's, it's there 'cause I recalled him--recall him talking about--them talking about their, their young life but that's and, and yet they didn't meet until, until they met in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, now you were telling us something about what they said to each other when they met but--
Speaker 1:  	I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 2: You were telling us about what they said to each other when they met, but where did they meet?
Speaker 1:  	In Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, but in what circumstances?
Speaker 1:  	They met, they met in Chicago and I was trying to think of the circumstances because it was very interesting.  They met by accident.  Oh, a friend of my father's, my father was one of the most handsome men you ever saw in your life and he and his buddy used to double date you know and, and this time my, my father's buddy came to him and said that, "Nichols [Samuel Nichols, Sr.]," they called each other by their last name, "Nichols, you have to come."  My dad said, "No, I don't want, I'm not gonna double date anymore," you know, "I'm tired of double dating.  I'm tired of dating," you know just--. And he said, "Come on, because there's somebody I want you to meet."  And it--I can't, but somehow it had to do with my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols].  Oh, his best friend worked with my mother in a home, in a family on the, on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], which was the wealthy, wealthier side of town and, and, and he wanted to date my mother so badly and she wouldn't--she didn't date him and, and she just did her job, and he said, "She's so beautiful," and, and she, she just comes to work and leaves and does her job and, you know. And he said, "But I have a feeling," and dad said, "I don't wanna meet anybody."  He said, "I don't want--." And he said, "You're never dating, you gotta come." And he says, "Well, come and double date with me on this." And my mother, apparently whoever the lady that dad's friend was dating asked mom to come on this date with him and so it'd be a blind date and mother said, "No way."  She said, "Please, please, please because I'm crazy about this man that I'm dating and I gotta have--you don't have to do anything but pick him and" blah, blah, blah.  And mother said, "Okay just for you."  So they go by--my mother was living with my mom at that time.  They had a beautiful home, and she said they came to the house and, and mother was still dressing and they are trying to get her out of the bedroom dressing and come out there and mother said, "I really don't wanna go.  I don't wanna date anybody.  I'm not interested in anybody now and I just don't want to."  And she said, "You promised me, and he's in the living room and you'll be sorry if you didn't."  So mother goes, "Oh, okay, but you owe me," you know like that.  And mother took her time getting dressed, and took her time getting dressed and she came out and she took one look at my father and my father took one--and my father was going through the same thing.  He didn't wanna be fixed up in a date, in a, blah, blah, blah. And mother came out and walked into the living room and they looked at each other, because mother didn't even know who the boyfriend was of her friend, so which one it was.  And so she quickly introduced her boyfriend to mother, "And this is Samuel Nichols," and they just looked at each other and they never left each other from that day forward.  They went out on the date and that was it; and less than a year later they married.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And had six children?  Yeah.
Story_ID: 646224
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what they look like, what they were interested in, what--the talents they had, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2:  	My mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] (laughter).  My mother was a brilliant woman, also college educated and, and dad was too college educated and they could converse with one another.  They could talk the same language I guess as they used to say.  And he said, "Of course your mother had a better education than I did."  Mother's don't, don't lie to your children you know.  And I, I have--can honestly say I never heard a, a word of anger between the two of them all my life, being their daughter; and before they would disagree, and then they'd make an appointment to discuss it later.  And, and he--I said why do you--I remember telling everyone, "Why do you always discuss it later?"  He said, "Because she's always right" (laughter).  He said, "You have one of the most brilliant mothers--women in the world would have, for your mother, so understand that."
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, and we did.  We did (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 646225
Speaker 1: Now can you tell us, can you name your siblings from the oldest to the youngest?  Now are you the youngest?  That's what I (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	I'll just name them (laugher)--
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: --for you.  My father's name was Samuel Earl Nichols [Samuel Nichols, Sr.], and my oldest brother was the first born and he was Samuel Earl Nichols II, never a junior, second [Samuel Nichols II].  The next brother was the next son, child was Sam--Frank, Frank Nichols, and, and then me and then who's after me?  Thomas [Thomas Nichols] and then Marian [Marian Nichols Michaels] and Diane [Diane Nichols] and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Is that six?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did any of the rest of them go into show business?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	No.  Diane had--was a brilliant actress and so she, she did some things in school and a couple of other things, but she wasn't interested in being an actor and then she, she met the man that she was going to marry, that she would come to marry and has been with him all of these years very happily and I was the only one in show business out of all of my brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Three boys, three girls.
Speaker 1: All right, so your earliest childhood memories are of Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  Yeah.  Of Chicago--I was born and raised in Chicago.  Always knew what I was going to be; an actor, singer, dancer in show business.
Speaker 1: I know in your book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols] you say that you had a happy childhood, but you really didn't wanna be a child?
Speaker 2:  	Never--I never was a child up here and my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and father had this incredible knack with--their children were all different and they let us be different--they let us be ourselves and they encouraged us in anything we wanted to do and backed us in anything we wanted to become, to become; and they just, they only had one demand: if you're going to be it, be the best that you can be.
Story_ID: 646226
Speaker 1: So your parents [Lishia Parks Nichols and Samuel Nichols, Sr.] demanded excellence, right?
Speaker 2:  	They expected excellence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't demand anything.  They expected it and therefore you provided it.  That's what, what you did.  And they didn't demand or expect us to be anything except what we wanted to be in life, and then they demanded we be the best that we could be.  So we're, we all went different ways, except for my sister, Marian [Marian Nichols Michaels], she's also a brilliant actress.  She's a really quite--don't tell her I said this, but she's a better actress than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she do it for a living?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes, but she married and had beautiful children and, and some years later when she divorced, they divorced and, and she took on her career again.  She's, she's beautiful and, and my baby sister, Diane [Diane Nichols], is gorgeous as well and she never wanted show business as, as a beautiful as a little actress as she was, I think if she had gone in show business it would have been as director or producer, and she found the man that was her life and she was his and they've been married for (makes sound) years and years and, and they're as happy today and perfect with one another as the day they first met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It's amazing, yeah.
Story_ID: 646227
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in the, on--?
Speaker 2:  	In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, near 63rd Street on--?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah well, we left--that was, oh gosh, always on the South Side of Chicago, South Park was, was I think I grew--we grew up mostly on this beautiful, I'm trying to think of what, it's a lot of apartments but they're not tall, you know they're no more than three floors.
Speaker 1: Townhouses.
Speaker 2:  	Townhouses, yes.  All in the--this beautiful--and that was some, 6238, no that's Michigan [Avenue], six--6200 South Park and yeah, beautiful, South Park Place [sic. South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive].
Speaker 1: Were these graystones?
Speaker 2:  	No, they were brownstones.  They were gorgeous, gorgeous apartment buildings, and they were about--with a great garden and walkways in the middle separating one, two, three--one, two, three, four, five brownstones, beautiful at South Park and 60th Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well describe the neighborhood.  What was the neighborhood like then?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, it was, it was quite beautiful, quite beautiful and, and elegant and we were one of the first and last, or last black families to move in, in that, in that area, which was one of the last areas that, that black people moved in, and before moving on to larger areas as they-- we took over Chicago (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2:  	The South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: I've been told by other people that 63rd Street for a long time was the barrier--
Speaker 2:  	That was the barrier.
Speaker 1: --going south.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, we were one--there was, oh yes there's an African American man [Carl Augustus Hansberry] who bought property, vast property at 63rd, which was like the cutoff line where, where if you live--we lived at 60th [Street], so we were in, still in a gorgeous area, but he bought this property at 63rd and it was just land and, and then he, and then he started building and he built some of the most beautiful apartment buildings, the vast, you know with the great walkways and lawn and, and beautification that you, that you could imagine and, and first people who were getting in it were African American--a couple and it just, it grew.  He, he, and then he kept buying and then my father bought.  He said, "Samuel [Samuel Nichols, Sr.], you have to come and live here and you have to buy land.  You have to buy."  And so my father, he said and, and, and he--my dad as I said was a chemist and he never left his job.  Every time he'd go to lose--to leave his job downtown, he'd get a raise.  He created for Hydrox Chemical Company [Hydrox Chemical Company, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], Hydrox [sic.] peroxide for the company and, and, and then when, when all of this began to happen and we moved, moved more south, into 63rd and 65th [Street] and like that began, you know one black person move in and then it changes, (gesture) changes like that and so we used to say, "Well let's get, let's get one to move in there, let's get one to--" (laughter).
Story_ID: 646228
Speaker 1: The man that sold your fa- I mean that created the apartment building that your family moved into--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was Lorraine Hansberry's father [Carl Augustus Hansberry], right?
Speaker 2:  	Lorraine Hansberry's father, yes and, and, and I was a little kid and I became five years old I guess, and go to school [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and Lorraine Hansberry used to walk me to school.  She was so beautiful and I wanted to grow up and be like her, and her father was very wealthy African American man and he had bought property and, and, and he talked my father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] into moving into this beautiful apartment complex and, and then he talked my father into buying land and so forth.  My father had six children.  He had a great job downtown.  He wasn't thinking about in that term.  But, fortunately this friend--Hansberry and he became very close friends and, and he said, "Well, I'll think I'll buy some on the side," and very, very to, to our benefit you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --so.
Speaker 1: You were telling me before we started doing the interview that your mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] had like a premonition that we--that your family was gonna move into that building.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yes, yes.  She--my mother, if my mother said something, she usually dreamed it and she'd say, she'd be very quiet that next day and I could almost, I knew something was coming you know and she said, and I remember it at the dinner table, she said--we all ate at the table.  We didn't eat until my dad came home and, and if he was going to be late then we ate and, and when he came home it was a big thing you know.  My father is so handsome and so gorgeous and so smart and so wonderful to us.  He was so special and, and he thought, as far as we was concerned, my mother was the smartest person on the planet.  And, and they both had college educations you know, which is, you know back then everybody didn't you know.  And and, and, and where was I with this?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about your neighbors, and so when you moved into that building--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're, you're about how old when you all moved into Hansberry [sic. West Woodlawn, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	Oh and Lorraine, that's what I was telling, who was the daughter of--Lorraine Hansberry, was in high school, just going to high school I think, she used to walk me to school every morning, take me to school [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was five years old, she--and I--she was beautiful.  She was so beautiful.  I wanted to grow up and look just like her.
Story_ID: 646229
Speaker 1: So you started grade school at Betsy Ross [Betsy Ross Elementary School]?
Speaker 2:  	Hm?
Speaker 1: You started grade school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Grade school at Betsy Ross in, in Chicago [Illinois] and then--
Speaker 1: That's like 61st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] or--
Speaker 2:  	61st, 60th [Street], 60th, between 60th and 61st as I remember, 60th, 'cause we lived on 60th and used to walk to school, she [Lorraine Hansberry] used to walk me, but when we lived in that building, she walked me to school yeah.  And she was so--here's you know the big girl and the little girl and, and she thought I was smart, the smartest thing in the world you know and she didn't--she never talked to me down like a kid and, and I guess I grew up not, I never talked to a kid, talked down to a kid either and I, I thought that's the way you talked.  So and, and her father and my father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] were colleagues and when he had bought that building, Hansberry [Carl Augustus Hansberry], on South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], the first person he came to was my dad.  "This is where you're gonna live," and that's when we moved in there.  They were great friends.
Speaker 1: Now at Betsy Ross, what was your favorite subject or did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I think everything.  I was so fascinated with, with going to school and what you did there, and I already knew how to read and write, which was--I found out a big thing when I got there.  They thought I was putting on something you know and I could read, I could write and, and, and you know I'm just in kindergarten.  I went to that school from kindergarten up and I had wonderful--I was very--we were very, very lucky to go to Betsy Ross school because they had the most brilliant teachers who all believed that we were special and that they had a special purpose in life to bring out the best of us, the students.
Story_ID: 646230
Speaker 1: Well who were some of your favorite teachers at Betsy Ross [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I knew you were gonna ask me that.
Speaker 1: And if you can't think of the name just (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I can see her face and, and I had her and they went on to, they didn't teach just one class--one grade you know.  A, a teacher would teach you through first grade through, through eighth, you know, so we were very lucky because they knew who--knew what you were and they gave you advanced work that, when they knew that you could handle that and when you come to talk with them or, or need advice or want to talk about the project that you're on or you're having any problems, zoom they were there to, they thought--they knew that was their job and we were very lucky.  I think we were the luckiest kid- children on the planet because we had teachers that didn't say shut up and sit down you know, and be quiet.  No if you had--"Is there something you need to know," you know if you--even when you were out of, out of--not attending, it wasn't okay, you know--that our teachers never talked to us like, like we were being disruptive because can we share in this, let's talk about it.  And you'd have to share it with the whole class, so you're gonna be very careful about now, about what you get caught at and, and it also created another thing for us to be prepared you know.  If, if she, if she caught you or asked you to stand up and tell us to share it with the class, you'd better be prepared to do that or there was such a thing as punishment (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I take it you had a head start on the other students being able to read and write already.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yeah, yeah but there were some brilliant kids in all the classes, all my classes and we were very lucky at, at Betsy Ross school.  The--almost all of the teachers cared about you.
Speaker 1: Now was there any arts training at Betsy Ross?
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: Any training of the arts?
Speaker 2:  	Did I?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did they have music at Betsy Ross (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, music--
Speaker 1: --art, dance?
Speaker 2:  	--art and, and you'd bring it to your history class and, and share if you got caught doing something besides your history book, share it with, share it with the class and that's how, one of the ways that you--that I learned how to stand and talk to a whole classroom of people you know and they were--and when you finished, they asked questions and you had to be able to answer them and then you wrote a paper you know, and then they all wrote, that was their assignment to write a paper on whoever was, we called, "Tag, you're it."  Whoever was it that time and I was always winding up being it and, and if you were it--got caught, you better know what you were doing, you'd better have something to present and it, and it turned out to be not a punishment but something wonderful you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--a, a learning process--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that I'll never forget.
Story_ID: 646231
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about something that you shared with the class that was--
Speaker 2:  	Oh my goodness, almost anything.  And, and then there's one thing, what will you be when you grow up, and then there was doctors, lawyers and Indian [Native American] chiefs, and I said, "I'm going to Broadway and I'm going to--," and then I had to explain what Broadway was and I opened my mouth and I had to, "Well, it's in New York [New York]," and I don't know what Broadway is.  But I know that it is, when you get to Broadway you've made it you know and, and I'm going to to be an actress and--who sings and dance, and I had taken ballet and I was in all the school plays and one thing led to another and I knew that's what I was going to be the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to the shows at the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yes, yeah.  Oh, Regal, Regal on--
Speaker 1: 47th [Street] and Lake Park, South Park [South Parkway; Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]?
Speaker 2:  	South on--almost on Lake Shore Drive halfway between, we were 60th [Street] and from Prairie [Avenue] to South Park to--on the places we lived on South Park all the way to, to the lake.  There was a lake, Lake Michigan and it, it was a fortuitous happening that we on that particular part of South Park of, of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], expected their children to finish school and go to college and to do this and, and that we had great expectations you know, and God forbid those didn't fulfill them you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what about--can you remember some of the acts that you saw at the Regal Theater when you were a kid?  Or were you allowed to go to the Regal when you were growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, you could go to, if you were really good they would take us to the Regal Theater. When Duke Ellington came to town that was where they played.  The Regal Theater was a beautiful, big, gorgeous theater and, and it--when the black people moved into that section of town, they, they were the people who had the money to keep it as they found it and, and even improve and, and bring--their children, bring us up to appreciate the arts and, and, and the ar-
Story_ID: 646232
Speaker 1: One of the biggest thing is that I came home and told parents [Lishia Parks Nichols and Samuel Nichols, Sr.] that I got, gotten a scholarship to the arts institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] downtown, woo.  You know my brother was the artist and, and he, he, I mean he was really, he is to this day one of the finest artists and he, he got full scholarship to the Art Institute.  His, his full education was paid for.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Speaker 2: So how old were you when you got a scholarship?
Speaker 1:  	Oh, I was, I only got one year because I didn't want to--I wanted, I wanted to sing and dance and act and write and you know those things and that was all well and good, but they were (speaks in a deep voice) more serious than that, you see.  And so my brothers were serious on that level, but I was all in, always in the school plays but, but the magnificent thing about that, that didn't get you anywhere if you didn't get A's, so I'd have to read books and tell--and that helped me a great deal in having to get up before the class and, and, and talk about what you've, what you've read and what you were assigned and things and, and then of course my, my show biz [unclear] in me came through there and oh they, they loved me to stand up and talk about this book that I read or the chapter that I read, and I think the teachers did too because I dramatized them you know.  It, it wasn't like, oh you know it wasn't, it wasn't ordinary to me.
Speaker 2: Can you remember a book that you read that you dramatized for the class?
Speaker 1:  	Name one (laughter).  The teacher would name, would name the books that we were supposed to read for this, this, this week or month or whatever; and, and you had to get up and talk about it, you know.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 646233
Speaker 1: You took dance classes with the--
Speaker 2:  	Ballet.
Speaker 1: --Chicago Ballet?
Speaker 2:  	I--well you took dance classes, you took ac- acrobats [acrobatics], tap and ballet and they and--
Speaker 1: Now is this from Sadie Bruce [Sadie Bruce Glover]?
Speaker 2:  	No, I never went to Sadie Bruce.  I went to Sammy Dyer [Sammy Dyer School of the Theater, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Sammy Dyer.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes and he was a fantastic man and his teaching was different from, from the ordinary, from the Sadie Bruce, of course they were, they were very different what, what they excelled on you know.  But you went to them to, to them for--but he believed in, in having a wide range of, of interest so I learned all of it instead of just one aspect.  And then I knew which one I loved the best you know.
Speaker 1: Now there's a story about you going to the Chicago Ballet Academy [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about how you got in and that--you wrote in your book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols] about your father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] took you and they said that you couldn't possibly do it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh (laughter) yes, there was, as a matter of fact, I was about twelve and by that time I'd been going to ballet class, and if you go to ballet class you go to acrobat and tap, and it's sort of acrobat, ballet and tap, but I excelled at the ballet because that's what I was interested in.  Wasn't too good at tap but you--only, only well enough to pass you know and but there were kids who were tap dancers who were just brilliant and went on as did I to--for that to be their- their career, just brilliant.  So I'd always get with the brilliant kids and the tap and they would teach me that and I'd teach them the ballet and, and, and gosh I'd forgotten all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	You're bringing out some really interesting places I've been in my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you had to do an audition for Chicago Ballet Academy right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.  How'd you know that?
Speaker 1: I read the book (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh (laughter).  I'm going to go back and read it (laughter).
Speaker 1: I want to talk about it, tell us about it.
Speaker 2:  	I don't know what part that you're referencing?
Speaker 1: Your father took you to there--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  Oh, yes.  He actually took me--this was a dance school, the whole building, and on the second floor they had--I been studying all, all this time and I'm just about twelve years old and I needed, I was so interested in my dancing that I told my dad that I didn't have enough room at home to practice and so he took me to this dance studio, which was only about, not too far from my--our home and and to, to, they had dance rooms you know.  They had several rooms and he went up and, and said he wanted to lease one for a couple of hours two or three times, so it would be when he came home from work, so it would be maybe five or six o'clock you know in the evening and, so that I could excel, so I could practice, so when I got back, 'cause he knew now that ballet was my, my, my thing.  Well, I'm, and I wasn't real--I was only interested in ballet.  And--
Speaker 1: Now why is that?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It just appealed to me, and--the beauty of it, you know?
Story_ID: 646234
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Had you been I mean-
Speaker 1: And I--
Speaker 2: Did you go to the ballet?
Speaker 1:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Did you go to the ballet with your parents [Lishia Parks Nichols and Samuel Nichols, Sr.]?
Speaker 1:  	Oh yes, my dad used to take me to the ballet downtown in Chicago [Illinois] several times a month if--when the ballet was, was in, you know he would get, get tickets and that would be our date.  Daddy and his little girl and I, but I, I--he found this rehearsal place for me and, and so I'd go, I was going into the rehearsal place and have my ballet shoes on and stretching my body you know on the bar and I kept hearing this noise (makes tap dance sounds), and there was, there was a big dance studio you know and I had a small room, it all had mirrors and I had never heard this or, so but this was the night that they had that and I went out and, and I went over to the room and I peeked in and there're all these kids with tap shoes on dancing away and making the most incredible sounds you know.  I'd never been in a, a class.  I'd always taken my ballet with a, with a teacher one on, you know one on one and they were--and they had their--the beautiful movements, but they were tapping you know, and so I stood there and watched them and the teacher looked over and saw me.  Carmencita Romero, I'll never forget her, and I always adored her for this.  She looked over and saw me looking in and, and the kids tapping you know, well they looked at me and like, who is she you know.  I don't know, oh that's whose that music is over there in the little room you know and she invited me to come in and, and tap.  Well, I came up, it was like, I said you take acrobats, ballet, acrobatics and tap so I knew how to tap, you know what they say, but I didn't like it and so she said come on in.  Well, I go in and they all look at me and they're you know (taps feet) tapping away and finally one by one, and I'm tapping, you know I'm doing what--what they're doing and finally I realize everybody had stopped but me, and they're turning, looking at me and cracked up laughing, couldn't stand it anymore.  They laughed their heads off because I'm tapping like this and (laughter) and I said, well does that mean I can't do it you know laughing and why?  And so I said, "Does that mean I can't tap?" And I had, from then on I had them tapping like with, I said it ha- it has to have some--something with it you know.
Story_ID: 646235
Speaker 1: And they weren't laughing at me, but they were laughing at me because they'd never seen anybody tap you know like (gestures), with this ballet movements and then they wanted to do it.  So when we did--I joined the class, she [Carmencita Romero] let me join the class and I, I shaved down some of my ballet movements too because I kind of liked the way they moved, and they picked up some of my ballet movements because they wanted to--we had a good time, and I joined the class and, and they--the teacher would get, once a year you have a, a show for--that all the students take part in and for the family to come and see how their kids are doing.  So they wanted to do, wanted to do one of my ballet things, but with the tap dancing, and so the teacher thought it was just, wonderful idea and, and so we traded, we, you know I showed them some of the beautiful movements that they thought were fancy (laughter) and, and they taught me to tap.
Speaker 2: Yeah so this is--you're a teenager now?
Speaker 1:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Between ages fourteen and sixteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Twelve, twelve.
Speaker 2: You're twelve?
Story_ID: 646236
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah between twelve and, and I went there from a--
Speaker 2: All right.  This is the dance class of Carmencita Romero--
Speaker 1:  	Carmen, Carmencita Romero.
Speaker 2: And it's Afro Cuban?
Speaker 1:  	Oh, she taught Afro Cuban, she taught straight tap and she taught jazz and, and Afro Cuban and, and, and she had a ballet class, but nobody wanted to really, really you know because you just, they're movements that when she says she wants something and a snap and clap, you know tap, and you move, you don't wanna look like that you know and so it was like a, a kind of marriage where we traded and we became and, and she did, we had a recital once a year and, and, and she let me choreograph one of the tap numbers and everybody was so--they were doing ballet and tap at the same time, they were so happy and everybody, the audience and the parents were going, "My god that was so beautiful, where did you learn that?"  And they just were just delighted.
Speaker 2: So what were you? Twelve or thirteen when that--
Speaker 1:  	Well, I think I was a little maybe--
Speaker 2: A little older?
Speaker 1:  	No, I think I was twelve, so this was about thirteen or fourteen, fourteen that I'm talking about that the--because I studied there for about five years, six years after, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now at a certain point--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I heard that, that your lessons led to some professional dancing at the Sherman House hotel [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1:  	Oh yeah, well Carmencita Romero had I guess when she was young--younger had a few years prior--prior Ernie Byfield owned the, owned the hotel, I'll tell you what the name, in just a minute, and then it was a major hotel downtown and he had this great supper club in it and he was, was, had seen Carmencita dance and years ago at that, at that, his great big supper club had a large stage for, for their shows and he hired her.  He decided to do 'The College Inn Story' and in it would be the representations of when she was very young with the, oh what's that great woman's name who had the--I'll think of it, anyway she was in the show and, and just a young girl and when she grew older to have a, have a dance class, and was going to do her, her--she went to Ernie Byfield and asked if she could have the, have the kids come down and rehearse there and he hired her and I was one of the dancers and, and I'm the one who she had to teach everybody the ballet move- movements to go along with the tap instead of you know that and--you're bringing stuff back to me and it's so funny, and, and we went in and we stayed and, for six weeks; and then we got held over, and one year and six weeks later we were still in the College Inn [Chicago, Illinois], we--and that's when I turned professional.
Story_ID: 646237
Speaker 1: So you're--you're what, about fourteen (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I was about, yes I was about fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your parents think of you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Fourteen--I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Lishia Parks Nichols and Samuel Nichols, Sr.] think of you becoming a professional dancer?
Speaker 2:  	I, I, oh, my parents were, to me amazing.  All of us kids, they have six kids, six kids, there were six of us and whatever you were best at or were interested in that's what they, whatever they saved or my dad--whatever he made, it went into our, our education became what we were going to be and wanted to be and that's where they, they spent the money, their money on you know for us, for our education.  That was--I wanted to be a dancer.  I had to take ballet, modern, all of the things and I also took ballet, tap and you took it because it was--that was what they offered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you were a student at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	I went to Englewood High School, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you graduate, even as a professional?
Speaker 2:  	As I recall, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	Because when I say that it is not to be funny, but it is kind of funny, I barely graduated there because by that time I was, professional dancer.
Speaker 1: So this was 1948 when you graduated?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.  '51 [1951] is what I remember being in the College Inn [Chicago, Illinois].  And, and, and low and behold this same woman who was my dance teacher had, when she was very, very young, had danced with the--had been accompanied, with-- I'm trying to think of the great African American woman dance who was the first, maybe you'll come up with it.
Speaker 1: She--
Speaker 2:  	It'll come, but she was with her troupe and--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham?
Speaker 2:  	Katherine Dunham!  Katherine Dunham and, and her barefoot dancers (laughter) and lord, but she also tapped you know and did, was just brilliant and, and this lady was, was her top student, students, top dancer and when she, when jump-- when I'm talking about her now, then I became her top student.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's interesting.  So this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Carmencita Romero was a Dunham dancer.
Speaker 2:  	Was a Dunham dancer, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	And, and sure enough Ernie Byfield and, I guess I'll never forget his name because he owned the Sherman House [Chicago, Illinois] and--and his favorite was the supper club [College Inn] in the Sherman House and he always put a profess- had a professional show for us.  It's just, you know it wasn't just a eatery.  It had a magnificent dining room with a magnificent stage.
Speaker 1: Now did--now you were culti- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) And that's where I did my first professional show.
Story_ID: 646238
Speaker 1: Were you cultivating your singing voice too at this time?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I always sang (laughter).  I, I have--
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you, now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  Oh you better believe, Baptist.
Speaker 1: And what church did you go to?
Speaker 2:  	We called it the church around the corner (laughter).  We--I lived on 60th Street and then there on, is that Indiana?  Prairie [Avenue]?  No, Prairie was a little church and before you got to 61st [Street], to get there there's an elevator you know and that, that's the church we went to on Sunday, and they had a big, there was a big room on, on the side and when they had dinners but when they didn't, they also had a barre sitting, you know, I'm talking, not alcohol bar, a, a round bar that was the extent of the place and that's where I wound up rehearsing and, and dancing for my ballet, and, and wound up doing a major show there.
Story_ID: 646239
Speaker 1: It became--and, and, and Carmencita [Carmencita Romero], oh took us downtown and, and she called my mother, I guess this is so--I was fourteen now and I came and I'm walking home from high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] with my books you know, and my mother's knocking on the window, "Come in here."  And, "What?"  And she said, "You need to get downtown, Carmencita Romero at the, at the, at the hotel [Sherman House, Chicago, Illinois] and, and she wants you down there, and she said, 'Ms. Nichols [Lishia Parks Nichols] have her look grown, not just those'--." Well my oldest sister [Marian Nichols Michaels] had just given me, we wore the same size shoe and she had just given me my first heels but I couldn't wear them.  My, my mother said they'll have to be saved 'til you're old enough right?  And I'm fourteen and, and mother, and I'm getting ready to leave and I'm looking as old as I can and you know sophisticated as I can, and mother brings out these heels and said, "Try them on," and they worked perfectly with my--and Carmencita had said, "Get her down here to the hotel immediately," because--from school, and I was, you can't imagine my first pair of heels and I got on the, the elevated line ["L"], which went down to subway and went to the hotel and I walked in with this beautiful suit that my sister, older sister, one of my older sisters had given me and these high heels that the other one had given me and the gloves and my hair was long so, but it was always worn in school in braids and you know like that, and my other--combed it down for me and I walked in there and Carmencita and, and the Ernie Byfield and, and everybody was up on the stage and, and I'm going gulp, and I straightened my shoulders and I walked up, and the stage is not like that, it's like that, and I walked up on it and they're sitting in chairs on, talking on the stage and because she doesn't have to audition, she already, he already knows how, how great she is and so I go up there and I don't--it doesn't occur to me that there's steps on, over either side, so I go up (laughter) and I and I, and I put my hand out, Ernie Byfield goes--Carmencita was, everything she could do to keep from a--keep a straight face and I, I was a really accomplished dancer at that time and I just raised up and sat on the stage and, "Thank you, sir," and (laughter) talking to the owner of half of downtown Chicago [Illinois] and, and that was it.  He said if she's with the, with the--and Carmencita was the lead and, and, and Carmencita [sic. Ernie Byfield] said, "Now if you could just find me someone to match you," and I had, and she had two big guys, magnificent dancers with magnificent bodies and that was Carmencita Romero and her dancers, and her dancers were, and that was my first professional job, and of course I had to have my mother or father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] or both come to the--to take me down--so after school, and I had to keep whatever grade that I had in school, I had to maintain it.  Well I happened to have an A.  I been working so hard towards that A and I've got an A and I've gotta maintain an A and, which is the highest score, you know; and, and I did because I was--anything to work, to be able to work at that wonderful profess- as a professional.
Story_ID: 646240
Speaker 1: Now what were the social dynamics of performing in those days in Chicago [Illinois] because I know in some places, I know I've heard stories--?
Speaker 2:  	Underage your parent had to be with you.
Speaker 1: But as an African American, that's, that--
Speaker 2:  	They were-- We were the first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Anywhere downtown that, never seen anything like it except for when Carmencita Romero was with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, and low and behold they were doing 'The College Inn Story' and he had Carmencita play the Katherine Dunham dancers and I was one of the Katherine Dunham dancers.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so I was thinking about the dynamics of race in terms of being able to, for instance at the--at the Sherman House hotel [Chicago, Illinois], can black people stay in that hotel when performing in those days?
Speaker 1:  	Carmencita Romero was the first to have a, a, it was probably among the very first to stay at that hotel, downtown.  Black people did not stay downtown.
Speaker 2: I know, I think people can perform downtown but they couldn't stay.
Speaker 1:  	They could perform but they couldn't stay and, and Carmen--Carmencita Romero had played with the great, with Katherine Dunham back in the '20s [1920s] when she was just a kid you know and Ernie Byfield that owned, that owned the hotel, oh there's a story, he bought the hotel and, and opened it for--they were the first African American customers because you didn't, you didn't go downtown and, and eat in the eateries and then I didn't know it, I was a child.  But I learned through it.  I knew what you could and could not do.  I was aware of that and, and, and when he wanted to do the--when Ernie Byfield wanted to do 'The College Inn Story' he got Carmencita Romero who was in the chorus twenty years ago when she was just a little kid and Katherine Dunham's troupe, and he was the first to bring an African American anybody on, on that stage as a, as--in that supper club in that supper club [College Inn, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Now we talked to [HistoryMaker] Herman Roberts who had Roberts 500 Room [500 Room, Roberts Motel No. 6, Chicago, Illinois] and he was telling us that many of the acts that were, performed downtown--
Speaker 1:  	You couldn't, you couldn't live there.
Speaker 2: --would, would come to his place afterwards--
Speaker 1:  	That's right.
Speaker 2: --to party.
Speaker 1:  	That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) And, and you traveled back to, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], to your home at night.  We had a suite, all, everybody--of course I had a suite, but my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] or father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] and both had to be there with me you know, but, and I was the youngest one, so after me they were all adults; and they all had not just rooms, but suites to live in.
Story_ID: 646241
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were fully invested in show business in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and did you ever think about some other profession--
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: --were you ever torn?
Speaker 2:  	Never.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Never.  I guess when I was that high I knew what I was going to be.
Speaker 1: Okay so in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Because I, I, the thing I was gonna tell you, I used to have my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] sit down and unbeknownst, of course after a couple of times they knew it, but I would, would put together my little act and then I'd say okay, I'd see them sitting down, I said, "Okay, sit down I have something I wanna show you," and they were always, "Well, okay let me get my--a drink then.  Is this going to be a--," and my father didn't drink (laughter).  So he--they have their little drink and they sit and I'd, and then (makes noise), the show would come on and I would put a show on for them and it would be from a beginning to end you know, not just a song and--
Speaker 1: Well for instance what would your show consist of?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What would your act consist of?  What would it be like?
Speaker 2:  	Oh well you have to have an opening song, so I either wrote one or used a song that was, that fit you know, that was on, on the television or you know that was a popular song and so I used one that, up tempo to open and then I'd do a soft number you know and I, I kept it at five numbers you know, and then a dance jazz number and then I'd do one where that light had to go out and just one light on me you know.
Speaker 1: That's the real sensitive song.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, oh gosh, and then a finale (laughter), so I was putting on shows, I was about twelve, thirteen years old and my father and mother, and especially my father, he just treated me like I was just so special and so I had to live up to that you know, and my mother would sit there and just, I sometimes see her here like (shakes head), because she just had to reconcile herself.  I was gonna be in show business and that was the last thing (laughter) she wanted me to be in.  I was gonna have a college education and be a, you know doctor, lawyer, or an Indian [Native American] chief, but not a singer or dancer.
Story_ID: 646242
Speaker 1: Now when did you start touring?  Was it in the '50s [1950s] or?
Speaker 2:  	Well, doing the College Inn show where, where we, Carmencita [Carmencita Romero], had two boys and two girls.  Now she was tall and we were short, so she had us like that you know, and then the guys could you know, were strong and could pick her up you know and, and she, she spotlighted us so nicely, but we spotlighted her, you know.  Well we, we opened in the College Inn show downtown because, because Ernie Byfield was doing 'The College Inn Story'--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2:  	--and he hires her because she was me--with [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham back then, and so now I'm the little girl where, where I'm her now.
Speaker 1: Now you told us that part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: I just wanna know about the touring?  When'd the touring start, yeah?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I didn't tour.  We were at that, at that place for over a year, a year and three weeks or six weeks and so I became professional in the College Inn of the Sherman hotel [Sherman House], downtown Chicago [Illinois].  Now once that, as that time became toward the end, I was a professional performer and by that time I had put my own act together, which my parents were my audience and sure enough an agent came and said, "I can book you." And, and I said, "Well okay that's wonderful, but you'll have to book my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] too, or my father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.], and maybe my mother and my father," and they laughed their heads off, and by the time I came out of--and they did, my mother went with me and then within a year later, I was like sixteen, seventeen and I was able to get I, I went my first big job was, was in Hawaii.  The guy that owned a major res- hotel and supper club in Hawaii saw me and booked me and that was my first professional job other than the College Inn.
Speaker 1: So you say you were sixteen?
Speaker 2:  	I was about fifteen when I, when it was over I was about--I was about sixteen because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was--we were a year and a month or something like that.
Speaker 1:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And-
Speaker 2: So, I was about sixteen, yeah--
Speaker 1: I have a (unclear) from what--
Speaker 2: --and I've never stopped performing since.
Story_ID: 646243
Speaker 1: Okay, now you performed, so from what I understand you performed all over America and Canada--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you, and by the end of--at some point you became attracted to the West Coast, you want to come and live on the West Coast?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I was attracted to the West Coast from the time, from the time I sloshed through snow and ice to go, go to grammar school [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was plotting and planning, I was not going to live in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you sang with Duke Ellington and Lionel Hampton?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is big time?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, because that's the same Duke Ellington that I'm talking about, you know, when I was just a kid.
Speaker 1: Duke Ellington, Lionel Hampton--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 1950--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --would be analogous to you-- to someone singing with, let's see today, let's see, I don't know I'm trying to think of the biggest star today.  Those were the biggest stars.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, those were the big stars and, and what's his name, well I said Duke Ellington, yeah those are major stars and, and when I finished there as a little kid in the, in the Sherman hotel [Sherman House, Chicago, Illinois], I was, I was a professional.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And that's when I put my act together, not sing-- not singing and dancing with Carmencita anymore.
Speaker 1: Now at this point did you have any records?
Speaker 2:  	No, no.  But I knew that I had, that I was a singer.  I wasn't going to have a career as a dancer because dancers, how long you gonna last as a dancer? You can sing 'til you're a 190.
Speaker 1: And the dancer is not the star either, right?
Speaker 2:  	Well, well they were, like I said; Carmencita Romero was with, what's her name?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham--
Speaker 2:  	Katherine Dunham she was major she had, Katherine Dunham and--had major schools after she was stopped (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, but as a solo act--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --a dancer is not gonna be the solo act.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah she was.  She had a company. She had a company at which she was the--
Speaker 1: But you weren't as a solo, you weren't gonna be a major star?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had to be solo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About the only person who were tap dancers--
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah then you could do (imitates tap sounds), you know and, but so, so tap was not my thing anyway; and, and I knew what I was gonna be.
Story_ID: 646244
Speaker 1: So tell us about--now, now you were in the--WAs this the Ameri- on the West Coast, one of the companies of 'The Roar of the Greasepaint - The Smell of the Crowd' [Leslie Bricusse and Anthony Newley], is this the, the--is the right time for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) There was, there was a show called that, but that's part of the original show and I took that, the--what is it?
Speaker 1: 'The Roar of the Greasepaint - Smell of the Crowd.'
Speaker 2:  	The 'War of the Paint' [sic.] yeah, and 'The Smell of the Crowd' and, and, and did a show around it, and I think that was my first solo out of--me out front and with dancers behind me and two boys, oh yeah I did.  I, I became Carmencita Romero who became [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 1: The big hit song from that show is "Who Can I Turn to"?
Speaker 2:  	Say what?
Speaker 1: The big hit song from that show was "Who Can I Turn To"?
Speaker 2:  	(Singing) "Who can I turn to, when (vocalizes), who can I turn to if you turn away," my god.
Speaker 1: Yes, you can still sing.
Speaker 2:  	You brought--
Speaker 1: You can still sing.
Speaker 2:  	--(laughter) oh my goodness yeah.   Well I had--well I found out, I thought that I could not, I had to be a dancer in order to be a singer and I knew I wanted to sing, but I didn't know I was, really was a singer so I started taking lessons and the, the man who I studied with, I was, I just fell in it really fortuitously.  He trained singers and he wouldn't, he wouldn't take a singer as a student unless he heard that voice and as far as he was concerned the human voice was the piano and that's how he taught you, and that's how I found out I had a four and a half octave range because I just sang right there and, and at the middle C and, you know and a little above that and one day he just--and he'd give me a song that was a little higher and then he'd give me a song that had it and next thing you know I was going into (vocalizes), I was going (vocalizes) you know (laughter), and I just, you know once I saw that man I just started playing with it to see how far it would go and I turned to him one day and I'm standing there on, on this C, above high C and I, when I hit that I just stayed on that note and I'm looking at him and he's just cracking up.  He just.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm stunned here listening to you do this because I'm used to seeing you on 'Star Trek' you know talking about there's a channel clear or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I had no idea you know, I mean I know you're a singer--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because I read about it--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --but I haven't heard I don't think, very few people have heard you do that.  You are really a singer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, yeah well, and when I sing, when I sing in supper clubs or I always do, I do the supper club kind of things you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you really have a voice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I take a light, you know a spotlight for in the middle of my show and I'll sing an aria and the audience goes, and if they, you know they like to talk in between, you say if you're good they give you some attention and I got into, (singing) "Summertime, and the living is easy" ["Summertime"], you can't hear a pin drop because I just have a, one light on me--
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about 'Porgy and Bess' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I like to do, I like to create shows.  I don't like to just sing.  I like to create something around it you know so; and audiences like to get involved you know, so an audience can get involved with you.
Story_ID: 646245
Speaker 1: Just to step outside of performing for a minute--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you got married in 1951 to Foster Johnson right?  He was a dancer?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, we know it didn't work out, so--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I was so in love.  I was so--he was a great, great dancer.  He was on Broadway, he and his partner, and he saw me perform somewhere, and I'm not a great tap dancer you know, and I don't think he was looking for a great tap dancer.  He was a fantastic tap dancer.  He could stand still and his, just his, one of his feet moved and (makes sounds).  He was so elegant--I think I fell in love with him because of his quality of performance and, and he had a partner.  When he was on Broadway, in a big show for the longest time, and he was, he was famous for himself and he was looking for--he was gonna take for the first time a girl, a female and, and, and do with a trio and of course I was out of my bird you know.  I was fifteen, sixteen, gonna be sixteen, and so I was doing my best and he wanted ballet, and you know because I'm not the greatest tap dancer in the world.  I could just get by and that was fine with him.  And he was just about one of the most incredible tap dancers and he'd been to Broadway, so he wanted what I did to surround what he did, but by that time I could tap dance too and, and, and then, so I taught him, gave him some of balletic moves in some of the things he did instead of just standing there, he could stand still and, and tap and you wouldn't know he was moving.  It was just incredible.  So I think I fell in love with his, his ability you know his creativity and as well as him and that's my son's father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your son's name is Kyle right?
Speaker 2:  	Kyle, yeah.   Kyle Johnson.
Speaker 1: So, he was born in '51 [1951]?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it says here that you returned here to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: It says here that you returned to Chicago, I guess in the early '50s [1950s] and performing--
Speaker 2:  	I guess so.
Speaker 1: --with Jimmy Payne [Jimmy Payne, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2:  	Oh god, I forgot about Jimmy Payne.
Speaker 1: --'Calypso Carnival' right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Oh, you read my book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols].  I was--how do you know all this stuff?  Yeah, yes, yeah.   I guess I did.
Speaker 1: I know Jimmy Payne too.
Speaker 2:  	Did you know Jimmy Payne, who that is?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	You knew him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2:  	Incredible dancer just--and choreographer, so that's when I, I was just sitting here thinking, now when did I go off, how did I, when did I go, yeah Jimmy Payne and he did a show in Chicago and he, he didn't have, he had dancers that were--what we call them, they could tap dance, but they had no you know and, and so you know I brought that to it because I'm a ballerina you know, and I'm not a good tap dancer so I can do around it but, and that's when we became partners and fell in love, got married and six months later of course I had to come home because my son was on the way.  (Laughter) And made a little appearance in terms of, well you better get ready because here I come.
Story_ID: 646246
Speaker 1: Now did you take some time off from show business or did you--?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I from--four months pregnant, I took off and, and everything was about my son.  So Foster [Nichols' ex-husband, Foster Johnson] went, you know continued to, to work and he went to Canada and he did not get back for Kyle's [Kyle Foster] birth, and I gave him plenty of time and so when he came back I was a young woman.  And I was not, not, I was no longer satisfied to dance until it came out and did (makes sound), because he was an incredible tap dancer and he could stand still and, and his feet would just do make sounds that you could not believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you stay married, how long did you stay married?
Speaker 2:  	Long enough to get pregnant (laughter) and come off the road (laughter) and, and, and decide that I wasn't gonna do this, what we'd be doing.  I wasn't playing second fiddle to, to anybody because I knew now what I wanted to do and I wanted to sing.  I have a three and a half octave range and I, I wanted to dan- I sang and danced until I finally realized what I really am is a singer--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and an actress, who can dance.
Story_ID: 646247
Speaker 1: Did you take any acting lessons at this point?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Oh from, from, oh I think I must've been thir--fifteen when I took professional acting lessons, but I think they told me I was a natural so I was always doing scenes or shows where, where, as an actress as well you know.
Speaker 1: Well when you were coming along, were there any African American--was there an African American theatre in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Where was it?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and, and or you brought in shows.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Richard B. Harrison players in Chicago?
Speaker 2:  	The who?
Speaker 1: Richard B. Harrison Players in Chicago?
Speaker 2:  	Place?
Speaker 1: No, Richard B. Harrison Players?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, the Harrison Players, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.   And, and there were--as an actor you could act all the time if you were good, and I guess I was good enough, but I also could sing and, and I could dance; but I knew I wanted to be, finally I knew I wanted to be an actor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And that took over.
Story_ID: 646248
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna skip ahead here to 'Porgy and Bess.'  You appeared in the film 'Porgy and Bess,' right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right. I skipped over anything we need to go back and catch let me know.
Speaker 2:  	No, no because that lead me into my solo performances where, where I knew what I wanted to be was, was really from 'Porgy and Bess,' and I was in the movie. And so when I got in the movie of course they had been--they're taking it from the big Broadway show and everybody was in it, was practically in it were from, from Broadway except Sammy Davis, Jr. and, and so here I am a professional dancer, and so I get on the show as a singer and then I go back separately and, and audition for dancer, so I'm in the dance (unclear) and I'm in the singing chorus but in, in that, oh my goodness, in that-- oh my goodness-- in that movie they did this--who was the male lead in that movie, but oh I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sidney Poitier.
Speaker 2:  	Hm?
Speaker 1: Sidney Poitier?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Sidney Poitier and Sammy Davis, Jr.--
Speaker 1: Brock Peters played Crown.
Speaker 2:  	--and Brock Peters, and Brock Peters, and Brock Peters oh my goodness, Brock Peters' major act, song was done in the play with a girl--his girlfriend; and, and since I could, since I was a singer and I was a dancer in, in there and when I went to audition, oh all this is coming back, when I went to audition, I did a song from where?  From 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin].  (Singing) "Porgy I is your woman now, I (vocalizes)," ['Bess, You Is My Woman Now'] that's what I auditioned to get in the movie.
Speaker 1: Now the movie, the movie Bess, was Dorothy Dandridge who--
Speaker 2:  	Who had no voice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) lip synced--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she lip synced the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) And, and they were going to let me be the singer for Dorothy Dandridge, but Dorothy Dandridge had a fit so they just let Dorothy--'cause she couldn't hit all high C, you know, and, and, and she was a nightclub singer and a very fine performer, you know, and, and a star, you know, and, and here comes little me and they were gonna have me sing, which would have been wonderful you know to do the, do that role as a singer that, then she--she would have no part of it and so they got a white girl that (laughter)--she heard me sing and said, "That's really nice honey."  She told me, "You will never get anywhere off of me" (laughter).  She sure did, and I said, "Well, there's after this picture because I'm going to be a star" (laughter).  "I'm going to be somebody," and, and then I, I created my supper club act and, and I sang everything and I started out, I can't remember what I opened the show with, but down here and you know and then in the middle of the show I did--the, the "Summertime" from 'Porgy and Bess' and the audience went (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Just like I did a minute ago.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah (laughter).   Did you (laughter)?  And, and, and after that and then I'd go back to my show to, you know where, but the audience would go like--and the guy came up to me and said, "I kept looking around to see who that was," and I saw him, he kept, he'd be looking at me go and he's looking for the--whoever's got that voice. And so now I knew I had something going and I created an act around just building up to that you know, and.
Speaker 1: Now this is '59 [1959], 1959--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 646249
Speaker 1: Tell us about 'Kicks and Company.'  Now you were, you were in the [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. play, which had great potential but never really made it big.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I'm trying to think, 'Kicks and Company'--
Speaker 1: I know you write a lot about it in the book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you played Hazel right?
Speaker 2:  	"Hazel's Hips," "Hazel's Hips" right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Contours and curves as she went (vocalizes), she served, I served six meals a day in this crummy cafe," but the, the something that brings the cash, I forgot the song, oh god, I gotta go back and get all those songs out.  I'm, I'm thinking very much or have been about putting my, a supper club act back together you know as a singer and--
Speaker 1: You could do it.
Speaker 2:  	--and you, you're really responsible now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now one thing that we discussed with [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle earlier (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Donnie McKayle, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was involved in 'Kicks and Company.'
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --too, which as a vehicle of the great Oscar Brown, Jr.--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and he discussed--
Speaker 2:  	And Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 1: --some of the problems with the production which are still baffling to me--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --today. Why wouldn't Oscar play the role of (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	Everybody wanted to know that.  He was perfect, but they had, but the guy that played it, he was a star by now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Burgess Meredith.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, no I wasn't talking about Burgess Meredith; I'm talking about the guy that played--the black guy who played the lead in 'Porgy and Bess,' when we did 'Porgy and Bess.'
Speaker 1: Oh 'Porgy and Bess' or, I was talking about 'Kicks.'
Speaker 2:  	No, I'm not talking about 'Kicks and Company,' no I'm talking about 'Porgy and Bess' who was--
Speaker 1: Sidney Poitier played the lead in that?
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: Sidney Poitier played lead in--
Speaker 2:  	Sidney Poitier, but Sidney couldn't sing.
Speaker 1: Right.  Sammy Davis, Jr.--
Speaker 2:  	And Sammy Davis, Jr. could sing, so he could do his but, but the guy that you're talking about is the voice for Sidney in the movie.
Speaker 1: Oh [HistoryMaker] William Warfield or?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2:  	No.  Oh did Warfield do it because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know he had done it on stage.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: No, I don't think he did it because they didn't match.  But the guy that we're talking about with this great voice who played that role on the stage is the one who had the voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'm confused now but that's--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I have to go back and, and stop and think.
Speaker 1: Well let's just move on.
Speaker 2:  	But it's not, it's neither here nor there.
Story_ID: 646250
Speaker 1: So, in the early '60s [1960s] you were, you were here in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], right, after the movie ['Porgy and Bess'] and all that?
Speaker 2:  	I guess I was.
Speaker 1: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: All right and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah because I went to Hawaii and then I came back, I know that I was, yeah. Yeah I was here in California because I grew up plotting and planning to live in, in beautiful Southern California.
Speaker 1: Now it says in your book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols] that you are really close friends with Gene Roddenberry, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.   Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Gene Roddenberry provided you with your first dramatic television role--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in '63 [1963] in a show called 'The Lieutenant' right?
Speaker 2:  	'The Lieutenant,' yes.
Speaker 1: Describe the role you played. 'cause it was history making.
Speaker 2:  	I, I played the role of, ooh you taking me back.  I played the role of the fiance of the lead man [Ernest Cameron] who gave up her--who was educated and, and had a bougie family--came from a bougie background, bourgeois background and, and expected to conti- to marry someone like that and falls in love with this--
Speaker 1: Marine [U.S. Marine Corps]?
Speaker 2:  	Who was it?
Speaker 1: --a marine, right.
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: A United States Marine?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that's what I played, but I--yes and falls in love with this--and she leaves her job to follow him and, and she's regretting it and regretting it and regretting it, but that, now was she the one that sang I'm getting them mixed up?
Speaker 1: No, we're talking about 'The Lieutenant' and the role you played.  You played a black woman who of course who falls in love with a white marine right in 'The Lieutenant'--
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: --the episode that was never aired.
Speaker 2:  	No, she didn't fall in love with a white marine.
Speaker 1: Oh no?
Speaker 2:  	No.  Her, her, she followed--she gave up her career of education to follow her, her boyfriend that, they were gonna get married, anyway--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --and he, and the two of them, the other guy happens to be white and his lieutenant was black and he, he comes into the room, they're in separate rooms when he comes--when he walks in, he walks like this, so does the white guy and they're the two who have, have succeeded and come this far and have been chosen and, and he--they go up to the lieutenant or whoever is the next in line in the [U.S.] Army and they're standing there and not looking at each other and, and they say, "Sergeant So and So," I mean what's the lowest in the Army?
Speaker 1: Private.
Speaker 2:  	"Private So and So reporting for duty," and they're just, I mean whatever the next step is and the other guy says his name and, but they've not, they've come in different doors and they're walking like this so they're not looking at each other because the big shots there you know, and they're reporting to him, "Sir," and when they, both of them do that they realize they know tho- that name and they dare not look in, the other way, they're looking at the lieutenant that they came to talk to and he said, "You're gonna be working together," or something like that and they finally, you might as well, you know each other but they, they know that they know each other by now and they turn and they look at each other and they try to kill each other and she plays--the role I played was the--his girlfriend that she's given up her great education and everything to follow him and now he's in the brink [sic. brig] with this white guy for trying to kill each other and they--turned out they'd come from that same town--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a little southern town.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that episode was never aired from what I understand?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Story_ID: 646251
Speaker 1: So that episode never aired I guess because it's too--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --controversial for that day because we had just had the summer of '63 [1963] with the murder of Medgar Evers, and the March on Washington--
Speaker 2:  	My god.
Speaker 1: --the assassination of John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], the Birmingham church bombings--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --demonstrations all over the United States.  Yeah, '64 [1964] was Freedom Summer, the murder of Goodman [Andrew Goodman], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney] and--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --there was, a lot of things were going on--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that made life kind of volatile--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so maybe they decided not to put that one on--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but Gene Roddenberry is working on other projects, right?
Speaker 2:  	No, but everything that you read so far was on TV.  That last one that you're talking about that was on TV.
Speaker 1: Oh it did make it?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  As a matter of fact that was my breakthrough--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in films.
Speaker 1: All right, well we have to correct this outline because it says it never was aired.  So it was on TV, okay good.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  Oh yeah.  Oh my god.
Speaker 1: Now you were around--
Speaker 2:  	Well, what was funny was the black guy and the white guy who go at each other's throat, it was really difficult because they were buddies (laughter), they had become buddies (laughter) and, and that was so funny and and the cut, cut (laughter) because, "You hate each other," oh god, he says this gonna be, he said, "This gonna be the acting coupe of my career," 'cause and both of them, because they were buddies you know; it was very difficult to come on and try to kill each other (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 646252
Speaker 1: Now in '64 [1964], from what the note I have here, and I, you know, you said it could be true that you were in 'Blues for Mister Charlie' that was written by James Baldwin?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He wrote that as a result of those--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --trying times with murder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of Medgar Evers and it was about--
Speaker 2:  	Jimmy Baldwin was an incredible, incredible person.  Boy did I miss him.  Boy was he talented.  But he was, he knew, I mean you'd have to be crazy not to know how talented you are, but he was not ever like you know do it my way or the highway.  I mean he never, he was always in the creative mode, that's what, what he was--was so wonderful about him.  He was always in his creative mode and it wasn't enough for him to be wonderful, it had to be excellent, past that.  He was always working.
Speaker 1: I'm sure he was more than likely the most popular black writer of that period by far.
Speaker 2:  	He never stopped improving anything that he wrote, which would drive the producers crazy.  He never stopped improving.  He was never satisfied.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 646253
Speaker 1: What did you--let's see, later on I know you would have a conversation with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but were you keenly interested in the Civil Rights Movement in those days or did you just--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.  I was very involved.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said you were involved?  What did you do?
Speaker 2:  	We, we marched, we--wherever I was and then there was a point where, where you really have to decide are you gonna concentrate on your career or are you going to concentrate on changing the world and, and there were enough fantastic people out there changing the world, but I let them always know when you need me, I'm here.
Speaker 1: Now did you attend the March on Washington?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: I know a lot of people from the film industry--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  That's one of the things I regretted and didn't regret because I knew if I went to the March on Washington, I'd still be marching.  My career would have gone another--
Speaker 1: So you had something to keep you busy at that time?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, oh yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so now--
Speaker 2:  	I did a film--did something about that time that kept me fr- kept me if I wanted you know if I decided to go to get me from it, can't remember what it was.
Story_ID: 646254
Speaker 1: Now as we approach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I don't know if it's 'Star Trek' or not.
Speaker 1: --as we approach 'Star Trek'--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you being a close, a close associate of Gene Roddenberry, you kind of knew what was coming, right?  Did you know ahead of time that he was developing this project, this science fiction project?
Speaker 2:  	That Gene Roddenberry was?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, oh yeah.  He called me and said, "Let's have lunch."  And I went to have lunch with him at the--I was doing something at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation] and that, that restaurant Maxwell [ph.], not--something that starts with an M, where everybody goes for lunch.  There are two places that was across the street, so we go there and so I meet him for lunch and it's like eleven o'clock, so there's nobody in there except us.  He orders a cocktail for, for both of us.  "What are we toasting to," you know?  And now that's when he was doing--what, what have you got there?
Speaker 1: He was doing 'The Lieutenant' and, before 'Star Trek' that's all I know.  I don't know--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he was doing 'The Lieutenant,' he says I got a role for you, that was it, 'The Lieutenant.'  Yeah and that kind of kicked my career in, in the acting direction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you know about 'Star Trek' before the other actors in it or were you asked first or, or--
Speaker 2:  	Oh for 'Star Trek' I knew about, 'cause Gene Roddenberry--no, that's when I went to lunch with him.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and he told me, "I'm going to tell you about something.  What were we doing before that, anyway?" And he said, "There's something for you in it," and I thought it was a little part, you know he's sitting there and he's telling me about the movie and the show and about it and so forth and I'm getting all involved and helping him write and so forth, and there's this role and, and I'm getting all involved and he says, "That's because, you really like that?"  And I said yeah.  "Oh that's wonderful," I said; and he says, "Well that's the role you gonna play.  I wrote it for you."  Oh my god.
Story_ID: 646255
Speaker 1: I often wondered how--who named your character, Uhura?
Speaker 2:  	Who named what?
Speaker 1: Your character in 'Star Trek,' Uhura, who named--
Speaker 2:  	Guess who?
Speaker 1: I would guess you, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 2:  	Of course.  That was one of those lunches (laughter).  That was one of those lunches and, and he says (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where does the name--
Speaker 2: --but I want her to be different.  I don't want her to be ordinary and, and I said, "Well, she can be from, from--her parents can be from South Africa," right?  And so he said he liked that.  And, and that, that keeps her in two places you know as an American black and as the parents that have that history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the African root and--
Speaker 2:  	The African roots yes, and everything and yet she's very American, you know.  And, and, oh you're bringing up stuff that I'd forgotten; and Gene was very excited about it and he had--oh my god, he's an incredible man, Gene Roddenberry, and he took me to lunch and we talked about, and it was early, too early for lunch.  It was about ten o'clock instead of the noon time that, and it was right around the corner from where we're working and, and he would pick my brain, that I found out later, that's what he was doing you know.  I mean he was so obvious about it you know.  He wanted me to know and, and we were a great team together.  We were a great team together.
Speaker 1: So you, what you're saying here is that you know-- not only played the role of Uhura--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you developed the role of Uhura.
Speaker 2:  Oh yes and, and I, I told him who her parents came from and how she got that name and, and the whole thing.  He let me--when it came to that character he let me, he gave me full, full range.  He gave me full range.  It was just amazing and of course I was so excited you know.  I'm just (makes sounds) and, "Guess what else I am thinking?" And he used just about everything, and I was just so excited and he says, "And guess who's gonna play her?"  And I said, "Well it better be me" (laughter), but at first to tell you the truth, I wasn't thinking, I wasn't thinking as I was working then, yeah.
Story_ID: 646256
Speaker 1: Oh you're bring- bringing so many things I forgot.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I heard, a couple years ago I heard Leonard Nimoy in person.
Speaker 1:  	You met Leonard Nimoy?
Speaker 2: Yeah I heard, he addressed, he spoke to our college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --at a dinner for a retiring president in Dayton [Ohio] believe it or not--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and he talked about how the role he played in developing Spock--
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --the Jewish symbols (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yeah, the Jewish symbols.
Speaker 2: --the hand symbols and some of the other things--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, that came from--
Speaker 2: --that came out of Spock's culture were things that he drew out of his own Jewish--
Speaker 1:  	Yes.
Speaker 2: --upbringing.
Speaker 1:  	Yes, exactly, exactly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, uh--
Speaker 1: He was wonderful to work with.  He was distant because he took on the character and the character is not that far from him anyway (laughter), and he was wonderful to work with, wonderful to work with, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he really was a funny man, had a lot of funny stories.
Speaker 1:  	He's a funny man.
Speaker 2: He was driving a cab.  He's a struggling actor driving a cab.
Speaker 1:  	Oh yes, yeah, yeah but he, he got that role and he jumped in it (laughter).  That role was not created, that was him.  He, he jumped inside that role, and he's been that role ever since.
Story_ID: 646257
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now the, the story that, that I've heard over and over again is that Gene Roddenberry wanted to really create a diverse television show.
Speaker 2:  	He wanted to what?
Speaker 1: To create a diverse television show, diverse.
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Diverse.  D-I-V-E-R-S-E.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Um-hm.  And, and he had, had that show in mind.  He really--that was really the first black and white stars on a serious nature, not just one person, you know one black person in it that's, he created that and he was determined, he was determined he was going to have that change the face of television and he did.
Speaker 1: Now George Takei--
Speaker 2:  	(Pronunciation) Takei.
Speaker 1: Takei played Sulu [Hikaru Sulu]--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah and did he have a role in developing that character too as well?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, everybody in that, in that, in that show ['Star Trek'] whether they knew it or not, coming in most of us knew it you know because we--he'd have us in his office separately or together and, and discuss it and we just got, he just typed away.  He took, he took so much of what we came up with, and we didn't come up with it until he provoked it out of us, you know; and, and oh gosh, I don't think we even knew we were doing that, but we knew it because it was so different from working with anybody else.
Story_ID: 646258
Speaker 1: Now did you help develop the pilot for 'Star Trek'?  The one with Jeffrey Hunter, and I know Leonard Nimoy was in it as Spock but--?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah I was in, in that one.
Speaker 1: In the pilot?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, the first pilot.
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Hunter was Captain [Christopher Pike] right?
Speaker 2:  	Jeffrey Hunter but then they didn't keep him--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	--and, and that was sad because he's such a, a, a cool guy, such a beautiful human being, but he wasn't the new cap- he wasn't, he didn't--
Speaker 1: But what was the reason do you know?
Speaker 2:  	Gene [Gene Roddenberry] wanted a schmuck to play that role.  (Laughter) He wanted an arrogant ass and he got one.  (Laughter) Don't you put that in there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now speaking of--
Speaker 2:  	I forgot that thing is rolling (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you know William Shatner was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) William Shatner was perfect.
Speaker 1: Captain Kirk [James T. Kirk].  He was--
Speaker 2:  	He was--
Speaker 1: Now he's of Jewish origin?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: He's from Canada.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, he's from Canada.  But he, he heard what, you know he understood that, and he came and jumped into that role with both feet.  And he was a sweetheart before when I first met him.  He became Captain Kirk (laughter), oh my god. And that's a true story (laughter).  Oh my god.
Speaker 1: Now also in the cast is--there's a Russian?
Speaker 2:  	And both of them have died now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um, Walter Koenig right?  Is that it?
Speaker 2:  	No, not Walter Koenig.  Walter came later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Jimmy Doohan [James Doohan].
Speaker 2:  	Jimmy Doohan and, and the one who played the doctor [Leonard "Bones" McCoy].
Speaker 1: DeForest Kelley.
Speaker 2:  	DeForest Kelley.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  DeForest Kelley was wonderful, wonderful human being.  You would have loved him.  I mean to know him is to just, he never had a harsh word or bad word to say about anybody and he very seldom said anything else anyway.  But off stage we would get together and talk and there he was you know just one of us.
Speaker 1: Well, the interesting thing is his character was always critical--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --of especially Spock (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: And I can hear him say, "Damn it, Spock," you know.
Speaker 2:  	Spock. (Laughter) And he could say that so and he put that in there you know, that they kept it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Right.  "Don't you have any shred of humanity," and always, "Damn it, Spock," you know. So this is DeForest Kelley.
Story_ID: 646259
Speaker 1: Jimmy Doohan [James Doohan], in your book ['Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories,' Nichelle Nichols] you said you were really close to Jimmy Doohan, he was a real--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --real close friend.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: He was Scotty [Montgomery "Scotty" Scott], right?
Speaker 2:  	Scotty, yeah.  He was wonderful.  He was wonderful and fun and funny and, and dry when he wanted to be.  Yeah he was wonderful.
Speaker 1: You're thinking of something funny now, but you're not saying it.
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) It can--not to be repeated.  But he had, he had everybody off camera, he'd go off camera you know when he was, when he was, when was, you know knew that camera was on him, he was that character.  You go off camera and he smoked you know, and he come off camera and he would have us in stitches.  We fixed him.  Is it him or was--we fixed, oh I think it was Kirk [William Shatner] or something and I think it was his hat or something, and what's the guy's name we're talking about?
Speaker 1: Jimmy Doohan.
Speaker 2:  	Not Jimmy Doohan.
Speaker 1: Leonard Nimoy?
Speaker 2:  	No, the one we were just talking about.
Speaker 1: DeForest Kelley.
Speaker 2:  	DeForest Kelley.  The Captain lost his--couldn't find, what was it his hat?  No, it wasn't his hat, it was something and he finally, he's looking for it you know and everybody knows he's looking for it and he comes, finally he says, "Have you seen my," I don't wanna lie now but, because I knew it wasn't a hat, and by this time everybody knows it's gone and one by one we find out DeForest Kelley had done it (laughter).  So one by one DeForest lets us in on it, and one by one here comes the Captain, "Have you seen--" so we get him in this, across the street and there's another set and we're over there and he's like have you, and you got to, so everybody is standing there (unclear) he's walking up, just as he is walking in, "Have you seen my-," so we all started now when was that you lost it?  Well too then everybody, he suddenly realizes everybody is like this and finally somebody was all just like this, and he looks, and he keeps looking at us like we're crazy and we're all looking up that way and he starts following where we're looking and there it is up there on the rafters.  We left it up there for two weeks before this happened.  He went bonkers.  He laughed so hard, he could not stop, tears started coming down, I mean before he started laughing, the tears came to his eyes looking at us you know and then he started laughing and we're just looking up there and he sees his possession, I think it was a hat I don't know and finally somebody goes up and gets it for him you know, but that we're all sitting there watching and nobody would admit that they're looking at it.  He says, "It's right up there damn it."  He says, "Where?"  He said, "Where you were looking."  They were going, "Where.'  We're all going--he never got over that one.  He never--we never let him forget it either (laughter).  He has a damn good sense of humor.
Story_ID: 646260
Speaker 1: What was--the cast for--the strength of the show you know, and I watched it from its initial episode--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as a teenager all the way through its first run and then all the reruns--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --until I knew them too well, and I stopped watching but I knew the show pretty well but the--and a lot of people did eventually, 'cause the first season hardly anybody watched it.
Speaker 2:  	You what?
Speaker 1: The first season of 'Star Trek' wasn't watched by that many people--
Speaker 2:  	Oh.
Speaker 1: --and it kind of grew--had to grow on people.
Speaker 2:  	Actually they were watching, but nobody knew it.  That's how they got--and, and, and then they I guess they asked for--
Speaker 1: So what was it a Nielson [Nielsen Media Research] problem?  Nielson wasn't--
Speaker 2:  	The Nielson, oh god, Nielson ratings and then what, what took us over, the thing we finally realized that, that the one you're talking about, that he, he knew where something was, anyway it had to do with that and it had to do with if we're gonna get picked up you know and nobody know--nobody knew nothing.  The directors didn't know, the front office didn't know.  Nobody knew anything and, and, and quite frankly I think they really didn't know and we were sure this is our last season; and somebody--
Speaker 1: The first season?
Speaker 2:  	Hm?
Speaker 1: The first season?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 646261
Speaker 1:  	And what were we on, two seasons?
Speaker 2: Two and a half.
Speaker 1:  	Two and a half.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So somebody--they said, oh then finally somebody who knew one of the producers would say, "Well, it's all depends on what New York [New York] does." And they said, "Well why don't you have them out here and see what--," and "Don't they like the show ['Star Trek']?"  "Well, they picked us up last time," you know, like when we thought first season was it and we get the pickup.  I'm trying to think of the man's name back east, but he hears about it apparently.
Speaker 2: This a producer?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  Yeah but the producers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brandon Tartikoff [sic.]?
Speaker 1:  	The money people, huh?
Speaker 2: Brandon Tartikoff or I'm just thinking of a NBC producer I mean who--
Speaker 1:  	That sounds like him.
Speaker 2: Okay yeah, okay.
Speaker 1:  	And he appears on the set one day.  We never met the man you know.  We know, we've heard of him and that'll make you shake (laughter) and, and everybody shivers--you just say his name. And he comes out and he says--and everybody's around you know because we've done the scene you know, and there's acts between the scene and the two guys coming over and talking to him you know (unclear) (laughter), and he's like this (nods head), and finally, and we're kind of at this other side--"Have you met so and so," and everybody's like, "I'm not going over there."  And he is kind of working his way with his, with his entourage from New York and he says to somebody something and we're standing over there and I'm getting ready to leave and says, "Nichelle and you guys, have you met," blah, blah, blah.  Oh so we turn and everybody's kind of (makes sounds), and he said because the only person I came--the only reason I came out was to meet--and nobody heard what he said and that's when they, I'm getting ready to walk away because let the guys have it usually you know, and they said, "Nichelle," our producer says, "could you come here a minute?"  And I come over and this man that we're so scared of is like this (smiles), and he says, "I've been wanting to meet you for a long time," and we're all kind of like, "Okay," you know. I said, "Oh thank you.  We've wanted to meet you too, and as a matter of fact it's wonderful that you're out here you know because your name goes before you," and it really did and not always in a good way, not in a bad way but in a scary way you know, like be on your Ps and Qs and the man says, he says, "Well I came out because I wanted to meet [HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols.  She's my favorite actor".  (Makes a face) And apparently that's what--he didn't say it in front of any of the actors 'cause we're all over there and that's what brought them over to, to me so (laughter), Bill [William Shatner] is going, "So nice to meet you," and Leonard's [Leonard Nimoy] going, "Very nice to --," and I'm just standing there. And he says, "Very nice to meet--," and he said, "you're Nichelle Nichols, my favorite actress" (laughter).
Story_ID: 646262
Speaker 1: But the, the success of the show was with the relationships in the show.  It wasn't so much, it was just--the monsters and the fact that it's in outer space, because there are other shows that had those elements, but they didn't have the same appeal that 'Star Trek' had.
Speaker 2:  	We were reality, you know.  We weren't like out of space and they're freaky looking people or demons or anything, we played reality because we were on the brink of--we've got people gone to the moon and back you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the last (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) it's time.
Speaker 1: --the last year you were on--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: --the U.S. went to the moon.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.  And and so we put--we--our directors and the producer and everybody wanted to play it real, and the moment they did the show just went up like that, just it went, it broke all the records, yeah and so we did that, that and we got front office that's, that's it and we got two more years as I recall.  Another year, and that--we were in our first year to finish that year and another, another year or two, yeah.
Story_ID: 646263
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite episode, or, or favorite episodes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I'm sure, I'm sure I did.  I can't think of it now, but it's--I liked--they asked me what was my favorite episode and I said, "Anytime Nichelle [HistoryMaker Nichelle Nichols]--any time Uhura got to get off the bridge."  Everybody is going off of the bridge and leaving me there, the communications officer has gotta be on the bridge.  Quite, "Fine, thanks, don't I have an assistant who can handle this?"  And, and suddenly I was having roles that were off the bridge and, and, and we gave credit to, to the producer from New York because Uhura was his favorite actor and he told--he made no bones about it when he came out there.
Speaker 1: And 'Star Trek' culture, people recognize--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that if there's a landing party, the two guys in the red velour shirts were gonna get killed, you know if they had red shirts on they were gonna get killed.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, you know it wasn't planned that way.  It just--they had more shirts, red shirts and everybody that you saw on the set had their color you know and you never saw the doctor in a red shirt you know, and so they had the red shirts, it just happened that way.  Gotta kill somebody, kill an extra.  Extras had the red shirts on and that's how that all came about and you know if you go on the show, don't wear a red shirt.  Tell them you don't want a red shirt (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're not coming back next week.
Speaker 2:  	You remember that, that is so funny, yeah because we weren't even thinking, you know it took the audience to tell us that everybody died who had a red shirt on.
Speaker 1: There were other black actors, really a couple really powerful ones that I can think of that had episodes devoted to their situation, whatever William Marshalls [sic. William Marshall]--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was really one, he was the--a genus scientist who invented this computer--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that started taking over the Enterprise [USS Enterprise] remember?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And William Marshalls as you know is a powerful--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --actor, he needs a big role and he had a big role in it--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in that episode, I think Percy Rodrigues had a similar--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --strong role as an admiral or somebody--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --star from the federation or something.
Speaker 2:  	That was Gene's [Gene Roddenberry] doing you know.  He wanted, he always wanted to make sure that we didn't have just an interracial cast, and most of them are, are what are those guys called?  Extras, you know.  He didn't want that.  He made sure that, that what was his whole doing was how, how that came about with the, with the, with the cast.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was--
Speaker 2: So that was matter of forethought.
Story_ID: 646264
Speaker 1: And do you remember the episode ['Let That Be Your Last Battlefield'] where there were two characters, one character--
Speaker 2:  	One what?
Speaker 1: --well two characters who hated each other [on 'Star Trek'].  They were aliens.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And one had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) One was on this side--
Speaker 1: Face was black and the other side was white?
Speaker 2:  	I thought that was just about, the most brilliant writer came up with that.  You know they brought that to him and he thought well what's, and even the director, "Well what's the difference?" he said. And then they look at the cast--script, he said, "Read your script," and he looked at the script and he goes, "I'll be damned.  I read this script."  He goes, "I read this script." He says, "Read that scene next," and he says, "Oh," when they look at each other, oh that was just brilliant.
Speaker 1: Opposite sides of their faces was either white or black.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this was like a race relations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know 20th century.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: They hated each other.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes, they hated each other's gut (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anyone else (unclear)--
Speaker 2: "You're black on the wrong side."  (Laughter) "You're white on the wrong side" and that's when they had to, and they were on the--except when they looked at each other, white black.  It was brilliant, it was absolutely brilliant and, and nobody got it until they read it all the way through and they went, "Ah," we been shooting these guys.  He didn't give them the last pages until almost the end see, so nobody had really read how it ended.
Speaker 1: Now, now--
Speaker 2:  	Those lines, because it wasn't (gesture)--and, and then they had to look at it and it was like nobody had noticed that.
Story_ID: 646265
Speaker 1: Now your big, the moment that you're remembered for in history, even though you said--what was your line all the time on the communicator, what would you say?
Speaker 2:  	"Hailing frequencies open, sir."
Speaker 1: Right.  You're famous for saying that.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And anybody that says that will--people will remember you--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you also were too--and I'll say this--I've heard other friends say that they just, they loved the fact that you were on the show ['Star Trek'] because you were just simply beautiful.  But as a young black man, we didn't have any beautiful black women on TV.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I've heard that so.  I've gotten letters like that.
Speaker 1: To me, it was really special for me to see you every week.
Speaker 2:  	How wonderful.
Speaker 1: You were someone that, you know we could relate to as some beautiful black woman on television.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You had an African name, it was just--
Speaker 2:  	And what I was so pleased about was, and that's, again is Gene's [Gene Roddenberry] genius, I was head communications officer.  That kept me on the ship.  That kept on the, on the, on the deck, the command deck.  So I was actually fourth in command.
Speaker 1: Well, that's true.
Speaker 2:  	I remember Bill Shatner [William Shatner] sitting at his table with some--and the guy was coming over, the director, who had been talking to this, is just his first day on and he says, "Well, you're okay Nichelle [HistoryMaker Nichelle Nichols], you're fourth in command, so let's do--."  Bill goes, "What?"  Next thing you know, front office was coming down, I mean the producer, our producer was coming down because he heard, he'd better get down here.  The cats out of the bag.  (Laughter)  And they took a cut and then he said, "No, no let us come," so and so, you know, and he's going like so and so and, and once they came in and they explained, he said, "Well that makes sense," and he was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, well this raises another issue.  You were the only, well, there was--you were the only woman in the main core--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or group.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: There was another.  I know there was another, there was a white woman that appeared in about two episodes, who was like--
Speaker 2:  	No, she was--
Speaker 1: --the ensign to Kirk [James T. Kirk] or something.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And she had a reoccurring role for a few episodes.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you were the only who was consistently there.
Speaker 2:  	Yes and, and the reason, and I felt very badly about this and they should have thought of that and handled it differently, but it was very obvious that she and the Captain were, you know, and I think, and they played it that way.  I mean they produced it that way.  They directed it that way and the audience loved it you know, but then they got a little too much and then they had to, and that's when they took her off the bridge and she got can--she got re--
Speaker 1: Did they give her a red shirt (laughter)?
Speaker 2:  	No (laughter).  And, and so you know that kind of took a little steam out of her.  I think she left the show after that.  I think she left the show purposely, yeah it was her decision as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I hadn't even read much about her as an actress, who she was you know.
Speaker 2:  	She's still working, she's still an actress.  I see her every once in a while and, and then sometimes when we have a 'Star Trek' event she's there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she left the show shortly after that.
Speaker 1: But you became the banner for black people and women on the show for the most part.
Story_ID: 646266
Speaker 1:  So did you, did you personally get a lot of mail, and?
Speaker 2:  	Oh god, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact more than I knew.  So once a week a guy would come from the mailroom and he'd bring our fan mail and there would always be this stack for Captain Kirk [James T. Kirk] and then just a little, couple of less for Spock and, and then we got four or five.  We were happy if we got five.  So one day, that was a lot you know, two or three here, two or three for everybody else.  And so one day I'm walking on the, on the lot at lunch time and I'm, I'm, so you leave, you stay in your uniform you know because you're not going off the lot.  They don't like you to go off the lot without changing and, and there's a great big commissary and then there is a, I'm sorry and then there is a smaller, more intimate, more little small dining room for, for the producers and stars if you wanna and, oh what was I telling you?
Speaker 1: We were talking about--
Speaker 2:  	Hold that sentence.
Speaker 1: Gosh, you were just about to tell us--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --yeah the mail right.
Speaker 2:  	The what?
Speaker 1: The mail.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yes, so I'm walking down; I'm still in my uniform and had gone to a commissary and, and I'm going maybe back to to the set and there are two young men behind me and they--I catch some things they're saying and they're saying, "Well, I think we ought to tell her or ask her," you know.  So I just turned around and they're the two guys from the mailroom.  I don't know that, but they said, "Hi."  I said, "Hello," and they said, "Oh," they realized I heard them you know, so I said, "You're from the mailroom right?  I heard you say some--," and he said, "Yeah," he said--well to make a long story short, they advised me that I wasn't getting all my mail, and what they used to do like on a Friday, somebody would come and, who had from, that was on the set, supposed to be on the set.  Somebody, an assistant, and they had mail and they'd go over and give Bill [William Shatner] and Leonard [Leonard Nimoy] a stack of mail you know like that and then they'd come over and give us two or three.  Everybody else got two or three.  Maybe DeForest [DeForest Kelley] got five.  Walking down the street, jump now on the set, on the lot and two guys behind me says, "Well, I think we ought to tell her."  And why I turn around real quick and they go, "Oh." And I said, "What? Tell me what?"  And they go oh, "We don't wanna get in trouble."  Nothing, nothing.  I said, "Well, might as well, I'm not gonna get you in trouble, why should I get you--," and he says, "We're from the mailroom."  I said, "Okay, I'm getting my mail."  And they looked at each other and they made up their mind, "No you're not."  And I said, "Well why not?"  He says, "You know where the mailroom is?"  And I said, "No, I don't."  He says, "Well, we just come from there, just right across there, down there and that's where the mailroom is."  I said, "Okay."  And he said, "Whenever you want your mail, you have a right to come in and get it you know."  I said, "Well, they deliver it to us."  And they looked at each other, and they looked back at me and they said, "You have a right to come in and ask for your mail."
Story_ID: 646267
Speaker 1: So did you?
Speaker 2:  	Well, come to find out they weren't giving us all of our mail (laughter).  They weren't giving--they'd come on the set [of 'Star Trek'], the people you know our, our-- producers people and they come in and, and deliver everybody their mail on the set.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you ever go and find out what you had over there?
Speaker 2:  	Let me tell you.  Oh yeah.  So we all, we'd get two or three and Bill [William Shatner] would get eight to ten or twenty, they get Derrick [ph.] and Leonard [Leonard Nimoy] and we said, "They're the stars so what."  You know and we're glad to get our little mail.  And so now I jump on the guy that's walking behind me, he said, I said, "Oh yeah." He said, "Maybe you ought to, you know you can always come to the mailroom and get your own mail."  I said, "Well, they deliver to us."  They just looked at each other and they looked back and said, "You can always come to the mailroom and get any mail that you didn't happen to get."  And I said, "Oh, where's the mailroom?"  They showed me where the mailroom--I went in the mailroom.  I said, "I'm Ms. Nichols, I came to get my mail," and I said, oh, and this is different people that's working in there.  Said oh, "Yeah, do you want all of it?"  "Well, yeah."  They said, "Okay."  So they bring me a sack that you pull a string you know.  He says, "Here you are."  And I said, "Well, I'm not gonna go through it to, I don't wanna go through it to get my mail, don't you sort them?"  He says, "That's yours."  They been keeping our mail from us except Bill and Leonard because they didn't want anybody else having as much as they had.
Speaker 1: Do you know if DeForest Kelley and George Takei and other people had similar amount as you or did you?  I would suspect if I'm not--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I would suspect you'd have more than anybody else.
Speaker 2:  	I did.  I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I did you know because it was rare seeing a black woman on, in a good role.
Speaker 1: You represent women (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you represent black--
Speaker 2:  	And African American yeah, it was really something, but from then on I went into, on the way out and he said, "Well, why don't you--," we didn't have a drive on then.  Only Bill and Leonard had drive ons.  Not that there wasn't enough room, god forbid, but there's this whole thing of making the stars feel like they're the stars you know in a special thing.  So I, I said, "Okay," so I went and got my car, came back over, guy said, "Yeah, go on in," and he said, "Why aren't you parking on the lot?"  I said, "Because they told us to park over there."  Well he said, "Well there's plenty of space for over here anytime--."  From then on I parked on the lot.  They knew it by now, but nobody said a word.  And from then on and the show was picked up.  It was just fortuitous that it happened about the same time, but we had to go park over there, come down, come across, come through the gate and--
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2:  	--and maybe catch a, a trolley that's going past our set, so from there on in I just came, "[HistoryMaker] Nichelle Nichols," they said, "Go on in," and I went and parked my car; then the next thing you know it's, everybody was doing it and nobody said a word.
Story_ID: 646268
Speaker 1: How often did the cast see Gene Roddenberry?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Until he died, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he involved in every show on a (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes, that was his baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he's responsible for it even being on and it being, women having a good role and an important role and for it being interracial--
Speaker 1: Now this leaves to the big--
Speaker 2:  	--including black, white, yellow, brown, red you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	He was very, very involved.  A great guy, great guy.
Speaker 1: So this leads to the episode that made history ['Plato's Stepchildren'].  I guess it's been called the first time--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, the first interracial kiss (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A white man kissed a black woman on television.
Speaker 2:  	A first interracial kiss yeah, yeah.  And do you know that they were still so nervous about it, they didn't do it in the sequence that they do everything else.  They waited until the end, they told us to say 'til everybody was gone.  Oops, I'm sorry darling.  Until everybody was gone and they took us in like it was so precious you know, and there was nobody there except camera people and, and the director and, and the two people that are going to do this (makes sound) kiss (laughter), and I thought this is really, really these people are somewhere else you know.  And and they said to me, "You don't mind this, do you Nichelle [HistoryMaker Nichelle Nichols]?"  I said, "What?"  I said, "My grandmother and grandfather didn't mind it."  "Huh?"  I said, "My [paternal] grandfather [Samuel G. Nichols] and grandmother [Lydia Haverson Nichols].  They didn't mind kissing each other."  "My father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.] and my mother [Nishia Parks Nichols] didn't mind kissing each other."  It finally got to them.  They finally figured it out.  Oh, there's such crazy things.  Something.  But our set [of 'Star Trek'] by and large was heads above, heads and shoulders above in those areas; and, and it was the time, that transition, a great transitional time.
Story_ID: 646269
Speaker 1: I think I got something out of sequence, but it would have been after the first season [of 'Star Trek']--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that you actually were considering leaving the show to--
Speaker 2:  	That what?
Speaker 1: --that you were considering leaving the television show--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --to sing and dance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --on Broadway right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, because, because you know I'm getting, "Hailing frequencies open captain," "hailing frequencies open captain," "hailing frequencies open captain"--how far you gonna go you know that, where can I go, things before they in large opened up and so I really told them I was leaving you know and I was going back to New York [New York] to do, which was true, they wanted me to come and do a musical, which is my, theater is my first love anyway.
Speaker 1: What show was it?
Speaker 2:  	Huh?
Speaker 1: What show was it that you were?
Speaker 2:  	I can't remember now because I didn't do it.  I stayed.
Speaker 1: And the reason why you stayed was because of a conversation with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I believe, right?
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.  I happened to have met Dr. Martin Luther King and, about this time independent of all of this and--
Speaker 1: This was at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] luncheon I believe?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that's where I first met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And this was probably about that time.  And but I had, and we had made friends and so we were, there were other things that he had invited me to, events and to come and, and so we became friends and I said, "I thought I was leaving the show, I think I was leaving the show." And he says, "You can't."  And I started to say (speaks in a deep voice), "What you talking about Dr. Martin Luther King?"  And I said--I told him years later, what I started to say and he cracked up--months later I told him and he said and he said, "You can't leave."  "They can put a white girl in there or yellow girl or green girl or something else in there."  He said, "You have to stay."  And I said, "Why is that important?"  He says, "Where is there another you on TV?"  And I thought there, there weren't.  He says, "You're opening doors.  You cannot go and let it close.  They'll never open it again or it'll be many, many years."  And I said, "I'll be dang."  You know so--
Speaker 1: So was this first time you really thought about that or considered what you were doing?
Speaker 2:  	Oh at this point and time that I'm talking about, you know we're about a year in and I don't know whether we're in first year or second year or beginning of our second year, I don't know, but I don't remember but I talked to someone about it and they said you--I think I talked to someone on the set, I mean a producer, he said, "You weren't thinking about leaving?"  He said, "We just can't put another Uhura in there you know."  And I said well--and I told him, he said God bless, God this was best, "God bless Dr. Martin Luther King."
Speaker 1: This is Gene Roddenberry.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  God bless, yeah I told Gene Roddenberry.  He said, "God bless Dr. Martin Luther King.  Somebody knows what I'm trying to achieve."  You pulled it together for me.  Yeah that's true, that's true.  Somebody remembered, "Somebody knows what I'm trying to achieve."
Story_ID: 646270
Speaker 1: Now how did you--do you remember how you found out about the cancellation of 'Star Trek'?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) The first one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the television show yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, well number one, I knew Gene Roddenberry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--
Speaker 2:  	Before 'Star Trek' he, he gave me my first starring role in a show we all had--TV show he had previous to Star Trek ['The Lieutenant'].  How did I know?  I know it was he who told me.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: But were you surprised? And you're kind of thinking well maybe it's gonna happen any time or what?
Speaker 2:  	I, I think he was, matter of fact this is what--we used to have lunch together sometimes if it wasn't the regular lunch, he would go like at ten o'clock instead of twelve or one and he would tell--call me and ask me, I wasn't shooting then, if I wanted to have an early lunch with him you know and and we'd talk about things that we wanted to get done.  He had--he still--he had great visions for beyond, you know, 'Star Trek.'  He was a brilliant, brilliant man and he could not understand the whole black and white issue.  He could not understand prejudices.  It, it was stultifying to him, you know.  He, he just, he was almost like a kid about it.  He just couldn't understand "Well why, what, it doesn't make sense."  It didn't make sense, it didn't make sense.  I said doesn't make sense, "It doesn't make sense but you learn to live with."  And he was like, "Why?"  And so he did the best he could in his way with how he cast his, his shows.  And it made a difference to everybody viewing too.  He had the first interracial show on television.  Can you imagine that now?  It's, it's absurd.  It seems absurd now.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I was asking you to remember the moment when you found out it was--in fact the second season of 'Star Trek' is when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right.
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You all were doing the second season when Dr. King was assassinated I think.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah, yeah.  Yes.  And, and they all knew that I knew Dr. King.  They were very, very impressed, everybody was impressed with Dr. Martin Luther King and, and there was great pain you know of course we weren't shooting then, but it was the way of the world.
Speaker 1: So, so what I was trying to get at is did you anticipate the show's cancellation, when it was canceled or was it a surprise to you?
Speaker 2:  	I was always shocked that it lasted as long as it did.  I'm going, okay another season okay.  Yeah.  No, because, because one had--it had really had nothing to do with, oh I got a job, but of course that's, that's always there but I was shocked it lasted as long as it did.  I was shocked it even got on as it was and, and that Gene Roddenberry he was just--and he was a famous producer.  That wasn't his first show.  He had two or three other shows prior to this.  He was, was well known and he finally got it because he had enough black actor, guest actors in his other shows you know.  The guest of the week.  And he had the first interracial show, so this was, this was big because this was a big one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Major, yeah.
Story_ID: 646271
Speaker 1: What did you set your sights to doing after it was canceled?
Speaker 2:  	I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Well here's a question too before we even get there: did you get, when, as soon as it was canceled, it was picked up and shown on weekday afternoons in syndication?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes, it went into syndication immediately.
Speaker 1: Did you get residuals?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Still do.  Wherever it gets showed somewhere down the line, I get residuals.
Speaker 1: So this is a show, it picks up steam in '69 [1969], '70 [1970] all the way through--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the '70s [1970] people are watching it.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Not only here, but all over the world.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, I know.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2:  	I know and still if I go to Europe I'll, I'll not only be talk--be approached about the work I'm doing, you know my current stuff, they'll go back to 'Star Trek' every time because it was a fantastic show.  It was a quality--it was fantastic quality.  It was very big in Europe and Asia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So when it was over, did you get involved in a Broadway show?
Speaker 2:  	In what?
Speaker 1: A Broadway show?  Did you ever fulfill that dream?
Speaker 2:  	I haven't gotten to Broadway yet (laughter).  Every time I get ready to, to do anything, and the best I can get to Broadway is go see a show (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what I, that's what I thought (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you hear that Broadway?  I'm ready.
Story_ID: 646272
Speaker 1: So now you were in--at some point--now in, oh in 1973, 'Star Trek' was picked up as an animated show for Saturday mornings.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It was--that, that--
Speaker 2:  	We did the voices.
Speaker 1: That's NBC television Saturday morning lineup?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did the same cast do the voices?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay everybody.  All right.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Um-hm.  That was fun. It was weird, but it was fun you know 'cause sometimes it wasn't the whole cast in there you know.  You'd be going in or put--redo your voice for something, or do the voice that Bill [William Shatner] had done, his part because he's gotta be out of town you know, and you're already out, they couldn't get them up the same time slot and yeah, then you really learned another part of this business and how to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  In-- Now in one of the animated episodes Uhura assumes command of the Enterprise [USS Enterprise] right?
Speaker 2:  	Uhura did what?
Speaker 1: Assumed command of the ship.
Speaker 2:  	Oh yes.  But that had to be in one of those animated ones yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now animated series actually was nominated and won an Emmy Award in 1975.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is something that the TV, the regular show never got.
Speaker 2:  	I think there's more to it than just that you know.  During that time there was a lot of stuff, difficulty.
Speaker 1: Well, explain.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I, I think they weren't accustomed, they still weren't accustomed to interracial shows you know, especially where there was equalities and, and it, it took a while for Hollywood to get, to relax, to sit back and enjoy it and you know do one better.  Go you know, well now we can do it.  You know it's--we, we broke the mold for a lot of, on a lot of situations.
Story_ID: 646273
Speaker 1: Now in 1974 you appeared in 'Truck Turner' with [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) (Yawn) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: You were in 'Truck Turner' with Isaac Hayes in 1974, right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is an era they call the blaxploitation film era, but were you in very many films in those days or did you want to be?
Speaker 2:  	There weren't very many.  And when you got one it was still handled this way you know and then things started to open up more.  'Til today, you can do almost anything without feeling like, "Oh god, this will ruin my career."  What career?  You're not working, what career?
Speaker 1: Did, did you ever feel that 'Star Trek' had kind of branded you, where you couldn't do anything else?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It, it might have and to a degree, but I never felt that way.  I, I just--this is the business that I chose to be in.  It is what it is and, and you keep working and doing good work and supporting each other and one day it just cracks open you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know some of the other actors, I know William Shatner was in 'T.J. Hooker,' the cop show--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --on television in the late '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Leonard Nimoy was a host of what was it ['In Search of...']--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  That was a good one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right--
Speaker 2: That was a good thing.  He enjoyed that more--
Speaker 1: He talked about strange phenomenon, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he did some other things too, guest appearances too you know some of the other actors showed up, but I think, correct me if I'm wrong, but after 'Star Wars' ['Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope'] appeared in 1977, I guess the production wheels started moving again to do something with 'Star Trek.'
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah.  I don't think they ever really fully got what they wanted you know from it for its bringing it back and and all, but it certainly, the overall, our show and then the subsequent ones served to change the face of TV forever, which is quite well.
Speaker 1: Of all the, now how many 'Star Trek' movies were you in?
Speaker 2:  	Movies?
Speaker 1: Yes, the movies.
Speaker 2:  	I haven't the slightest idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think, I have a sense there's maybe six or was it about six or seven before they--?
Speaker 2:  	I think--yeah I think so.  When you said six.  Yeah, it was six.  We did six 'Star Trek' movies.
Speaker 1: They were done maybe every other year--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, every two--
Speaker 1: --so twelve years--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so the cast would get back together again--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, was it fun getting back together with--?
Speaker 2:  	It was fun getting back together and it was, you, you still had that feeling of brand newness but, and, and many of us had interacted in the meantime, but sometimes there were those who we had not seen or worked with off, other than 'Star Trek' so it was real--it was for all intents and purposes it was a, a rare joy you know.  I loved the show.  I loved the people, all of them, everybody.  We, we, we came to a point where we cared about each other, other than the show, you know, and we became friends other than the show.  We still are, you know.  We still are sort of a team, and, and yet we have our own lives.
Story_ID: 646274
Speaker 1: When did the--do you remember when the Trekkie phenomenon started with the 'Star Trek Adventures' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Almost immediately (laughter), because we had such avid friends, that, friends of theirs who were avid, I mean such avid yes--avid, avid fans that that, that, that it was different, that we were, we weren't just a cast, we were friends you know and, and in and above and around 'Star Trek' and, and still are, and still are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how many--would there be a--'Star Trek' conventions like once a year in the United States or were there many of them, I don't know?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, there were many.
Speaker 1: In the course of a year?
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	There were sometimes after, we worshipped them.  Our fans were so avid that there was, I'd have a, a 'Star Trek' convention to go to about every month at least, sometimes twice.  Sometimes one on this side, one of that side of the world you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So around the world--
Speaker 2:  	Oh yeah.  We've gone to, to Germany and, and England especially and I mean lo and behold they even had one in France, and I mean yeah it--and they're avid, you know (laughter).  There's so--they're wonderful because they ask you things that you're supposed to know and you're trying to, (laughter) trying to remember.  They know it (laughter).  Well, I go, "Well, you tell me what I did?" (Laughter) And they crack up.  I, I love the life of, of events that, that you get to talk with the fans one on one you know.  They're great and they're funny, they're great.  They're a great sense of humor you know and they're serious about their show.  Serious about the show, serious to them--
Speaker 1: People will argue what a Romulan is versus a Klingon or whatever?
Speaker 2:  	Well, yeah they don't even have to do that.  They're all on the same page.  I might--they might have to tell me (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so this is an income stream going to these conventions right?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: It's an income stream.  This is a job going to these conventions?
Speaker 2:  	Oh it became a, a, a source of, of income that we hadn't even planned you know, expected and, and it still is.  I mean I don't do as many now you know, but there's still the true blue fans, and some of our fans now were a little, like their parents brought them.  They grew up with us and, and the Trek films, I mean the Trek events, they grew up with us and then they discovered that--I have one marvelous story, is Gene Roddenberry's son, oh take that off okay.  We're not gonna do that.  But a person's son who, when we were on, was a little bitty thing and as he grew up you know, "Oh, this is what dad does," you know and, and, and as time went by became fans of the show because they discovered the show after we were gone, after we were gone you know and, and became great fans and I think that's just great.  They can tell you word for word sometimes and what the shows were about you know.
Speaker 1: Now one time--
Speaker 2:  	And the important, and the wonderful thing is the importance of what it did and it's time, and still does you know.  The quality of it and the relationships it--I, I've even had people tell me that they thought they were racist until they became involved with 'Star Trek' and, and realized that they were just part of a reflection of, of how they were raised or and that they were liberated by this by our show, you know, and, and what joy came into their lives.  How wonderful to be involved in something that had more than just a, a fun--or, you know, a, show more than just a show, they were real people to them.
Story_ID: 646275
Speaker 1: I know in--by 1980- I think it was '85 [sic. 1987] or '86 [1986] they produced 'Star Trek: The Next Generation.'
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, and then by 1992, if I'm correct I think there were three 'Star Trek' shows on television.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: One had a woman captain [Kathryn Janeway]--
Speaker 2:  	Yep.
Speaker 1: --'Star Trek: Voyager' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --then there was 'Deep Space' ['Star Trek: Deep Space Nine'].
Speaker 2:  	What was wonderful about that they, the new shows that didn't have the original, any of the original cast in it were nervous as actors that you know we would feel they had replaced us.  We were some of their biggest fans (laughter) and it, and it just opened up a wonderful, larger scope of your friends you know and, and something that you, that you believe in.  Something that you've done that you can really believe in and enjoy too you know.  Become a fan of.
Speaker 1: Now did you, I know Avery Brooks had a significant role in 'Star Trek: Deep Space Nine' as the captain, he was actually captain--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: --of 'Deep Space Nine'--
Speaker 2:  	So it's very easy.
Speaker 1: --did you and Avery Brooks talk about the show?
Speaker 2:  	Oh we're friends with all of them.  Yeah we talk about not only what we've done with the show, but what the shows have done for us you know, and what a pleasure to have something follow you that you really enjoy and that's of quality.  That's, that's, that's no small wonder you know, that's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Do you have--have you seen the latest two 'Star Trek' movies?  The--
Speaker 2:  	I think I've seen everything walking that's 'Star Trek.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of course you're not weary of these things right?
Speaker 2:  	I've seen it all absolutely and I, and I'll sit there and enjoy it like it's the first time I've seen it because they're so well done you know.  No, nobody has done a takeoff and done it cheap or without great thought.  You know that they're, they were a fan and they know what they were doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now do you have a favorite part in any of the 'Star Trek' movies that you were in?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Anytime Uhura got to get off the ship (laughter).
Story_ID: 646276
Speaker 1: From time to time you've renewed your act, right?
Speaker 2:  	Hm?
Speaker 1: There have been several times you renewed your act, right?  Your, your singing act?
Speaker 2:  	My singing act?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2:  	All the time.  I put new stuff in.  I keep a core, I keep a core going because you have fans that they're gonna ask you for it anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And in '95 [1995], well in '94 [1994] you published your autobiography--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'Beyond Uhura: Star Trek and Other Memories' [Nichelle Nichols] and which we have a copy right here.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We used for the preparation of this interview.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that difficult to do, to write or, or?
Speaker 2:  	I thought it was going to be until I started writing it.  I didn't know where I was gonna start.  Then I said, well just start writing, and then I talked to people and they sort of fell into place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah and I've never written a book before so, and at one point I went into it like, oh I'm just gonna write this and--and at some point I'm going, oh my god, I've never done this before.  What am I--suppose it's lousy.  And then I had wonderful readers who you know would--I say find anything wrong with it that you know that I, that I didn't do right and they were wonderful people that came in and they--they took pride and joy and ownership, you know (laughter), it was great, it's great.  Trek fans are great (laughter).
Story_ID: 646277
Speaker 1: Now in '95 [1995] you authored a science fiction novel called 'Saturn's Child' [Nichelle Nichols with Margaret Wander Bonanno].
Speaker 2:  	What did I do?
Speaker 1: 'Saturn's Child.'
Speaker 2:  	What about it?
Speaker 1: Did you write that?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I didn't hear the question.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you about it.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, um-hm.  I wanted to write--I didn't want it to be a Trekdom but I wanted to write a heroine that might very well have been a prelude to, to 'Star Trek' or any--fit in and, and she kind of wrote herself.  Then when I got compliments on it, and sold so well, I went, boy I didn't know I could write.  I knew I could write, but I never thought I would be a--write books you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You've also had--you've been very active in community activities?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry, what?
Speaker 1: You've been very active in community activities--
Speaker 2:  	I and who?
Speaker 1: --well in activities associated with developing aspects of the community around science and technology and that sort of thing.  You were--well tell us what your interaction with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]?
Speaker 2:  	Oh NASA, you're talking about Trek fans, that's where you'll find them and I was--have, have  always been amazed at at the real space program you know.  We only project what might be, but these people are really doing it, and come to find out as far as they were concerned we were projecting, we were projecting they were big 'Star Trek' fans.  And it was a joy.  It was a joy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Mae Jemison said that she watched 'Star Trek' as a youth and got inspired by that.
Speaker 2:  	She, she--how did I meet her?  Did I meet her separate from, from that--but when I did, I met her--she lives in, in, oh what's that other state, anyway I was in her, in her hometown doing some--
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois].  She's from Chicago.
Speaker 2:  	She's from Chicago, but she lives in--
Speaker 1: Texas I think.
Speaker 2:  	--in Texas yeah, and, and I met her, she was so down to earth, I met her and I was like, ooh you know because she's doing the real thing and she was so excited and she was so wonderful and she's so down to earth and funny, we became great friends, great friends and we are to this day and beyond, you know, and when she comes to town, she, she would call me--she stays with me you know and vice versa, when I go to Texas too I stay with her.  And and we do great things together.  We're just friends like that.  We were like that (snaps fingers).  We knew each other, you know you meet somebody and you know you don't have to pave the way or anything, you just feel like you've known them forever.  That's, that's how we are.
Story_ID: 646278
Speaker 1: Tell us about Kwanza, the women's group?
Speaker 2:  	Kwanza Foundation is an organization of black women in the industry that was founded by a few of us, oh ten, fifteen, fifteen almost twenty years ago and we don't do a lot of it, we do strong things.  We fundraise and, and give to deserving organizations or people, or as such, and women's organizations that--especially those that have to do with children that might--any org- entity that needs, that funding doesn't come easily for and, or in better need of it and don't, maybe don't even know it, but know it and don't know how to get it.  And once a year or two years because most of us, we're an organization of, of black women in the industry.  We fundraise and, and, and every dime that we make goes to a foundation or, or some organization that, that assists black people in one way or another that we feel are deserving.  There're many deserving, we wish we could do more for a lot more.  But we've been very successful and we've been very--we give big events and that, and everyone wants to come to our events because they are fun and, and every dime that we make goes to a charity.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just want to read off some of the names--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Judy Pace [HistoryMaker Judy Pace-Flood]--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --Isabel Sanford, Esther Rolle, some have passed, Vonetta McGee, [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas, [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo, Lillian Lehman, Beverly Thomas--
Speaker 2:  	Lehman.
Speaker 1: --Beverly Todd, Sheryl Lee Ralph--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Debbie Allen, Margaret Avery, Telma Hopkins, Marian Smothers [ph.], and the organization has been supported with--by, partially by everybody from Richard Pryor to Oprah Winfrey, Curt Flood, Sidney Poitier--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and Paul Moody [ph.] so--
Speaker 2:  	Among--
Speaker 1: Among many.
Speaker 2:  	--among many that support us yes.
Speaker 1: So this is, the name Kwanza, Swahili for, first the holiday Kwanzaa you know is--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know time of giving or sharing--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --and were you inspired by the holiday to?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Was the organization inspired by the holiday as such?
Speaker 2:  	No, I think we just fell in love with the name and it was about that same time that we formed, and we wanted something distinctive that had a meaning, that had connected with quality and we thought Kwanza Foundation is us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Has Dr. Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] ever had any interaction with--?
Speaker 2:  	I can't hear you?
Speaker 1: Has Dr. Karenga ever had any interaction with your group?
Speaker 2:  	Doctor?
Speaker 1: Karenga, who, the founder of Kwanza the holiday?
Speaker 2:  	I think someone said--we're all, all of us are connected with someone who supports, help supports us so I'm not sure if--who they all are and they change over the years you know.  And, and they grow but we have supportive people in organizations that--and we give big eve- we give one big event a year; and everybody wants to come to our Kwanza Foundation event.
Story_ID: 646279
Speaker 1: Tell me, we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2:  	For the African American community they--I have no fears or concerns, negative, concerns in the negative.  I'm very proud of the Kwanza Foundation.  We give events and, and every dime is not--goes to a deserving organization or group of people or families or whatever that we know is necessary.  Sometimes it's ten or twenty families that can't have, that won't have Christmas or, or Christmas dinner and we, we, so it changes who we--so we don't fundraise for one, one thing.  The one thing is Kwanza and then we distribute it as we see.  Sometimes it's one whole lump sum the same--of whatever we make and, and, and we feel.  Its very heart rendering [sic. rending] and, and to know, and there're organizations that they put their, that we help, that we help fund that put their heart and soul in what they're doing and sometimes open their own pocketbooks and so do we.  We want to make our--we want our organization to fund--sometimes they're just small, but what we fund is what are things we grew up seeing that needed funding and sometimes it's young people, sometimes it's the women, women's organizations that are doing fantastic things, that need just a spirit of money to get something pushed through, sometimes it's, very seldom is it political, political.  But we're very political in what we're doing in terms of, of making sure that what--who we fundraise and, and get that it goes we know the quality of the people that it's going not in somebody's pocketbook but in some hungry person's stomach, some kids ability to go to college, some mothers' need to feed and dress her kids so we, we've done most what we do is we're very proud of and so the variety of things.  It's whatever everyone brings something in to and we decide which one we're going to 'cause we want--we would rather help one organization at a time so that we can give them one great lump of-sum of money that we know, we know that, that it's going to be used in in a great way as, as we would do it ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we're a fundraising organization for the good of our community, the good of our, our people.
Story_ID: 646280
Speaker 1: As someone who was on a television show that focused on the future and the future technology, are you--what do you see I guess in terms of--oh I had a good question here, I'm losing it (laughter).  I really did have a good--but, well, what I'm, yeah--
Speaker 2:  	Would you pull; can he pull in a little closer?
Speaker 1: Well, I can lean in a little bit.  Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Is he in the way?
Speaker 1: No, I'm not in the way.  As someone who participated in fiction about the future, do think about you know future technology and what you liked to see in the future for--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --for the world?
Speaker 2:  	Absolutely.  Personally I, I basically come from you know, well (speaks in a deep voice) we were in the future, about opening, that avenue is, is open to our people and, and sometimes it's a narrow limited person that we help and then sometimes we give to something larger.  It just depends on what we and we don't, when we fundraise once a year and it has gotten bigger and bigger--
Speaker 1: Now, I wasn't talking about Kwanza [Kwanza Foundation].  I was talking about you--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --as a person who's been involved in futurism on some level--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --even as an actor--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know what you thought was coming in the future--
Speaker 2: Boy.
Speaker 1: --you know for us as a people?
Speaker 2:  	If I, if I had the trusted any knowledge of what's gonna be in the future, wow.  I think I, I think, I guess that's why we've all come together because we all have views of, of what we and yet they all seem to be almost the same you know what I'm saying.  To answer that is like, well it's bigger than a breadbasket.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let me ask you this then.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you personally, do you feel any compulsion to keep up with the latest technology yourself you know in terms of cell phones and other things that were modeled on 'Star Trek'?
Speaker 2:  	I can't help because it was all thought up on 'Star Trek' to begin with so much that we had such creative writers that back when we were doing 'Star Trek' they would come up with things that, that we would go wow, it seemed like every--you know simple today.  And so when Kwanza was funded it, was founded, it, it was founded with ten African American women and I think it's maybe twelve or fifteen not fifteen, twelve maybe twelve now, who were dedicated to and then we, we realized that even if it were not exactly the same thing that I'm--that mine is, it interacted.  We all interact and, and, and, and when we fundraise they know they're gonna have one great party.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wasn't talking about Kwanza again, but--
Speaker 2:  	Oh?
Speaker 1: --but let me--
Speaker 2:  	What are we--?
Speaker 1: --I just have a few more questions.
Speaker 2:  	What was this question?
Speaker 1: This was a question about technology and I was asking you about technology but--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: But you answered that and--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --you also answered all the questions about Kwanza.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, well technology I'm interested in--I'm glad you asked me that because the quality of our technology, whatever it is that you're specifically interested in are, are, are larger range, benefits us when it's, it's able to open its flower and, and grow and deliver that we, that we--that one person can't even imagine doing or getting done by oneself.  When you pull together ideas come to you and from nowhere and suddenly because we talk about it or making a fundraiser or even before we go to the fundraiser, we know what we're going to be able to raise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Does that make se- does that answer your question at all?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 646281
Speaker 1: When you think about everything you've done to this point today as a, as an actor and as a writer, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2:  	I'm sure there are some, but I was raised by two brilliant people, my mother [Lishia Parks Nichols] and father [Samuel Nichols, Sr.], and they said don't dwell on what you can't do or what isn't--look at what isn't and see it as what is and go, go make that happen and, and I've always, whether its personal or communal, community that's the way I see it.  There's nothing that can't be done that you decide to do; and we go after that--there's no such thing as can't.
Story_ID: 646282
Speaker 1: When you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2:  	Waking up this morning (laughter).  I, I really can't pinpoint any, any one thing.  I can tell you about all of the things like Kwanza Foundation, we have things come into us from, sometimes we pinpoint one or two or three, or sometimes we take it all together and let it and fundraise for that.  But we, we--our greatest reward is seeing we particularly love young people you know and seeing the faces of no matter what age you are, eyes widen and you see the child in them that says, "Oh, I can do that."  I, I could and see the energy and, and uniqueness come, come to fruition in their eyes you know and then they go out and they do something wonderful and we've, we've had some responsibility there.  We helped and I helped you know.  It's, it's, it's the most rewarding thing when you, when you have a goal and it's worthy and whether it's bigger than a bread basket or small as your fingernail, when you, when you achieve it and watch it flourish because you've come together and, and made that happen; it's just, it's a feeling like no other feeling.
Story_ID: 646283
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your family?  Now you have a son, right?  And--?
Speaker 2:  	I have a magnificent son, Kyle Johnson.  He's brilliant.  He's kind.  He's loving.  He's, he's just one incredible human being and he, and he's thinking of his, of our world what he knew before he's thinking of me, me, me you know.  What can I--what in my vast knowledge or limited ability can I broaden the world going into the right pla- going into a beautiful place that that I'm proud to live in.  That's the way we feel.  Not to sound maudlin because we're certainly not.  (Speaks in a deep voice) We're a couple of tough ones.  But there's got to be a spirit, there's a spirit there and there's gotta be a spirit within that, that, that something flows from out of and makes the world better and it can be something that you can identify and spotlight and say this we're going to make this happen or that happen or it or one gives to the other you know.  One makes the other happen because if I'm happening and I see you and you need, that's not even a matter of thinking about it and that's the way things come to me because this is our world.  This is our world and, and, and, and it's ours equally whether you're a millionaire or poverty stricken, you own this world and you, you owe this world and the world owes you.  The better you give to the world, the more beauty comes into you--more of what you need comes to you.
Story_ID: 646284
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't talked about or we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2:  	I don't think so, you (laughter)--I have expressed myself on more than I have even knew I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And this has been a joy.  This has been a joy talking to you.
Speaker 1: It's been a joy talking to you and learning some things about you.
Speaker 2:  	Thank you.
Speaker 1: I had no idea your voice was that beautiful.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: So let me ask this last question then.  It's similar to legacy but it's a little different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2:  	Oh boy.  If everything that you have filmed was in one large thing that I could leave behind me, and I don't know if you even hit on everything, but by in large you know how I feel, where I'm coming from, if what I do and how I live I leave and it leave to the world, because when I came in this world, somebody had left that space for me to grow, that platform for me to grow.  If, if I've done--if I get to accomplish and or touch somebody in anyway and, and with the--with my career and, and ability to reach out and it touches enough people to say if she can do it, I can do it 'cause I can't do it, nobody can do it all by themselves and it's not something that you can make a glass or a pair of glasses but it was in somebody's mind somehow, somewhere and so you can see better you know.  You can quench your thirst, you can build something and before you can build the, the Eiffel Tower [Paris, France], you had to somebody had to see it first.  And I see a better world every day and, and all any time I catch myself and I'm in any way displeased with myself is because I haven't contributed in some way, in my way.  Not somebody else's way, but in my way because I know what I can give and, and, and I know where I come from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2:  	I thank you.
