Story_ID: 26988
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Camellia Grace Moses Okpodu, C-A-M-E-L-L-I-A, G-R-A-C-E, M-O-S-E-S, O-K-P-O-D-U.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 24, 1964, Portsmouth, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name--last name, Okpodu?
Speaker 2: Well, that was my ex-husband's name and it became my professional name so I kept it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So I married into that name.
Speaker 1: And it's a Nigerian name?
Speaker 2: It's from Nigeria.  He was from Warri, a Bendel state, and I met him in college and married and kept the last name Okpodu.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of biology and the director of the Intelligence Community Center of Academic Excellence at Northfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 20, 19--excuse me (laughter).  June 20, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Norfolk, Virginia at my residence.
Story_ID: 26989
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as a warm-up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Asparagus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love asparagus.  I wish I could figure out how to grow a lot of asparagus around here 'cause it's expensive but I like it.  I like anything green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.  Although I'm wearing pink today, red is my favorite color; I didn't think it would look too good on camera so red--pink is a variation of red (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's a deep pink too. It's almost, almost red.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's almost red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not with these allergies, but actually, I, I like the spring and when I look-- listen to Vivaldi's 'Movement,' I like the spring, so spring is my favorite, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm going back to India this, this year but I guess if I, I--there's no place like home so--I know this sounds very trite but I like going back to the beaches of North Carolina where I grew up, so Holden Beach, North Carolina is my favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have so many (laughter).  I guess my--I'm most famous for my--quoting James Brown, "I don't need nobody to get me nothing. Just open the door and I'll get it myself."
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's famous JB (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(laughter) the philosopher, James Brown, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right. Right, right.  What did you call him earlier? Popp--
Speaker 2: Poppa JB (laughter).
Speaker 1: Poppa JB, okay.
Story_ID: 26990
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll put 'em together but we'll ask about 'em separately at first.  So can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood, L-U-E-R-E-V-I-A, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Fullwood, F-U-L-L-W-O-O-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born July 2-- 23, 1930 in Southport, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where is Southport in relationship to let's say Charlotte or--
Speaker 2: Well, if you-the, the reference point would be Wilmington, North Carolina--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so if you go down Highway 17, we're thirty-five miles-- thirty-five miles south of Wilmington on seventeen.  So about thirty-five miles--thirty minutes from Wilmington and about thirty minutes from North Myrtle Beach; we're on the coast--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --not too far from Holden Beach, which is my favorite vacation spot (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories from that side?
Speaker 2: That's actually very interesting because I'm actually working on a book on that.  So my mother's side of the family we can go back to 1840 to her--on her father's side and they were the Fullwoods and we know from court records that we have some lineage, I guess it's her fourth generation back from her, so it would be her fourth grandfather removed, that he was involved with leaving the area, the Southport area, and coming here to the Hampton Roads [Virginia] area to participate in Freedom Fortune which is at Fort Monroe [Hampton, Virginia], and he was so overcome by the fact that he was able to get his liberty that he changed his name from Fullwood to Monroe so Jack Monroe is one of my mother's relatives, and I recently learned this as I was going back trying to put together our--a book related to my work on the Emancipation Oak, which is actually related to Fort Monroe.  So in doing my research for my research book, I found that I actually had a family connection (laughter) to this, which kind of surprised me.
Speaker 1: Well what is the story about Fort Monroe?  Now I didn't really realize what Fort Monroe meant--the significance of Fort Monroe; just kinda tell us.
Speaker 2: So my--so during the Civil War, if a slave was able to be free, run away and was able to--if he was captured--re-captured by the union side, then he would be able to go to Fort Monroe.  That's where they held them and they called them contraband slaves, and they were never to be--they were called contrabands because they were material I guess; they were thought of as items, and they were not re-introduced to slavery.  And so Fort Monroe became the place known as Freedom's Fortress because if a slave could make it to the--if a person of color who was a slave, even if they may be fighting for either side, could make it to there, they would never be in bondage again.  So that when, when the Emancipation Proclamation was read, it was read about three miles west of Fort Monroe or at Hampton University Gate [Hampton, Virginia], which we called the Emancipation Drive, which is near Hampton University.  And so that was the place where contraband slaves were taken; it's a very interesting--it's recently made the news because we decided when they closed Fort Monroe as an army installation, that we would make it a national park.  And so now it's back in the news because they're now looking at making it a national park that everybody--and so that's why I was really interested in recreating the history so that my family story could be part of that.
Story_ID: 26991
Speaker 1: So you said that the Emancipation Proclamation was read at, at Hampton's gate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a drive called the Emancipation Drive--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is right next door geographically to Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], so what I meant by 'at the gate' is this entrance to the campus where it says 'Hampton University,' that's Emancipation Drive; and the Emancipation Oak where it was read--the Emancipation Proclamation was read is right there, and I've done my research, my actual forensics research, on the Emancipation Oak.  One of the things that happened when I moved into Hampton as a plant biologist, some local people came to me and asked me was there any way that I could help to recreate the lineage of the tree.  They had folklore that there was a tree in the neighborhood that had--was started by some free people from the actual Emancipation Oak and--but they had no other authenticating-type way of doing it so I used biotechnology, DNA fingerprinting to show that the two trees are related because if not, the city was getting ready to tear the tree down, and so I was able to show that it had lineage to the Emancipation Oak which is where [President Abraham] Lincoln actually read the Emancipation Proclamation, and the pen that he used to sign the Proclamation is actually kept in the museum on Hampton's campus.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a very fascinating story.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now this is a live oak, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, a Virginia live oak, yes.
Speaker 1: And they call it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-'Quercus virginiana.'
Speaker 1: Okay, so Fort Monroe [Hampton, Virginia] was a union fort that if you were enslaved and you made it there, you were considered contraband 'cause they couldn't really officially say you were free, I guess, but they could say that you were no longer available to the slave master.
Speaker 2: So what happened was they used the South's words against them because they, they said slaves were property, and so they were demanding the union to return them and so in using their own logic, they said, "Well, if they are property and then they are contraband, we have--we don't have people 'cause they had--we weren't considered people yet.  We have contraband and we do not have--as the articles of war, we don't have to return contraband (laughter)."  So. And I mean I guess that might have infuriated the other side but it was their logic.
Speaker 1: Right.  They weren't family members?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--They weren't soldiers. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They were not prisoners of war, they were contraband; they were items, so, so I guess it was one of those things adages that I like to say when people started off for bad, God turned it around for good (laughter). An unintended consequence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is quite a heritage on that side, and you said your great, great, great, great grandfather on that side changed his last name to Monroe?
Speaker 2: It's my grandfather's brother; I must have misspoke--
Speaker 1: Oh, his brother.
Speaker 2: --his brother changed his name from Fullwood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So it was a great, great, great, great uncle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Uncle, yes--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--that changed his name.
Speaker 2: --changed his name from Fullwood to Monroe, So I've recently learned, and there's a lot of Fullwoods that's still in this area but I--my mother has a large family, and I know some of them still live in Virginia that I've recently found out, and I was asking her, she's eighty-two, she'll be eighty-three this year--about that and she was explaining to me that "Well, the Monroe's that are in this area are some kin to you too."  And this is how.  So then when I went back and looked at the information myself, I was like "Wow, that's pretty--that's really fascinating."  All along I've been doing this research for-Koren [daughter] is now--she'll be nineteen, I've been doing this research for sixteen years; close to sixteen years, and I never really stopped to think about my relationship; it kind of found me, you know?  It's quite interesting.
Speaker 1: So this research started at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So when I got from Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], when I left Virginia Tech and took the girls and came to Hampton--I'm a plant physiologist, and I quickly surmised that I wouldn't be able to do the level--the same type of research, I won't say level 'cause that's not true--I wouldn't be able to do exactly the same thing that I was doing at Virginia Tech, so I asked myself "What can I do within the environment that I'm in?  How can I take advantage of the natural surrounding?"  And so one day, as I often do, I was walking outside and I thought 'hey, why don't I use what has'--I left history; my ex-husband was a historian, but I've always wanted to be a historian of some sort or a linguist I guess to say.  And I said "Well, why don't I use the history, the natural history to draw my students into what it is that I'm doing, make an inter-disciplinary approach to science, and draw them in with the history that's something that they can all identify with, but use that as the way to hook them into the science."  So it was like I'll use the Emancipation Oak as a living laboratory, so I started teaching pathology--plant pathology, physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology by using the tree.
Story_ID: 26992
Speaker 1: And so one of the biggest projects I wanted to do and I didn't get the chance to complete it but I started it while at Hampton was to actually work on cloning the tree from tissue culture, and in order to tissue culture, I had to know all the elements that it had, so I started studying any pathogens that were on it.  Right now, I have a paper waiting to hear if I'm gonna--if it's gonna be published or not, on some of the pathogens we were able to isolate; not really pathogenic in the sense of causing commercial damage, but more aesthetic pathogens.  The tree is maintained by the city at--excuse me, maintained by the arborists for the state, so it's pretty--for its age, it's pretty healthy, and we estimate it would be somewhere around four hundred years old, just based on some of the physical attributes.  But--so I started thinking why could--how could I do that?  How could I draw students in?  So I started using it as a living laboratory and that's how my work--then I start--then those people came to me and said "Well if you"--they found out about my work 'cause I was on T.V.  Of course you know the university (laughter); when everybody know what I was doing, they got a large NSF [National Science Foundation] grant from it, they saw me on television, they came to me and said "Could you help us with this?"  And then I started working on that project trying to figure out how to isolate DNA from the leaves because I had some that was some that was herbarium stored and I had to figure out how to get the DNA, which was not an easy feat, and I worked on that for a couple of years and once I figured out how to do that--that I could use it and it was a good quality, then I did the DNA paternity-type things on the tree.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the original live oak--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm?
Speaker 2: --is, was destroyed or something, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No, it's on Emancipation Drive.
Speaker 2: It's on-- it's still alive?
Speaker 1: It's still alive.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right.  I couldn't even understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It's still alive at campus.  And, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So the original one is still alive and they wanted you to do DNA testing on another one to see if it was related to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So what happened was some--during, I guess, celebrations over the years, people would take cuttings and they would plant them other places; we don't recommend that now because if you cut the tree, you run a susceptibility in introducing whatever fungus is on there and it's old, and it's just like anything else that's aged, you make it more susceptible.  So that anyway, I would assume that tree's at least one hundred and fifty years old--the one that they have.  So they had only anecdotal stories.
Speaker 2: This is the new one.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The younger tree that came from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and the old tree is four hundred years old, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, and the stock--the Emancipation Oak, the original one.  We estimate it around four hundred years old.  Someone had taken early in the 1900s a cutting from this tree and planted it somewhere else in the city and the only evidence they had that it was related to the Emancipation Oak was anecdotal.  Someone had told their children "Don't ever let this tree"--'cause we took it--I don't know if it was related to Booker T. Washington or what, but they had planted it another place in the city.  The bank had purchased the property and the bank was going to demolish the tree so the people came to me, they wanted the moratorium not to do the bulldozing until I could do the research, and they came to a conclusion that they would save the tree, so they put a thing around it but it didn't have the evidence and so recently, I guess two years ago, I was able to publish that data to show that those trees are highly related and most likely came from the same starting material.
Speaker 2: Did it save the tree?
Speaker 1: It's still there, and I told the bank--they put a plaque out there.  And I'm not--I'm at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] now, I'm not at Hampton, so I went back to the bank and I said "I think you need to put a plaque so that people will know that this tree is related; I mean it would be a great port for your business."  So I'm not quite sure, but at least right now the city didn't bulldozer it.
Speaker 2: What is--we have to get back to your family history, but like what is the life span of a live oak?
Speaker 1: Well, apparently they can live at least four hundred and something years.  That's a good one 'cause oaks really are not trees, there's--those types of oaks are more shrubs and there's, there is some that have--we consider them trees because they have a lot of what we consider secondary growth, but a lot of them have lived, I know three hundred--usually three hundred, four hundred years old, so--
Speaker 2: You know live oak is not really technically an oak is it, as such--an oak tree.
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I said. It's more of a shrub, yeah, yeah, but we consider it a tree. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--A shrub, yeah.  I know the leaves don't look like oak (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, there, there's a--I don't venture to say there's at least twenty different types of oaks so all of them have leaves that are shaped differently, so I wouldn't say that.  We consider it because it grows low; if you ever see the way they grow, most trees will grow with a very large stock and grow out; they grow very low, more like a bush, so you will see that they're very great shade trees but they have a lot of secondary growth so we do consider them trees. So the more, the way that we have horticultured them and have used them into our environment and treat them--they're not like the big pin oaks that you see outside, or red oaks.
Story_ID: 26993
Speaker 1: Well, your mother's side of the family now.  Okay so this is the biggest story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So my mother's side of the family.  My mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] was one of, of four daughters and my grandmother was an only child.  And so (laughter), so my mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother's people do historically after Fort Monroe?  Did they farm, or did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So my mother's father's side they were farmers; they had--I don't know--I always laugh and say if reparations come, I could never get it because we--I think we got our forty acres and a mule (laughter).  My mother's family were more agronomists --agriculture, and they did a--living off the land.
Speaker 1: Did they get--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: --land from the government?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know how this land got into our family, but we're land rich; that--they, that was one thing that was really interesting so I don't--I'm not quite sure exactly how it got in.
Speaker 1: But they acquired it back in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They acquired land a long time ago.  Now I mean they don't have it now because they--you know we usually sold it and stuff, but there was a lotta land and they farmed it.  My mother's aunt Lily, who also lived to be about one hundred and five years old, farmed most of her life; that's what I remember from her, she was farming. I learned a lot from her.  She was very eccentric and different and I learned that it's okay to be different.  She loved the Lord, she was a church-fearing, God-fearing type of person and she didn't mind working outside and, you know, she loved growing tobacco and soy beans; she was very good at it so, in some ways, I think I learned that trait from her.  My mother's mother she was one of--she was an only child and--all I know is that there was a long history of, I guess they'd call it biracial lineage; that's about all I know on that side.
Speaker 1: This is on your mother's side and--
Speaker 2: My mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, your mother's mother?  Okay.
Speaker 2: She lived to be close to a hundred years old as well.  Her name was Addie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a biracial lineage goes back to those pre-Civil War days?
Speaker 2: [Nodding yes].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, when she was a kid (laughter), we couldn't tell her from the person down at the other end of the--they were far away from us but it was a white lady who lived at the other end of our street and we would run, we'd get up to her and say "Oh, you're not our grandmother." So. (Laughter)  And we would go back to playing.  They looked so much alike that we learned--as I grew up, I learned that it was my grandmother's cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So her cousins lived in the region (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26994
Speaker 1: So now your mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] was one of four daughters--
Speaker 2: She was the youngest out of four.
Speaker 1: Okay, youngest, right.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Now did she talk about growing up and what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: My mother had polio growing up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so she wasn't expected to do much, but she was a tough one, and the interesting thing--I did get a chance to talk about this before; I got interviewed by Oprah and I talked about this.  My mother was very fascinating; I didn't know that she had anything wrong with her 'cause she never made it an excuse, and it wasn't until I was an adult that I realized she really couldn't use the left side of her arm-- her body.  She had--it was pretty much paralyzed, but she raised five children by herself.  Although part of my life I lived with my aunt and uncle, she, she managed to raise, you know, all of us--three daughters and two sons, and four of us went directly to college.  My oldest brother [Donald Moses] decided to go into the navy; he was the smartest one of all of us but he decided to go into the Navy and has done well for himself; he retired and got a job at DuPont and all those things. But my mother was quite fascinating.  She went to trade school and learned how to do hair and was very supportive, was a, a woman who stayed and took care of her family and made sure that everything was good while my father [Frank C. Moses], who was actually working his way up through the military as an officer.  So I was born here in Portsmouth [Virginia] because my dad--I don't know if he was a naval experiment or what, but he was transferred from Hawaii--it wasn't a state yet, and they moved to California where my older sister [Linda Moses] was born, and eventually he got orders to come across state--come across the U.S. to Virginia and he worked in a shipyard--in a nuclear area of a shipyard.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask about him in a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So your mother went to cosmetology school?
Speaker 2: Yes, in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she go under any specific system like Madam Walker or Annie Malone or--I don't know, I'm just asking.
Speaker 2: I just know she knew how to press and curl.  There was a--Apex School of Beauty I think is where she went because she always used this Apex grease in our hair (laughter).  I don't know if you remember what Apex grease is like, so this is white petroleum-based grease that she used to put--and I actually have some upstairs (laughter).  I still use it on me, but it works wonders, so I know she went to Apex Beauty School.
Speaker 1: Okay, Apex School of Beauty in New York City [New York].
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was in, it was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 26995
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna leave your mother's side for a minute and we'll go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Frank C., the letter C, Moses.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 1--no, July 2, 1928.  And I don't know where he was born--somewhere in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--so what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  I know my father's brothers--brother--two of his brothers, because when we were kids, they used to--they made it a point to come and get my sister and I and take us to New Jersey for the summer, but I really know very little about their family.  I know some information but I don't--I haven't been able to substantiate this information so I really don't know that much.  I, I know about my dad, you know, what I was able to learn over the years from him, but I know very little about his family.  Now I did run into a colleague who was at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] who has traced our lineage back and told me that we were from the same group of Moseses; his name is Henry Moses and apparently I'm some kin to him according to his findings, and he gave me a family history--a story, but I wasn't sure because I wasn't able to substantiate this from any of our father's siblings so I don't know.  I really don't know very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had people in New Jersey you say?  Or--
Speaker 2: My uncles and his sisters lived in New Jersey and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Three lived in--excuse me, two lived in New Jersey and two lived in Philadelphia.  I think there were seven of them totally; my dad was the oldest out of seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he grow up in New Jersey or?
Speaker 2: He grew up part of his life in South Carolina because I remember he went to Claflin University, or Claflin College.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in Orangeburg [South Carolina], yeah.
Speaker 2: Orangeburg.  So I know he grew up--they lived in Timmonsville--Timmonsville, South Carolina?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: And he spent a couple of years at Claflin, and then he left and went and joined the Navy, and that's when he met my mother in Philadelphia.  So at that point, half of them had left the farm because they were also agri--agronomy, and they left and went to Philadelphia and that's where he met my mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he met your mother in Philadelphia and--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --he was already in the Navy.  Now he was, he was a naval officer; he must have been within the first group of black naval officers I guess, or an early group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So he eventually--he was, he eventually became a officer; when he passed, he had I guess like three stripes on his--coat, whatever?  But he worked his way up.  I don't know if he was a officer when he came across; he was like a E-7 or something like that?
Speaker 1: That's like a Chief Petty Officer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Chief, Chief Petty Officer thing.  And then he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, that's like a top sergeant in the army.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was then a commander or something, I don't know.  'Cause I remember he had, he had a different coat when he passed.  It was a funny story that said that he worked in nuclear submarine stuff and when he got sick, I went to--my mother called me--my uncle called me; him and his youngest brother, who I do have a relationship with, but I never have asked him the family history so I guess I should do that (laughter).  This is making me realize I probably should do that 'cause I know nothing.  But I called him and he told me that I should go see about my father. So when I went to South Carolina, he was at the Medical College [Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina], he was very ill and I couldn't find him.  'Cause I went down to the regular patients' floor, you know?  And I went up and the guy was in the admiral suite.  I was like "Okay, what exactly did you do for the navy?"  (Laughter)  'Cause I'd never been in a hospital room with gold fixtures and mahogany beds and (laughter)--"Is there something else that you wanna tell me?"  So I know that he never retired from his--whatever he did, they always kept him as a civilian consul--contractor with them, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So there's a lot to learn about him still.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot to learn, yeah.
Story_ID: 26996
Speaker 1: You were saying there's a lot to still research about your father [Frank C. Moses].  He seems kind of mysterious in his position in the Navy; he was certainly important, right?
Speaker 2: My mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] tells a very interesting story about my father and that she's actually very fascinated because--one of the things I'm learning about her is that she's very, very quiet and she was very much in the support role but when my dad--the last time he went out to sea, I was born--or she was pregnant with me, and she tells the story about how she came here and they integrated the elementary school--Granby Elementary; not by--it was serendipitous because my mother did not realize that, you know--she moved from Hawaii to California, came here and the schools were integrated, so she enrolled my brothers in the school and when my--I guess my mother appeared to the school first and she appeared as a Filipino woman or some sort of Asian woman, they had assumed since she was coming from Hawaii and her last name was Moses that she wasn't an African American 'cause they were typically--she didn't look African American, so they allowed her to enroll my brothers.  And then she appears the first day of school with these two black children, and they were like "They can't go to school here."  So the funny story is that she tells 'em that--she ended up telling them "I'm not going to take my children across to Booker T. [Washington School] which is way across town when the school is right across my door."  We lived on Granby Street.  So interesting--I said "Well what did dad think about all this?"  And he kept telling her "Stop making trouble, you know; stop making trouble.  You're gonna get in trouble," and she says "Well"--the way she saw it was that either we were gonna stand for something or fall for anything.  So it was kind of interesting that my--my demeanor, I think a lot of my will to push forward comes from my mother not being afraid, and I said "Well weren't you afraid that they were gonna do something to you?"  She said "Well, Uncle Sam had sent us across here and I figured that if they did anything, I would just call the government and tell them they wouldn't allow my children to go to school."  So my brother integrated Granby Elementary School, and that was because my parents, I guess, were a social experiment.  I don't know why they sent my dad all the way from California here, but I do remember one story he told me about him putting his uniform in the car to drive across country because they were afraid that they were going to be, you know, harassed and he said there were only certain places along the way that they could stop in order for them to, you know, use the bathroom or get food and that daddy pretty much drove three days from--nonstop, you know, just stopping to get gas because they were afraid, and when they came to Virginia I'm not quite sure what the military or this area had set up but I get the idea that they were some sort of social experiment-experiment.  That they were trying to be progressive and move forward.  And if you've met my father--he had a really interesting personality, it was very--everything was fun, so--but he was only like five [feet]--probably five-five [five feet and five inches]; you would think he was like six foot tall because he, he felt like he was a giant.  So I think maybe my--they used my dad in some way for that but I've never been able to find out, I found out today that the Enterprise, which was the last I guess ship that he worked on, they decommissioned it and I didn't get the information until I saw it on the television today.  I thought it was kind of interesting that the--I should have gone to see that 'cause I remember him talking about that.  It was some sort of nuclear submarine or something--air craft carrier that he worked on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--so your parents met in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and about what year did they meet, you think?
Speaker 2: Maybe 1953, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you mother is in cosmetology school and your father is in the Navy.
Story_ID: 26997
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions, how they look, how they walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I look exactly like my mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] but I have my father's [Frank C. Moses] complexion (laughter).  I mean I'm my mother's spitting image (laughter).  It's kinda funny 'cause sometimes I'm walking from across the mirror and I'm like 'When did this happen?'  And so everybody at home knows that I can go and not, you know, like I just recently went home for my thirtieth anniversary high school reunion, and everybody was able to pick me out because I look just like my mom, but I do have my father's complexion.
Story_ID: 26998
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your brothers and sisters; you have like--
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, two brothers and two sisters.
Speaker 2: I'm the fourth out of five.  My oldest brother Donald followed our dad and went into the Navy and retired; I think he's now E-8 [Senior Chief Petty Officer], he just retired and he also works in transportation and is a Navy corpsman?  I think that's what he did.  He still--I think he just retired from the [Navy] Reserves and he--also, when he was sixteen years old, got a job at DuPont and has managed, had managed to work DuPont.  Every time he came home and had leave or whatever--he worked at DuPont, so he was able to retire from DuPont in enough time, and he retired.  I know he's really invested in DuPont; invested in the state of North Carolina and he's getting his retirement from the Navy so he's doing well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Okay; he has no children.  My second brother Durwin, we call him Darrell; Darrell is living in Trenton or--living in New Jersey, Morristown or something like that; he's getting married on August, August 9.  He went to Elizabeth City State University [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] to major in geology, wasn't able to complete Elizabeth City and transferred to Queens--Kings College in Charlotte [North Carolina] and got a degree in accounting.  Although he doesn't do anything really in business--accounting, he runs his own business but he's more in construction and things like that and builds things; he's very good.  So I guess in some way, his geology and love for architecture and that kinda stuff, he gets to use.  My next sister is named Linda and she went to Queens College in Charlotte and got a degree in accounting.  She worked as a clerk for the State of North Carolina and the County of Brunswick, she was a Clerk for the Court and now she has--she's going back to school to get a--she wants to get eventually a business administrative position--degree, and she is working for the police department as a dispatcher in the local police department, and she's a chaplain for that police department.  She has two children and one--Malinda, my only niece from my siblings--she got her biology degree from Chowan University [Murfreesboro, North Carolina] so she kind of followed after her aunt, and her son J.R. works for something down at Southport, I'm not quite sure what he does.  And then my younger sister's name is Lisa, so I hope you saw there's a pattern here--sorry, my stomach.
Speaker 1: D's and L's.
Speaker 2: Donald and--hey, how did I get a C?  Has anybody come up with this?  I had a lotta issue with this growing up.  Donald, Darrell, Linda and Lisa, Camellia.  Okay, something's wrong with this picture.  Actually, we call her Lisa but her name is Madeline--Madeline Lee, and Madeline got her B.S. degree in biology from UNC Wilmington [University of North Carolina at Wilmington, Wilmington, North Carolina] and was working on a master's at East Carolina [University, Greenville, North Carolina] and she is--she's done a lotta different things; she's been a teacher, she's worked for chemical processing plant, she's done a lotta different things, and most recently she was working for the Red Cross and broke her hand and has not been able to work since then.  So, that's my siblings.
Story_ID: 26999
Speaker 1: You said, now you had an interesting situation growing up, right?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: So tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: I had--so when I was about--I guess I was about five or six?  When I was two years old, I remember we left and moved from Virginia to North Carolina; my mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] just took all of us and we left and went home.  And then when I was about first grade, my mother got very sick and my older sister went to live with one of our teach--one of the teachers, and my mother was very ill and when she came back, my aunt and uncle were--she was gonna live with them so she went to stay with my aunt and uncle; that didn't last, and so she came back home to--and my aunt--my mother still had five children to take care of so my aunt and uncle had none, and I ended up going to stay with them and I think I must have been in the first or second grade, and I stayed with them 'til about fifth or sixth grade off and on.  I know when I got in eighth grade for sure I stayed with my mother because the high school in North Carolinas were better than the ones in South Carolina.  But I saw my siblings every--pretty much every day at school and on the weekends, so I didn't really miss them that much.  But I had the best of both worlds because my uncle he was p-- he was really cool (laughter).  He was, he was, he used to listen to my stories that I used to make up (laughter); he used to encourage this behavior (laughter).  I remember being put outta school in the first grade because I went to school, I could read and they didn't know what to do with me so they stuck me in the library, so I got stuck in the library until it was time for math, and then I would go back to math class, because I was so bored.  Man, I was reading--I've been reading since I've been about two years old.  I was just so bored with the people and the level of what they were doing and I remember getting in trouble, and they called my aunt who was a teacher, and she came from the other hallway and she was very upset with me, and then I asked the teacher to call my uncle who was in the other hallway and he came and he took my side (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they both taught at the same school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were all at the same school.
Speaker 1: So you're being raised by two school teachers.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  My stomach is growling, I'm sorry (laughter).  It's probably on the tape.
Speaker 1: Okay well that's great.  So two school teachers are raising you--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and your uncle loves to hear your stories.
Speaker 2: That's to make up--they wouldn't let me watch TV, and to this day I don't really watch television but I would go to my room and I would hear them talking about--they had these tapes, these LPs with Redd Foxx, and they would have these parties.  My uncle was graduating I think from A and T, and he started North Myrtle Beach, Incorporated.  So if you look that up, my uncle Legrand (ph.) was one of the persons who incorporated the first black incorporated beach in South Carolina; his idea was to have a resort town.  So I remember all these people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What was it called again?
Speaker 2: North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, Atlantic Beach Incorporated.  He wanted to have a black resort, sort of like Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And for a while, we had that.  So you could walk down on the strip and you could see all these black businesses and hotels.  We had a hotel; we ran a hotel.
Story_ID: 27000
Speaker 1: So you're at school, your aunt and uncle are teaching at school.  What's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: That was Union Primary School.
Speaker 1: Union Primary School.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Now does the name harken back to the union, actually?
Speaker 2: I have no idea how they came up with that name but it was--I remember going to the school when it was a segregated school, so that was the black high school. And then (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I'm sure it was named after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Something, something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It probably goes back that far, at least the sentiment--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --'cause they weren't talking about a labor union down there.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the union, yeah.  It's interesting.  I never heard one with that name, but there are a lotta things named Union that actually go back to the Civil War.  So, Union Primary School.  Now, it was here that I read an interesting story that you decided in the third grade to name--to find out the name of all the local trees and plants.
Speaker 2: Yes, my uncle--again (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Your uncle!
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--So I came up with this hair brain idea.  They had something called 4-H so there was a lady--I guess I was about fourth grade and we--third or fourth grade and went to vacation bible school, and this lady was a 4-H extension agent for our county.  This is where my biological mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] lives.  So I decided that I would make a leaf collection and that I would name every tree; not only its local name, but I would look up every scientific name.  I'm in the third grade; how a third grader knows trees have scientific names is beyond me but I did somehow (laughter).  I think I read it somewhere because I was always reading.  So I made this elaborate tree collection--leaf collection.  And I cut out a picture of a tree and he helped me use the hand saw to do that.  I remember laminating it and putting the leaves on it and finding on the names, and it got a ribbon, but at that point I was hooked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't get any grade for this project?
Speaker 2: I got a ribbon.
Speaker 1: Did you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And this is for--so you exhibited the collec-- collection in a science fair or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, I exhibited it at this local, regional 4-H competition, so it was a competition--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then I went to the state and I got, I got a blue ribbon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's the highest honor, right?  At the state level, a blue ribbon.
Speaker 2: But I don't remember, (excuse me) at that age if we went to--I didn't get selected to go to National [4-H] Congress, I remember that and I think I was upset.  But I did get a blue ribbon.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a start.  Do you think that this has anything to do with you--your chosen profession?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know because it was--I kinda ended up in my profession by serendipity.
Speaker 1: Well I don't want you to tell the story yet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, so I'm trying to think of how 4-H influenced that.  Well, it made me feel like was that there was more than one way to ask a question and so I didn't think of it as science because nobody had presented it to us as science but--I think you just gave me a caveat which I could do for expression.  I sought more as an artist because I got to, you know, design this unusual display.  It wasn't just a box with some things--I mean, I made it very elaborate and laminated and all, shellacked and all this stuff and it was really quite fascinating and it was more the artist that made it.  So I saw 4-H more of an expression of life experiences.
Speaker 1: So how many plants did you display?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember that.  Quite a lot--I know it was pretty good.  I think they actually gave you a limit and I don't remember how many, but I know I had in excess of twenty-five different species, you know.  But I went out and keyed in and figured out what they were.
Story_ID: 27001
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oooh, my mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood]--my biological mother.  She really could cook; she can cook.  So I'm allergic to seafood now, but growing up I remember they used to have these gatherings in the summer time on the back porch where they would have these cauldron's full of clams and, and oysters and--so they were just-- it was like a crab wall, I guess you would think-- and crabs--things like that, and they would put--sit back and they would just--corn in there, and I remember that. I remember that vividly 'cause it was at my grandmother's house.  And so--fish, flounder.  Mother used to fry it and make hushpuppies. I don't know if you know what those are.  So--
Speaker 1: So what, what are they?
Speaker 2: They're like this cornmeal battered stuff but I don't know how they make 'em to this day but they would deep fry 'em, they would drop 'em in there and they would--almost it was like cornbread, but they were like sweet bread, and taste so well, and they used to give those along with your fish.  And then collard greens and cabbage and kale and turnip greens (laughter).  We also--my grandfather raised hogs, my grandmother remarried and my grandfather, the only grandfather that I knew, he raised--he was a hog farmer, and so they would have these pig pickings where they would pick a pig and slaughter it and clean it and then they would have a barbeque and invite everybody and we would sit out and eat and, you know, everybody would come around.  So--I just remember the ocean. We lived close to the sea. The smell of the ocean and my mom's cooking. And my grandmother was-- I was good at baking and I, I, I, I think this had more to do with my interest in science than anything.  I started being fascinated by yeast, my grandmother used to make these rolls and so I would follow--watch her what she was doing, and I became a bread maker. I was pretty good at making yeast rolls.
Story_ID: 27002
Speaker 1: Now you, you grew up in Portsmouth [Virginia]?  This is in--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: This is in--no, this is in, okay--
Speaker 2: --I was born in Portsmouth; I grew up in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is a little place called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--south of--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Holden Beach, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, Holden Beach, okay.  I got a little confused.  So you grew up actually in Holden Beach.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just born in Portsmouth.  I left there when I was about two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] lived in South-- Southport?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Southport [North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --but she also grew up in--we moved to her hometown, so when I was about two years old, my mother moved all of us from Port--from Norfolk [Virginia], 'cause we were living in Norfolk, to the other side of Wilmington, North Carolina where she's from--Holden Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she was born in Southport 'cause that's the only place black kids could be born.  They couldn't be born in Wilmington; they didn't have hospitals for 'em, so the local community hospital was in Southport.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And interesting, my mother was actually born on July 23, but they didn't register her birth until July 27 so she, she has two birthdays she celebrates, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting area too, the Wilmington area there.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: There's black city government there until 1911, I think, from what I understand.  And then there was a riot where white people opened up firearms at City Hall.  But now tell me, do you know that story?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not aware of that story, but I wouldn't be surprised (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: We stayed out of Wilmington growing up because I don't know if you remember the Wilmington Ten.  We had a cousin who got arrested and so pretty much we didn't go to Wilmington.  Our parents would take us to Whiteville, which was a neighboring town, or Myrtle Beach [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: That's very rare that we went to Wilmington.  The only JC Penny's was there so for school we would--for school, we'd go there.  But we pretty much went to South Carolina, which was quite fascinating.  We went to South Carolina because--to shop or--my mother was in--my dad [Frank C. Moses] was in the Navy so my mother would go down to the commissary in North Myrtle Beach so we would spend a long time at the air force base at North Myrtle Beach.
Speaker 1: And that's almost counter-intuitive to think that people would go to South Carolina rather than go to Wilmington--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --but considering that history which I just found out about (unclear) years ago--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --that Wilmington was considered a more segregated than--harder segregated place than some places in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your cousin's name with the Wilmington Ten?
Speaker 2: [Earl] Vereen, was his last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we say cousin; I don't know how close kin he is, but they say cousin and his last name was Vereen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like Ben Vereen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I know Ben Vereen is on my mother's side but I don't know exactly the relation--how close it came, but he is some kin to her too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- I should have asked more questions about my family history (laughter).
Speaker 1: It seems like a rich history, a really rich history.
Story_ID: 27003
Speaker 1: So in grade school I take it, you're reading early, you're doing math, you're doing--you're collecting, you know, leaves and, and naming all the plants, and so what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher's name is Ollie Hickman, and I made connection with her the other day on the Internet, she's on Facebook.  I still remember Miss Hickman.  And then my second grade teacher, Miss Rudell.  Miss Rudell started me into my pageant days; I have to give her credit for that (laughter).  She made me the class queen so I ran into some little thing that they did for the school and that was Miss Rudell's doing. She pushed me for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So class queen.  Now this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Second grade (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my high school teacher--and I'm trying to think of her last name; I can see her face.  She was my geometry teacher.  She and her coach--her husband were coaches. She, she taught me voice, and her name is escaping me but she was my geometry teacher.  She was the first one to recognize that I had some talent 'cause I wasn't in the Honor Society; I wasn't conformist, and I saw the Honor Society (laughter) as a conformist group.  I was a rebellious person way back then.
Speaker 1: So did you deliberately get low grades or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I do not.  No, I just do it--I didn't wanna join.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had the grades but you didn't wanna be in it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause those people were not all that--I thought it had to be an honorable honor society, so I didn't wanna--in my estimation I didn't wanna be associated with people who I didn't find honorable.  So I--those kinda things I thought were more conformist and I didn't wish to participate. But she recommended me for governess--governor's school, a recognition for my research and my math skills--Miss Page, her name was Miss Paige (ph.); she was my geometry teacher, and I took some sort of regional test and I did okay, I mean I didn't, I didn't do exceptionally well. I think I made like a 80--88 or something like that, and--but that was pretty good for a kid who wasn't--'cause you don't get those opportunities unless you're in the Honor Society, and so she saw that I was one of the students who was leading the class and so she put my name in and upon her recommendation, I went to that competition.  I did better than most of the kids in the Honor Society (laughter), but I didn't do high enough in the state but I did okay, yeah.
Story_ID: 27004
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities when you were growing up like Girl Scouts or--
Speaker 2: My sisters were Girl Scouts.  I was a tom boy, and Girl Scouts was not for me (laughter).  I played little league baseball (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know I'm not--I don't know what you're talking about (laughter).  On one hand I was a beauty queen, but I played little league baseball, I tried to play football but my mother would not allow me because my brother got injured and then she made me stop my football career, so I had a very short football career.  I was a--I was a free safety. At the time I weighed maybe fifty pounds.  I was very, very skinny, you can't tell that by now, but I used to be very small. I ran track.  I actually integrated--I actually, myself and one other young lady who since--she's deceased, but we forced the high school to have a women's track team.  We petitioned because of Title Nine, that they should have a team for girls and so we did, and so I helped to start the women's track team at my high school.  My brother ran track and I wanted to too.  My brother played football and I wanted to too (laughter).  And he played baseball and I was actually a very good baseball player.  I tell my students I played against Michael Jordon. I don't know if Michael remembers me or not, but I know that he should remember that we were the only team that beat them that year.  I think I was like twelve, so--
Speaker 1: So you played baseball against Michael Jordan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in the Wilmington Post.  He had a brother and I think his brother's name was Larry--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I think Larry was really, really, really very good athlete and they were like--a year to two years ahead of me so from eleven, twelve, thirteen, I played baseball, and when I got thirteen years old and went to high school, they told me that I could no longer play baseball, that I had to play softball. Those two sports are not equal and I knew nothing about softball and I didn't like it so I didn't, I didn't press the issue so I stopped, but I was very good.  And then when I got--
Speaker 1: Now what position did you play in baseball?
Speaker 2: I played first base.  You know I had to be good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I got into high school and they told me I had to play softball. I knew nothing about that so I refused to do that. So I ran track.  I create--well, I did cheerleading because I was a gymnast and then--I loved to tumble so I did cheerleading. I did that for like four years, I did ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] and I got interested in that, Army ROTC, because they had weapons (laughter), so I joined to learn about the M-16 [a military firearm]; it was pretty fascinating to me, and then my sophomore year I wanted to run track and they said they didn't have one so LeAnn Redwine (ph.) and myself--we forced it--women's track; we used Title Nine to have a women's track team.  The coach was very upset with me but nevertheless, they now have a women's track team.
Speaker 1: And what event did you run?
Speaker 2: I ran the four-by-four, four hundred, one hundred, two hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I threw the shot putt
Speaker 1: Okay, shot put.  So you're a little person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I, I was able to bench press my own weight, which was quite fascinating.  I weighed a hundred and five pounds and I could bench press a hundred and ten [pounds] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So that is something.  So you were active and in good shape.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was because we had nothing else to do other than go outside and play, so that's what I did.  And I followed my brothers and all the other boys. We had a lotta boys in the neighborhood.  So I was more of a tomboy, climbed to the top of trees, you know.  My aunt used to get upset.  She'd put me in nice dresses and I'd be at the top of a tree (laughter).  She'd put me in Jack and Jill and I was like the--"I don't think that I'm coming back here.  This is not my cup of tea."  So I used to follow my uncle, he would go play golf and stay at the clubhouse where he played golf.
Speaker 1: Could you play golf too?
Speaker 2: I can now; I didn't at the time because I was told it was a boys' sport.  It's very interesting, some of the things we were told.  And that--but I learned--my daughter Koren, who was my younger, was on a golf team and because of her, I took a lesson because I wanted to be able to help her.  I took golf in college but not really--didn't--you know, you took it as a PE [physical education] and you didn't really get into it.  And once I took that lesson, I--my game has been really good.  At one point, I don't have the single-digit handicap, but Korrey got sick and then I stopped playing.
Story_ID: 27005
Speaker 1: You start off at Union--
Speaker 2: Primary School [Shallotte, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: --yeah, and then what?  Did you have a middle school or junior high school(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I went over to Shallotte, S-H-A-L-L-O-T-T-E Middle School [Shallotte, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Now was that named after--was that a segregated school or a black school or what?
Speaker 2: No, it's an integrated school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --named after the town--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and I only spent one year of segregated school and then my--well actually, it's a long story. I wasn't supposed to be in school (laughter).  I started school early and the year that I started it was segregated, and then when I--they put me out because they found out I was like four, and wasn't supposed to be at school.  When I went back to school at my right--appropriate time, school was integrated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Union.
Speaker 1: Oh, Union.  Okay, all right.  Same school, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Union Primary. Then I went to Shallotte Middle, and then I went to West Brunswick High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, West Brunswick High School [Shallotte, North Carolina].  And so this is the scene of the track (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, the high school.
Speaker 1: --cheerleading and all that?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any memorable teachers that--well let me ask you this first.  When integration happened, did the black teachers go to any of these schools?  Did they mix the faculties of these schools?
Speaker 2: Yes, my parents were teachers, my aunt and uncle were teachers and the reason why they were in North Carolina, and this is interesting, they couldn't get jobs in South Carolina.  My uncle had a--it was special education, and I think he had a master's in special education, and my aunt had--her degree was in home economics and economic something, and then she went back and got a degree in mathematics so she taught math and they both had advanced training beyond their undergraduate certificates. And they couldn't get jobs in South Carolina. Because my uncle started that incorporation of the town, and they would have these meetings, and as a kid I didn't quite understand it.  In retrospect, I realize what was going on. They were having these meetings at the house to discuss the incorporation of the town because they were getting a lot of resistance and so I remember my uncle like telling me not to go certain--don't go out, don't go near the windows, you know, certain things because they were getting threats and things like that.  So I think that's why he couldn't get a job in South Carolina because he was more of a social activist, but he pressed on and got this incorporated town, and this idea was to have it like Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] for African Americans to be able to go there.  So because of his activist, he was not able to get employment in South Carolina so they took the job in North Carolina where my mother was from; my aunt is from North Carolina as well.  So I think my family influence some ways helped them get a job in North Carolina but they couldn't get in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: I'm glad you revisited the town because this is remarkable.  I think--I've never heard of it before but this is the, the two beaches over there again?
Speaker 2: North Myrtle Beach and Atlantic Beach.
Speaker 1: And your family owned a hotel?
Speaker 2: My uncle and aunt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Uncle, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--his name was Legrand Gore, and her name was Vonnie Gore, and they owned Legrand--Levon, that was the name of the hotel, down off of the Atlantic Beach.  My whole family--someone owned the next restaurant; there was a whole group of them that went in--professionals trying to make this an escape for the middle class African American family.
Speaker 1: Now I see the L names again; your mother's name starts with a L--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your aunt's name is LaVonne --
Speaker 2: Emm hmm--my aunt's name is Vonnie--Vonnie.  His name is Legrand and her name is Vonnie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--my aunt's name is Vonnie, the aunt that I was named after is Grace, and then I had a aunt named Lottie.  So Lottie, Grace, Vonnie and Luerevi, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but my mother was gonna name me an L name but my dad named me Camellia, after the flowers (laughter).
Story_ID: 27006
Speaker 1: So, okay, at West Brunswick [High School, Shallotte, North Carolina] when you were like a senior--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --what are--are you getting counseled about college?
Speaker 2: Not really.  In fact, I'll never forget, I did really well I thought in high school. I worked the whole time and did a lot of extracurricular activity.  I was the vice president of the student government association, I was in the French club, I did ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps], I was Miss ROTC, I was Homecoming Queen, I did all these extracurricular activity and I maintained--took AP [Advanced Placement] classes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You were the Homecoming Queen too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like that honor 'cause the kids voted me Homecoming Queen, so--
Speaker 1: Now is this high school still mixed basically?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.  And I just brought a friend back--I, I don't know, maybe our parents bought into that I never, I never felt the segregation that--I loved my class mates, they loved me, you know what I mean?  They were just my friends, and that was when I knew, I, I didn't--when I went to college was the first time I ever really felt discriminated upon; it was just quite fascinating--it was, I wasn't prepared for it because I was taught that people will treat you basically how you behave and what--and you know how you carry yourself, and that was the first time I got exposed to people will judge you based--or if you're male or female, and what color you are.  And those were really hard swills-- pills to swallow for me, but my high school was very integrated and to me, we were all descendants of, you know, slaves' children and slaves' owners so it was just, you know, what we knew.  And the interesting thing, we do have people on the out--what I would consider on the outliers who are outside of our particular area who sometimes try to bring animosity that did not necessarily exist.  No, it's not a--that's not utopia where I lived, but for the most part, people want the same thing, decent living, decent--decent wages, and they wanna be treated equitably, so--that's good solid earth kinda people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so you didn't get much counseling about college.
Speaker 2: No, my teacher told me to go to the North Carolina A and T [University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and that's fine 'cause all my family had gone to North Carolina A and T.  But I got into--she told me not to apply to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], I applied anyway (laughter).  I think she might have been trying to do psychology on me, I don't know. She told me not to and I did it anyhow.  She told me not to apply to Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], I did anyhow, and I applied to NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] because as a high school student--it was seventh grade, I went to 4-H Congress and I went to NC State and visited the campus and I really liked the school so I fell in love with it then.  And then I didn't realize I had a cousin--I have long history with that, with that school so my--having memories of going there to school so kinda had that--it's Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] or NC State or North Carolina A and T; we had a long history with that.  And Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], and Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  So when it came time to go to college, I ended up at State because I got in Duke, and Duke wanted me to give them ten thousand dollars.  I didn't have ten thousand dollars to give them so--you know for two semesters. Five thousand dollars a semester, that was a lot of money back then.
Speaker 1: So they weren't offering you a scholarship?
Speaker 2: No, partial scholarship.  And they had this formula--because I was in a single-family household at the time. My mother and father were separated--my biological mother and father.  My mother only graduated technical school and they handed you some kind of actuary formula that decided I wouldn't be successful there. They didn't know me, but--it's okay.  So I told them no.  Brown, I got in, and I had a very tragic event that happened in my life where I didn't wanna leave the state of North Carolina and be too far from my family.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well can you talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was, I was, you know, southern girl, met my high school sweetheart, fell in love, we were both going to go off to college, he was a year ahead of me in college--in high school, he graduated and within five days of graduating, he died.  So it was very traumatic. I didn't wanna leave.  When I graduated, I didn't wanna go too far from my home so I didn't go to Brown because of that.  I just wasn't emotionally ready to move past that.  I wanted to be able to come back and forth to my mother's house as, as needed, and in my first year, I think my mother told me, why don't I just move my stuff back home and commute every day, which is a four-hour drive one way.  I realized I was becoming too dependent so I chose NC State because I figured if I didn't go to med school which was--everybody was pushing me, that--they had agriculture and I always liked agriculture, that I could at least fall back on agriculture (laughter).  So that's kinda how I ended up there.  I never intended to get a Ph.D. 'cause nobody had ever talked to me about a Ph.D., but I ended up at NC State because I had visited there and they offered me a scholarship, and when they offered the scholarship and I had--was familiar with the school, that's how I decided to go.
Speaker 1: Now did you know anybody else at NC State?
Speaker 2: Several of my class mates went with me, but I never saw them because they were out--I started out undecided until I was in engineering for a while.  I was in science and technology and they were in liberal arts, so I didn't really get to see them.
Speaker 1: Now, now-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Well, my brother lived in Raleigh so it was, it was cool.
Story_ID: 27007
Speaker 1: You got involved in theater in high school?
Speaker 2: I got involved in theater in, in college.  I was told in high school that I should not be involved with theater at all (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why did they tell you that?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  But the other teacher didn't care for me too much because--I don't know.  So when I got to college, I did a lot of theater and there was a group I joined called Raleigh Little Theater and I joined them and did several plays with them.  I, I did 'The Wiz' of course, I did (unclear) a number of other parts I did with them and I liked working back stage in costumes and things like that so it was not only working as an actor--actress or actor, I also liked doing the set design.  I got to use power tools (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now you were, I guess this is while you were at NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] you became-- you were elected Miss Brunswick County?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't- Was that--
Speaker 1: --that has nothing to do with State, I--that was my county that I was from.  So I found out that Miss Brunswick--that they had scholarship money--so when I was in the second grade, I told you the teacher put me in--started my career off as--in pageants, right?  So I got money for winning the pageant; even though I didn't come in first place, I came in--I meant I didn't win, I came in first place so I got money that I used to go to college for--a savings bond.
Speaker 2: So you were in college at the time you won this--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in college when I won Miss Brunswick County (simultaneous)--but I'm talking about how I got into the pageant thing; it started out early.  I thought--figured that you could win money and so--I sing, and so I figured, "Hey, this is a way that I can kill two birds with one stone.  Do I really wanna be Miss America?  Probably not.  Okay, it's a nice job but it's probably not somebody like me who says whatever she feel so probably that may not be the best job."  But would I like to represent my county?  Would I like to be able to share my talent?  Would I like to be able to talk to young women in particular on a platform of my choice?  The answer was yes.  So to me it was a no-brainer.  So I got to travel, sing, perform, wear cute clothes, and they gave me money.  And I paid for my books (laughter).  It was a win-win (laughter).
Story_ID: 27008
Speaker 1: Now at North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] you tried several things you saying; you tried engineering,--
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I didn't want to be an engineer but those people kept putting me in those classes; they weren't sure.  My dad [Frank C. Moses] was an engineer and I knew I never wanted to do that; I didn't wanna live up to him and, and it was a mistake on my part; I should have probably been an engineer 'cause all the time now I'm tinkering, creating stuff, designing things, coming up with new ideas (laughter) and I was like 'the engineer in me would probably go farther,' but I didn't want the comparison.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So I decided--I think I started out undeclared, then I went to Zoology and declared was doing engineering course work, you know; everybody does the same thing.  Then they'd hand me Zo [Zoology], which I know I don't like animals and that was not gonna happen. Then I went to biology with a emphasis in chemistry, and then just before I graduated, biochemistry became a discipline and I majored in that--got my degree in biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you majored in that in your senior year?
Speaker 2: It was technically my--end of my junior year when I found out they had switched, and so I switched over and gotten biochemistry.  By that time, I was married too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: So you met your--was he a fellow student?
Speaker 2: He was a, he was a student at NC State--at--I was gonna say football--soccer player, NC Double A All-American, still holds the records of a number of things for the NC Double A--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know all that stuff.  And when I went to State, I tried to run track, and they were not interested in short distances at the time.  The coach only wanted middle distance to long-distance runners.  And when your longest event is four hundred meters and someone then tells you to run two miles, you know, it's like, 'No,' so that wasn't for me.  So I was getting up, going over, practicing with him, and then I realized I'm not going to be--I'm not going to be serious about this. I probably could be very--really a good athlete at this, but it's not what I wanna do.  And doing that, I met Sam [Samuel Okpodu].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I met Sam through someone else, this guy name Prince, he was actually a prince (laughter), and he introduced me to Sam, and we became friends and then the rest of that is history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you get married while you were still in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Emm hmm, I got married in 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was--I had finished my degree in '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're married in '85 [1985].
Story_ID: 27009
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers at North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was, there was--
Speaker 1: That you remember
Speaker 2: --there was Dr. Augustus Witherspoon which we named the student center from.
Speaker 1: And what did he teach?
Speaker 2: He was a botany teacher.  He was the provost--associate provost when I met him but he never taught me a class, he was the provost. But he was a mentor.  And then I met--I never had a teacher that I could say--at State that really stood out and was exceptional except for, you know, when I got in graduate school.  My undergraduate teacher, the one that I think the highest of, is Dr. James Knopp.
Speaker 1: And what did he teach?
Speaker 2: Biochemistry, he taught me biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked in his lab.
Speaker 1: Now what did you like about biochemistry?
Speaker 2: There was not a white answer or a black answer or a male answer or a female answer; there was the answer.  So I had just as much, you know, a good of a chance as anybody else to get the right answer.  Versus when I took my English classes that it was so subjective that it was kinda hard, and actually my English teacher put me out. (laughter). I got e-- I got put out of my English class (laughter).
Speaker 1: What English was that, compositional or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-my very first writing English class, and I actually got put in someone else's sect-- section because I challenged the teacher about his--we were talking about Harm-[Joseph] Conrad's 'Heart of Darkness' and he made a disparaging remark, so I saw, about--that the book was about the, the darkness in Africa.  I don't know still to this day how he got that, so I raised my hand which I thought you were supposed to do, and I counter-argued based on what I had been taught in high school.  I wasn't combative, I was factual, I used--I said, "I think the book is talking to the darkness in all men's heart.  It's set in the continent of Africa because it's beginning of civilization where humanity started, and it's talking about how man's inhumanity to men."  So I was nineteen years old, had challenged a teacher, the next think I knew I was out.  He told me don't come back to his class because after I had started making my assessment using the book which I really--honest to God it was very innocent. I thought that's what you were supposed to do.  I was being very Socratic, that's what my teachers had taught me.  And I was using passages to support my argument (laugher).  The next thing I know, I'm outta that class.  It was the best thing that could have ever happened to me because he put me in a--graduate student's class was all but degree.  She was the first African American teacher that I met and I to this day can't remember her name but she taught me how to write, and I asked her, I said "I'm not looking for special favors I just want to be the best writer that I can be."  And she said--I said "If you don't think I've met the standards, then don't give me a passing grade," you know.  So--but that was a, that was, that was the beginning of me learning to speak and have voice because before that when I went to college, you would be seen and not heard, you would be polite, we were not taught to speak up for ourselves.  But I think there's something visceral in me (laughter). My parents driving across the country, you know.  Somehow that's in my DNA (laughter), and that I wasn't gonna take that, and I, I, I know that it's, it's good to be polite but I also know that you don't get an omelet without breaking a few eggs so, you know--so I learned early.
Speaker 1: Now did you graduate [from North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] with any honors in '87 [1987]?
Speaker 2: I graduated--no, I wouldn't say I graduated with any honors.  I graduated--undergraduate degree--my biochemistry grades were good. I did well in biochemistry but it was the subjective classes, that's why you asked me why I liked it so. It was the subjective classes that really killed me, you know?  So I do well.  Now I, I didn't take any anthropology or--after that first year, I refused to take any kind of social science class and unfortunately, had I taken anthropology--this is what I was talking to Dr. Blakely about; had I taken that class early, I probably would be an--a linguistic anthropologist.  I fell in love with that class but I took it my second semester senior year and was too late for me to change my major, but it's just because I didn't know about it, you know, so--
Story_ID: 27010
Speaker 1: Now were you there when NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] won the [1983] basketball championship?
Speaker 2: It was my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Emm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew Lorenzo Charles, God rest his soul, and my ex-husband, because he was an athlete, I used to hang out with them and I watched the guys play with Coach V. I got to meet him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's Jim Valvano--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Derrick Wittenberg--my ex-husband and Derrick were--I don't know if they're still friends now but they used to be very close.  Sam was NC Double A All-American for soccer so all the athletes lived in the same village.
Speaker 1: I think I've heard of your husband, Sam Okpodu--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --I think I've seen--I've heard that name before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was Nigerian National Coach for the Women's Soccer Team.
Speaker 1: Did he start playing at a very young age here in the states?
Speaker 2: No, he's from Nigeria--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He started playing very young in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, he's always been--he was from there, but came here and did very well with-- Derrick Wittenberg, Sidney Lowe, they were all friends, and Lorenzo Charles were--they were his friends.  Lorenzo died a couple years ago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was it Lorenzo that tipped him the ball at the end of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Derrick threw it and Lorenzo grabbed it and dunked it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and (simultaneous) Darrell Bailey.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all good friends.
Speaker 1: Thurl Bailey, T-H-U-R-L Bailey, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now that was a heck of a game back then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That was good.
Speaker 1: --people in Chicago [Illinois]--I remember when that was going on and they'd make a three-pointer, and they would yell out "Derrick Wittenberg."
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: In Chicago, during this time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think ESPN just did a full like documentary about that--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: --and it was on like three weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't have cable, so--but I would like to go check that out.  One of the things that was interesting about that whole time was, as a freshman, I grew up in that little area where race was not the issue for me, and I got there and the first time somebody burned a cross on my door (laughter).  So the football--the basketball team that year made the campus--made all the races and stuff--I don't know, I don't know where it went but the people didn't approach you in that way; they saw us as one campus and the people saw us as one.  I think it was very good; I think athletes--athletics have a place in college life to actually help people become a community.  I saw it at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].  I think Frank Beamer should get a Nobel [Prize] for what he did.  People will not look at it, but I remember what Virginia Tech was like before I got there--before he got there. I got there around the same time, and I remember all the controversy over him picking Michael Vick at the time as the, as his quarterback.  He held a press conference--that I've never seen.  He's like "You hired me to coach, let me do my job.  You wanna win, right?"  He's like "If I don't win, then you'd come back and do this," and then the rest is history.  So I saw Blacksburg (unclear) from a community that was not inclusive to football equalizing a lot of things, so I know we--you have a lot of controversy about college athletics but I think that for someone--for some it becomes a social healer.  We don't really look at it that way but I saw Frank Beamer change the whole town of Blacksburg because they wanted to win.  So they were willing to follow his lead; the same thing with Jim Valvano, did a lotta cultural good for the university.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mr. [Andrew] Heidelberg here in Norfolk [Virginia] was the first athlete on Norview (ph.) High School's team--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --he told--they had basically similar stories, how ostracized they were until he started playing football and scoring all these touchdowns.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: And, you know (laughter), it's, it's amazing.  Any rate that's--you know, I thought I'd ask you about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was there, I can remember where I was on April 4, 1983. I was on the Brick Yard and I fell down (laughter).  I fell down a flight of stairs trying to get to the Brick Yard 'cause nobody believed--we called them the Cardiac Pack.  Every game was taking you to the wire and I remember, you know, everybody was David and Goliath.  No one believed that we were gonna beat Houston [University of Houston, Houston, Texas]. That was the biggest upset.
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: It was Drexler, Clyde Drexler, he was smooth to watch.  He was a great basketball player.
Story_ID: 27011
Speaker 1: So NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  So you, you graduated with a degree in bio--a B.S. in biochemistry in--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --1987--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: And did you--now you didn't immediately go to graduate school, right?
Speaker 2: So here's the really interesting thing.  As a undergraduate, no one told me that I wasn't supposed to take graduate points because nobody helped me--other than Dr. Knopp.  So I kept taking these graduate courses.  So by the time I decided--something happened and I decided that I needed to be able to have employment and take care of myself and at the time we just had Samilia [daughter], and that I realized that I needed to be able to be self-sufficient.  I had taken, by that time, nine hours of graduate course work 'cause I kept taking these biochemistry classes 'cause I liked the subject. It was just one of those things where it came naturally and I saw--I don't know, I visualized it, I don't know, I can't explain to you but I understood it, it worked for me.  So when I got ready to go to graduate school, I applied for graduate school. I think it was 1989, 1990, I had nine hours of course work that nobody told me I wasn't supposed to have.  I was taking 600 level courses but I had taken all the undergraduate ones so I kept on taking them.  So when I got to graduate school, I had enough course work and I petitioned the graduate school and said "Well I've already shown that I can do master's level work, why would I get a master's?"  So they, they agreed.  They made me take twelve hours the next semester, I think I took twelve hours of 400 level--excuse me, 600 level classes.  I remember one of the classes was called Biochemistry 666 (laughter), and then I took morphology, or some course that was essentially a level--botany course, and then I think I made a 4.0 [GPA] that semester and they agreed that I could just go ahead and get a Ph.D., so I didn't do a master's.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So--okay, so I have some names down here of mentors.  Were these all people at NC State?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure not.
Speaker 1: Maria Ragland-Davis, James Knopp, Wolfgang Gross, Arlene Maclin, Roseanne--
Speaker 2: Runte?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Roonti?  What is it?  Is it--
Speaker 2: Runte (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It's Runte, rather.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm, Runte.
Speaker 1: Wendy Boss?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: And Esther Terry.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Maria Ragland Davis was a graduate student when I was an undergraduate and I worked with a lady--in my biochemistry we had to do a thesis project.  And it was at that time I realized that I didn't like to kill anything, and so Med School, handling animals was not going to be my cup of tea.  And so in order to finish my undergraduate degree, I had to do a graduate--I had to do a thesis on iron uptake and the level of messenger RNA transcription in reticular sights of tadpoles (laughter)--terrible; that's thirty years ago and I still remember it.  So I didn't wanna do the study 'cause you had to kill them--you had to sacrifice the animals.  So it was fine taking the animals up, injecting them, and to--doing the iron uptake load study; I had no problem with that.  But after seven days, I had to sacrifice the animal and I could not pick those tadpoles up and cut them in half as I was ordered to do.  So I remember crying, and I wasn't gonna finish my degree.  I would--this one course was gonna keep me from finishing my undergraduate degree.  So Maria was the undergraduate student in the lab, and she came in and she told me, she said "Failure is not an option."  And so she said "This is all you have to do."  So there were like twenty or thirty tadpoles.  She said "See, this is all you have to do.  See what I'm doing?  See what I'm doing?"  She kept cutting it (laughter).  She was just sacrificing them and then she said--after she had one left, she said "Now you do it."  So I sat there with that one tadpole, I closed my eyes, and I did it.  So now she was able to tell the professor that I sacrificed them; I didn't sacrifice all of them, but I did participate in it.  Well, we lost contact over the years; Maria went on and finished her Ph.D. and got it in plant pathology, and about four years ago, she was down at the University of Alabama, Huntsville [Huntsville, Alabama] and Amy Bishop came in the room and killed her.  Shot her.  Amy didn't get tenure and she murdered Maria.  Maria had been instrumental in my finishing my degree and had helped me out as a young Ph.D. student--a postdoc.  She had helped me out there.  So I often mention her because without Maria, I wouldn't have gotten the first degree.  Wolfgang (ph.) came about when I was getting my Ph.D., he's from Germany and he treated me.  He was the postdoc that trained me in everything that I know, made sure that my research Ph.D. teacher, Dr. Wendy Boss, understood that I had--I was very good at theory but at the time, I really had very little experience and Wolfgang trained me and I'm grateful to him.  The research that I do right now on biosensors is because of Wolfgang and unfortunately, about seven years ago, he passed away.  So I mention them because they were foundational; without Maria, I wouldn't have gotten the B.S. degree and without Wolfgang I wouldn't have gotten the Ph.D., and Dr. Boss was--took a chance on taking me and I was a little older than the other students and so she mentored me.  Dr. Knopp was the person who saw me as a biochemistry undergraduate and said "Hey, come work in my lab," and didn't care--I think I may have been the first black kid in that program.  He didn't care about that. He was a white man from Illinois, I think it's Urbana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-Champaign [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere like that; he didn't care (laughter).  He's like "You can come work in my lab, work in my lab."  So, you know, he was very open and he used to try to get me to go sailing with him and I was like "I don't swim, so it's no way I'm gonna swim" (laughter).  I can swim, but I'm not swimmer so Dr. Knopp you can forget that one.  But was--just treated me like a person, so he was a good mentor; still is a mentor, and when I want to teach something and I'm not quite sure, I will call him and ask him "James, how can I do this?  You got any ideas?"  So he is--he was a very good teacher.  And Arlene Maclin, without saying, has been instrumental in my life.  I met her as a young professor at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and she mentored me and helped me to get my first funding.
Story_ID: 27012
Speaker 1: All right, Dr. [Arlene] Maclin, we were talking about her during the break about--you're very close to Dr. Maclin, right?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, she's been like--we're like sisters.  I met her when I was at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] as assistant professor and she had started the physics program. She'd written a proposal for the physics program there.  She was actually probably on her way out but when I first came over, we had a mutual friend, Dr. Donald Lyons, and Dr. Lyons took me over to meet Dr. Maclin and we all had a meeting at her house and--with her husband and it was really nice, so it gave me some people to know.  But at the time, my children were really small so I was pretty much trying to juggle career, life choices, and the fact that I was--I had moved from Blacksburg [Virginia] with the girls by myself.  I had stepped out on faith and brought 'em to Hampton and--so Arlene was instrumental in helping me get my first funding, my first NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] grant. She used to read my stuff, and tell me it wasn't good or yes it was good, and just was very encouraging.  We've been friends now for close to, I guess, fifteen years.
Speaker 1: And you're still collaborating on projects--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.  She has the same worth ethic, you know.  It's not--I don't have--it's, it's--I don't have to say, "We got a deadline," and I got to beg you for it 'cause I don't like that. I think your work should call you.  Your work should dictate to you what you need to do and I shouldn't have to remind you, so she's the same way so we get along well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about Esther Terry now?
Speaker 2: Dr. Terry is the--was the interim president at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], and I recently met her, and she's just so regal and such a classy person and has taken the time to talk to me and to give me career advice and just a really, really nice person. I've only known her now for two years.
Speaker 1: Now is she the same Esther Terry who is at the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was there in the--
Speaker 2: As the provost--
Speaker 1: yeah, and the chair of the African American studies department.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, too.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was the interim president for Bennett College for women; I think she just stepped down, July 1 will be her last day.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're working on your Ph.D. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And Roseanne--I'm sorry, Roseanne Runte was my mentor from Old Dominion [University, ODU, Norfolk, Virginia].  I did an American Council on Education Fellows Mentor and she allowed me to shadow her; she was the President of ODU and I got a chance to follow her around and see what a president does.
Story_ID: 27013
Speaker 1: Now what was your [doctoral] dissertation about?  I know it has something to do with carrot cells, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So my dissertation was trying to figure out an enzyme that we all--that all living cells have and how it regulated, in particular, in plants.  So this enzyme is a--what we call lipid making enzyme and, phospholipid bilayer, and so my research was trying to characterize it--isolate it and characterize it and I did that.  So I purified that phosphatidylinositol kinase enzyme from carrots suspension culture cells and studied how environment factors affected its activity, how it protected cells, making more lipids or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm not sure I quite understand that but--
Speaker 2: So there's an enzyme-
Speaker 1: --so a lipid is--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: So we all have membranes, so lipids are the things that compr--the monomeric composition for a membrane.  And so I studied the enzyme that made those lipids that make up the membrane.  And so the first lipid is a--called a kinase which adds another phosphate to subpart-- subpart of the lipid, and so when it gets in the membrane, we call it a phospholipid. That means it has phosphate added to it.  And so I just studied how that was made and I used carrot, carrot system to study it in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And why the carrot system?
Speaker 2: Because they are something that you could regenerate in the lab really quickly, and you can study them and you can--they proliferate very easily and you can get large volumes of starting material.  And it was the organism of choice in our particular lab and we were using it as a model system to study membrane biogenesis--how, how organisms make new, new lipids.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So now you published this research, right?  I mean there are, I suppose, a number of papers came out of the research.
Speaker 2: Yes, for my dissertation, I had four papers to come out of that one, yeah, so I wrote it like chapters.  I wrote one on the Bio-Nebulizer, which was the instrument I helped to show proof of concept and then I had the phosphatidylinositol [PI] kinase one, and then the nuclear PI kinase.  In addition to having membranes in the, in the--around the cell, you have nuclear envelope too, and that same enzyme is not only associated with making membranes for the plasma membrane, but also for the nuclear envelope, so I studied that. No one had studied that before.  And then I have one other paper where I purified the enzyme.  So I had like four papers for my dissertation from that, from that research.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what's the instrument that you developed?
Speaker 2: I--someone invented it at University--let me see--Indiana University [Bloomington, Bloomington, Indiana], Dr. Suzuki.  And they didn't have a purpose for it so I looked at it and I said "I think I can use it to break open the tissue culture cells and get the nuclei out without disrupting the whole cell," and I showed how to do that.  And so it won Instrument of the Year in like 1999, and I'm sure Dr. Suzuki and NC State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North California] (laughter) got the patent and all the spoils that goes with the victory (laugher).  I was just the graduate student (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, so this is the instrument that Dr. Suzuki came up with but he didn't have immediate use for it-
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: --and you were able to (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) I showed him how to do it.
Speaker 1: --you were able to apply it to a problem that you were trying to solve.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got beautiful pictures and I don't where that--that stuff unfortunately got misplaced, I should say.  But it never got with me (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's somewhere in the archives of NC State.  It should be in my dissertation, wherever that is.  Yep.
Story_ID: 27014
Speaker 1: So this is 1994?--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --that you received your Ph.D.?  And so what did you do immediately afterwards?  Did you do a postdoc?
Speaker 2: So if you look at my bio, you'll kinda see I think there's a typing error, so in 1992 I left and went to Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] and took a job--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and came back in '94 [1994] and finished up my Ph.D.  So in '92 [1992], I had already finished all my class work because if you remember, I told you that I finished all my research--I finished all my courses in one semester, 'cause I didn't know any better.  I had taken nine hours before I got there. They made me--I shouldn't have done this but I now know in hindsight, I took twelve hours of graduate work my first semester in school. Coursework-- 600 level course work.  I had no clue. I did really well and I worked as a post--as a teaching assistant and I did my research.  So after two and a half years, I finished all my research.  I finished all four of those projects that I just told you about in two and a half years.  So when everybody else was sleeping, I was working, as I had a target, I knew what I was gonna do, I had an objective.  So by the time I finished all my work, all I needed to do was to write.  At that time, my ex-husband took a job at Blacksburg [Virginia] and I was, I was with my daughter--with my younger daughter. He took the oldest daughter and went to Blacksburg and then we had Elizabeth who is the second daughter, and I did not want to be in two different places, so I moved Elizabeth and we moved to Blacksburg.  And so I took a--Tech offered me a job so I took the job, I was all but degree--while I wrote and finished up my degree, so I started my postdoc before I got my degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So in '94 [1994], I finished, went back and finished and defended my, my Ph.D. in June of '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, so the postdoc was--
Speaker 2: Started in 1992.
Speaker 1: So it didn't last to '96 [1996], did it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this is right here, that you were doing postdoc at Virginia Tech in 1996.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then I took my first job at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Now you were working on some project on--on a plant pathology, physiology and weed science, right?
Speaker 2: That was a department.
Speaker 1: Oh that's--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I worked in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, that's the department you worked in.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I worked looking at antioxidant enzymes and oxidative stress in plant development and how stress affects the formation of those membranes that I was talking about and how the cells have mechanisms to get rid of that stress.  And I studied it not only at crops, but I studied it at co-process now.  I still look at the antioxidant pathway now, that's one of the things I do.
Speaker 1: So stress in terms of a plant would mean the deprivation of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Drought, of heat, water, of course--of drought water, salt, salinity, mechanical stress.
Speaker 1: Okay, which would mean like people trampling in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Or animals-
Speaker 1: Animals-
Speaker 2: --chewing on it (laughter).
Story_ID: 27015
Speaker 1: In '96 [1996], that same year, you joined the faculty of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I took the girls and came to Hampton.
Speaker 1: And how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Hampton was a miracle.  So I had a very-- Maria [Ragland Davis] was very instrumental in my life. She was there at a very trying time and I had a life-altering--I'll say it that way--experience, and I had to make a decision and I really didn't wanna raise my daughters in an environment that was not--that I perceived not to be healthy.  And I came to the conclusion--I didn't grow up with that, and I didn't the girls growing up-- we're parents, we're at odds, and unfortunately I decided that that was not the best situation and I made the decision it would be better for the girls to be with one sane parent than two crazy ones. So I decided to--I didn't know what I was gonna do; my job was ending at Blacksburg [Virginia] and I didn't see me getting another one there.  I had a lot of--there were a lot of issues at Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] at the time that I'm glad now that I look back are, are probably still there, but not as prominent as they were, and I just didn't feel a part of that group.  And that was--racially was a struggle, and I was having personal problems.  So I had told Dr. Gordon, William Gordon--I should have had his name down as one of my mentors at Howard University, at a conference, he asked me for my CV [curriculum vitae]. I never thought about it.  I gave it to him and about six months later, I get this call from this lady at Hampton, her name is Elaine Eatman.  Well, the only problem was that I never told anybody at Hampton that I was interested in a job there but he had forwarded my resume to her for her to look at, and they were looking for a plant physiologist and so I applied for the job at Hampton.  I went down and they called me and then she got my resume and said she wanted me to interview.  I came down I interviewed with her and it was, it was very interesting.  They offered, you know, me a position at Hampton and I took it and never looked back, and the girls moved.  So I say it's a miracle because I never really told anybody other than Dr. Gordon. I never really sent my stuff through.  I didn't know Hampton was even looking for anybody.  But because he, he was able to forward my stuff, I then applied for the job, once I found out it was there, and I got the opportunity to come and interview and I got the job.  Hampton was like a (balm?) for me; I love that school.  Even though at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] there's a nice healthy rivalry between the school, Hampton will always be special to me.  It was my first HBCU [historically black college and university] and it came into my life at a time that I needed it.  And so I still try to make sure and give to it; I don't give to it at a level that I tithe at my home church (laughter).
Speaker 1: Are you referring to the family atmosphere of the school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I'm referring to the--I can't explain it, I don't know if it's a family atmosphere 'cause I don't necessarily describe it as a family as much; it was a place whereas an intellectual, I was able to really express myself.  No one was--I never had this feeling that anyone was working against me.  Now I've been places like that--that I will not say that I've felt that everybody wasn't in the same vein trying to make you--to move you forward, but at Hampton I felt an opportunity to grow as a professional.  There was a lot of professional development with regards to grant writing. Like I like to write, and they took advantage of that fact, and they helped me to write, they didn't hinder me to write.  In think in the first year I got to Hampton, I begged the dean for $2,000, and within two years of getting that $2, 000, I had written a proposal and I got $200,000, and within three years of getting the $200,000, I had gotten $2 million only because they had the infrastructure.  Not everything that you had, but the attitudes were there that helped you.  They weren't work inhibitive attitudes. They were like 'The world is yours, go get it,' you know?  So it will always be special to me.  And the thing that's really funny is that there's, you know, a rivalry between Hampton and Norfolk State now and I work at Norfolk State now.  I still (give to?) Norfolk State because that's my home but Hampton is like, you know, your Uncle Pete; everybody has one but you can't talk about it (laughter).  So I don't let anybody talk bad about Hampton to me.  So--but I'll always love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hampton, the president at the time and the person that's been president for a long, long time is Dr. [William] Harvey, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Harvey was the president when I was there, yeah. He remembers me I'm sure.  He says to ask more kinds of questions.
Story_ID: 27016
Speaker 1: You're writing proposals there at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and for--what were some of the projects you were trying to fund?
Speaker 2: Well, I wrote a proposal to  NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] to fund my research in the microgravity research that I was doing, I wrote a proposal for my, National Science Foundation [NSF] for a Research Experience for Undergraduates [REU], I wrote one to NIH [National Institute of Health] as part of the MARC [Minority Access to Research Careers] proposal which was part of a larger group of proposals that we all wrote which we considered AREA Grant [National Institute of Health's Academic Research Enhancement Award], I participated in the writing of an ANPS, Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority in Science, so I was actively involved in a number of those proposals.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about microgravity, now that's just something that NASA is interested in, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) What happens to plants in low gravity situations, right
Speaker 2: Right, well I'm no longer doing that research but one of the things we know that plants have responsive genes that turn on a response to changes in gravitational pull, so right now you can take a--you've probably done this.  You grow a plant, if you look at the plant on the side, you know--if you've probably seen this, and then plant will grow towards--grow up, so how does a plant know that's up?  So we looked for genes that we could disrupt because those are gravity sensing genes, and we looked for that and that's what I was trying to do at Hampton.  I designed something I called The Modular Plant, Plant Module PM--MPM; I never got to drop it in the drop tower, and what we were trying to do was look at those early events of development.  What I had found over the years with the inositol enzymes is that those enzymes got turned on very early in, in development.  So anytime you're sensing the change, they return normal within--actually within seconds, which--at the time when we were telling people this, they didn't believe it to be true, and then Dr. Bolson, along with others, have shown that this is really--a change in the transcript level occurs very quickly.  So I--my question is what happens very early in microgravity?  And so I had developed a way to study this; unfortunately, I never got a chance to do it, I left Hampton, went to Elizabeth City State [University, Elizabeth City, North California], by the time I got the thing in place--my contract moved to Elizabeth City State, I--the person I was working with at NASA retired or left, and so I was never able to fulfill that research but I did design the module and my understanding is that it works, so I did do that, and that's one of the things that was very successful.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about this module.  I had a note about it here but what was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I designed it in such a way that as it dropped through the tower, that you could actually slowly or quickly freeze the material so by the time it got to the end of the tower which was a thirty second drop, that you could take lapse times, so I had it designed where you could--it would kill plants after one second, it would kill some of the--it'll freeze other plants after five seconds, and so forth and so on. So you could do what we call a dose response.  So you could look at--isolate the tissue and see what happened early on the first second of dropping and see what we call subtractive DNA analysis to see if there was any genes turned on or off as a result, as you would do the gravitational but I never got a chance to do it.  So the thing is created, we showed it work, I never got to do the experiments.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to see the results of how it worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got to do it, I just never got to do the experiments.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It worked.  We designed it and it worked, we built it but I never got to--'cause the person I was working with got changed to a different mission and then NASA Glenn [Center for Research, Cleveland, Ohio] was not doing the drop tower research anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was Project Oak at Hampton?
Speaker 2: That was the REU (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That was the--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That was the Research Experience for Undergraduates.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I named it Project Oak, Opportunity Alliance Network, after the fact that I was bringing students in--college students from all over the country, to come to an HBCU, spend eight weeks with us and do research centered around the Emancipation Oak that's a live--living laboratory.  So we did pathology, we isolated whatever pathogen was from the leaves.  We did micro-- molecular biology where did the isolation of DNA from both prepared and herbarium stored samples and we did some biochemistry in analyzing the different types of iso-enzymes that were seen in the leaves in response to different stresses.  So it was just simply using the Emancipation Oak as the foundational research project for our--what we were doing.
Story_ID: 27017
Speaker 1: Now you wrote a chapter for a book called 'See Jane Win,' right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved in that project?
Speaker 2: I was on Oprah, and I was on Oprah because I wrote a letter about my mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood].  My mother is probably the only person who told Oprah Winfrey that she was not gonna come to her show.  So my mother--they wanted my mother to fly; I wrote it about how my mother always encouraged us to do well, and how she raised all five children by herself.  I just wrote--I, I don't know, I was up one night, I had insomnia, I saw it on the Internet and I said "I'm gone write to this," and I wrote something about my mom and I got a call from the producers asking my mother to come on the show.  Well my mother decided that she did not want to fly to Chicago [Illinois] and then so I got another call and they asked me if I would come and be a guest and so I was a guest, and I talked on a segment about how to encourage young women to pursue math and science.  And so I talked about how my mother--what my mother and my aunt did for me, and used it as a way of encouraging young women.  So I got involved with C.G. Wynne because Dr. Sylvia Rimm was on the show that day and so she wanted to follow up with me and--actually the book is 'How Jane Won,' was the chapter that I was in, and then recently--they're updating that, and she chose my story as one to update and so I just gave her the update on what I've been doing for the last ten years.  So hopefully, that comes out very soon as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And the story you wrote about your mother was called--
Speaker 2: I just wrote an essay about how my mother encouraged me to be, you know, to reach--to dream big and never to, you know--she never made excuses; hard work, no excuses.  It was pretty much how she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And how did Oprah come to read it?
Speaker 2: I was on Oprah's website. I was up one night (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, okay, all right. You wrote it onto her website. I wouldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--there was a link and they sent it to me and I was like, "Oh, I'll just answer this," and I answered it. Didn't realize it was going to go to Oprah's website.  I don't know who sent it to me but I answered it and then I get this email and I was like--and then I get a phone call and they wanted my mom, and my mom was like "I'm sorry Miss Winfrey, but I don't fly" (laughter).  So I was like "Mom, you're" (unclear) (laughter), "you'd be the first person for Oprah to know" (laughter).  "Tell those people 'if you send a car for me, I'll come, but I'm not getting in anybody's airplane. I've lived to be this old and I'm gonna live longer" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So okay, so this is--this is in 1999, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And in 2000, you also appeared on some C-Span book tours about this book right?  I mean Sylvia Rimm's book.
Speaker 2: Yes, you know a lotta things don't you? (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's in here.  All I got do is follow the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes, I was in C-Span several times talking about the book and been to a lot of speaking engagements and did some things for the Girl Scouts. She came up with 'See Jane Win for Girls,' and the Girl Scouts adopted--and then I got recognized by the Girl Scouts of America and went up--went to one of their national meetings to be recognized.  And I was supposed to be meeting Deborah Roberts, which is married to Al Roker and that March, they said it was gonna be a snow storm so she didn't come. So I tease--I, I wanted to meet Al and tell him that it was his fault because he over-predicted the weather (laughter).  And I didn't get to meet Deborah but yeah, we got recognized by the Girl Scouts of America for our contributions to the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're still busy.  In 2000, you wrote a manual on plant physiology.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Is that true?  Yeah?
Speaker 2: So I got to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] where I didn't have as many resources as I did at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] or North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], and I was very frustrated and I said "What do you do if you gotta do--if you're at a university, how can you leverage what you already have?"  And so I didn't like the way that research books were written. I didn't like the way they were written so--a lot of my exercise books were written just--you do these didactic exercises but none of them really had any real tie together, so I decided to write a book where you could take either one--take an experiment and you can follow up with--follow the experiments to have a project, so it was project-based learning.  So the students wouldn't have--the people who had limited resources could leverage what they have.  And so Morton Publishers picked that up and I've been--they've been using it and it's been pretty good.  I get a royalty check every now and again that's nice.
Speaker 1: Very good, very good.  How long did it take to write this?
Speaker 2: I started writing when I didn't have a job.  I got out of the job at Virginia Tech--between Virginia Tech and Hampton, and I started working on the idea and the idea--I probably worked on it about five months before I got a job at Hampton, and the guy came to my--a guy came to sell me books and I said "Hey, I got a text book that I--I got this text book I've been writing, would you be interested in looking at?"  And he said "Yeah."  So that's how it started.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I was my own publicist, you know. "Hey, you want-"
Speaker 1: Is it--does it have a distribution in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they distributed it on their website and I don't know who's using it now; I haven't updated it.  It needs to be updated but I haven't.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea how many schools used it?
Speaker 2: I have no idea how many schools use it.  I don't know. I forgot how many royalty checks I'm supposed to get but I don't know, I don't have any idea.  Maybe the publisher could tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I was hoping that you'd tell us (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I don't know the answer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm not gonna interview the publisher (simultaneous)--it kinda reminds me of Dr. Lloyd Ferguson who we interviewed who--the chemistry professor who--it was said that his book integrated most of the universities in the South before desegregation and they were using his book and didn't know it.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, well I know ODU [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] was using the book and I didn't know it; they're right next door to me and I walked in the lab and said "Hey, that's my book." (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: As I said, it must be a great feeling.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Especially that it's being used for the intention that you, you know, you planned it for.
Story_ID: 27018
Speaker 1: You were appointed department chair at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] in 2001, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was that an unexpected honor or--
Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. [William] Harvey came to me and asked me would I be willing to be, do the department chair, and the person that had been doing the department chair had been doing it for twenty-five years, and I told him that I would be willing to do the department chair.  I felt, you know, I could do a good job and I thought that that person--she really wanted to step down, so I took the chair over. The only problem was there was not an increase in salary, just responsibility, and I just couldn't--that's one of the things that I--I probably would still be at Hampton right now.  I just couldn't make it off of what I was making for the girls, so it kind of forced me to look for jobs other places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So I left.
Speaker 1: Before we get you to leave, can you tell us about Dr. Douglas Depriest?  This was a math teacher that--he's someone that you eulogized so he must have been important, so tell us about him.
Speaker 2: So Doug and I only worked together at Hampton when he as at Hampton during that time--very briefly.  He was at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and he would come over and do math lessons for us.  When I left Hampton, he came over and I guess we had just a slight overlap because I remember one time he came in to tell me about Beta Kappa Chi; I had been Beta Kappa Chi now, at that time, maybe six years but he's gone come and tell me about it 'cause you know I didn't come from a HBCU [historically black college and university] so I wouldn't have known about it this.  But I learned a lot about Beta Kappa Chi from Dr. Eatman who was the--and Dr. Johnny Jones.  So Doug and I--I left and came to Elizabeth City [University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and then eventually came to Hampton--I mean Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Beta Kappa Chi is like a honor society?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's a national scientific honor society.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was started because African Americans could not have Phi Beta Kappa chapters on their campus.  You could be a member, but you cannot have a Kap--chapter, so we started a Beta Kappa Kai.  So when I came to Norfolk State, I became the national president in 2004 I think it was.  And so I was trying to get the organization to get back on its feet because we have a long legacy in history, and I thought we owed it to the next generation to leave them something that was healthy, and at that time, we were not moving in a very healthy manner.  So I never wanted to be president for life.  So after I had gotten things pretty much on the way, Doug, who was at Hampton, challenged and said he wanted to be the next president so I re--I stepped down, cast my vote for him. Because my idea was to get it somewhere that somebody would want to be the president 'cause for the last--for the four years that I took it over, nobody really wanted to be in that position. So then we became pretty good friends.  Thinking back as a, as a young professor when I was there, you know he was--he's just like, I don't know, he was very stately. He just had this presence about him and the--you know--mathematician, very smart. He used to always wear his glasses right here [gestures with hand] and--you know, like an accountant.  He just was really cool, and he was the national president after I was, and we decided that 2009 was my last year and we hosted together the Beta Kappa Kai meeting between Norfolk State and Hampton, so we had the regional meeting here--I mean the national meeting here.  We had over five hundred participants to come to the meeting and Doug and I were co-hosts or co-sponsors of it.  So his death--he was young. His death kinda shocked me.  So they asked me to write his eulogy--write a prose on him and I did. I wrote my perspective about how he was always--he was just, I don't know, he was just cool, he was just cool and smooth, cool--I don't know if he was--I think he was in a fraternity, I can't remember. Maybe--I think he was an Alpha.  And he always had his business suit on, you know, he just like a really well put-together person and always me treated me with dignity and respect. Never--I mean "Okpodu, you gone do such-and-such-and-such for me?"  You know, he was one of those kinda things 'cause he knew that I was a matter-of-fact kinda person.  So-"bottom line, I need this done."  so I got to do a resolution for him. I thought it was necessary because he came into the leadership position of our organization, he was a very good role model for the young men I thought--and young women, because he treated everybody with dignity and respect.  He was the quintessential professional and he brought the essence of what we wanted in our society--the integrity back to it, and so whenever Doug said he wanted to be the president, I had no problem with that 'cause I knew that things were gonna be done right so I didn't challenge him 'cause that's how we became close.  And it's funny you would mention this because I was just looking at his obituary the other day. I was like I cannot believe--'cause he died so suddenly. He had a heart attack, I think, and--very young.  I sometimes feel like he--we work ourselves to death. I don't wanna do that, you know?
Story_ID: 27019
Speaker 1: So in 2001, did you leave Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] to go to Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] or were you on like a leave or something?
Speaker 2: No, so I actually took a position as an endowed professor of biology at Elizabeth City and what was really interesting is that day I was on--you were talking C-Span and all that, that morning I was being interviewed by the CBS Morning Show about my work on the Emancipation Oak, and that afternoon I went for the interview at Elizabeth City, and the wonderful thing was they had saw the--that had saw my morning interview.  So I kinda got the job (laughter).  I was really happy, and I really liked the job because I really wanted to bring my girls--I'm from North Carolina. I wasn't able to really make what I needed to take care of them at Hampton. I was working way too many hours and having to do extra just to make ends meet, meaning I had to work extra programs, write extra grants, it was just difficult.  So when I took the job at Elizabeth City State, it put me in a position where I could take care of my girls financially and I still had some personal issues to work out--financial; I wasn't divorced at the time and I didn't foresee divorce (laughter).  I--it's kinda interesting. It was not what I want, but as I said earlier, you can't always get what you want, but it's worked out.  So when I went to Elizabeth City, that was really nice because not only did I get the endowed chair position, they gave me money to do research, so I did research while I was there.  That was really nice.
Speaker 1: So they didn't give you money at Hampton to do research?
Speaker 2: No, I had to earn all my money to do research.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had to raise it myself.  The thing about living in Elizabeth City at the time, I look back, I mean I really--probably if I was to do it now, I'll probably stay.  But it was really difficult because my daughter got sick and I was running back and forth between North Carolina and Norfolk [Virginia] and Hampton [Virginia] where our daughters were.  So I was very grateful when the opportunity came to work at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] because I was doing that four-hour commute back and forth and I, I needed to be in one place, so I left Elizabeth City after a year or so being there and came to Norfolk State to be the chair.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did that position come about?  Were you looking for a position at Norfolk State?
Speaker 2: They found me.  Sort of like with Hampton. They found me and said "Would you be willing to apply for the job?"  I think she saw me at--the dean saw me at some kinda meeting and I applied for the job, interviewed and was offered the position and decided to come, but I made the decision--I was tenured, I went from Hampton being--I was tenured as an assistant professor and the reason why I couldn't be a tenured associate professor, I had met all the qualifications for tenure but I hadn't been in the rank long enough, so Hampton only made me a tenured associate--assistant professor.  So technically, it gets like I stepped over a master's degree, I never was a tenured associate professor. I went from assistant professor to a full professor, so when I came to Hamp--to Norfolk, I made that clear that one of the things I learned early on is that women, we're not taught to negotiate, but I, I read a couple of books about negotiation (laughter), and I started negotiating for myself and I figured the worst they could say was "No, I couldn't have it," but then again they might meet me half way and I negotiated for me to win, and I expected that they would negotiate for them to win.  I didn't look for the win-win, I looked for Camellia to win.  And so with Camellia winning, they got what they needed as long as I got what I needed (laughter).  I changed my whole mind set on that. It was a learned skill because it was not something I was taught to do and I've heard another--a lot of female colleagues tell me the same thing.  So when I got here, I negotiated for what I thought would be the best, and I told them I would not come without tenure.  And so the board granted me (unclear) tenure and I came and stayed.  And I've been here ever since.
Story_ID: 27020
Speaker 1: So, joined the faculty here [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] in 2003--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --Right?
Speaker 2: [Nodding head].
Speaker 1: What was the climate like when you got here in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well we did a SWOT anal-- I did a SWOT [Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats analysis], and what I did was I spoke to everyone that was in the department, students, faculty and, and staff, and I got an idea what they wanted 'cause you know when you're the new person in town, people don't know what quite to think of you and your reputation may precede you, and so I didn't know what had or they hadn't been told but I'll try to make measurable outcomes that we could each know when we met those outcomes and that--so we had assessment-based evaluation-- performance evaluation that was not just based on whether I liked you or not but I actually had a rubric that we could actually use to evaluate fairly.  So if I was writing five proposals and you wrote none, you-- both of us shouldn't get a five when it comes to scholarly activity, so I tried to set some standards; we didn't have any.  We had no research going on when I got here, they had a person who was very prolific before I got here-- (Dr. Bimpong?), and he was leaving.  And so I helped the department to reestablish our research core. We developed core facilities for faculty and we developed five new labs for people to do research, and then I started recruiting research active faculty.
Speaker 1: Now what were these five new labs dedicated to?
Speaker 2: Well they were upstairs. One-- the first lab was a core lab and the other lab was--on the second--third floor was a research lab that the previous department chair had, and then we have labs on the fourth floor that the other young researcher and myself, we took those labs.  So they were research spaces. We didn't have any that people could do research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were the director of the Group for Microgravity--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and Environmental Biology here?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] funding--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so we were--used to be called Center for Microgravity but when I got to Norfolk State, they said "You can't use the word 'Center'" so I figured nobody could tell me that I couldn't call myself a group (laughter), so I changed my semantics to Group.
Speaker 1: Why the semantic ban?  What was that about?
Speaker 2: I have no clue.  I can't speak on that, I have no idea.  'Cause in the proposal that they took and signed off, it said Center, so--change in the new sheriff, new regulations.  I said "Keep it movin', I'm not gone sweat the small things."  I didn't think anybody could keep me from calling myself a group so we have a group (laughter).  And so the group--right now we've been active now since 2003. We first started with NASA funding to give us core equipment and we've been going strong ever after.
Speaker 1: So is their undergraduate research going on in microgravity now? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) No, we don't do microgravity research--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --NASA no longer funds us. We do environmental stress biology research.  We keep the name out of respect. Just because something is old doesn't mean you should get rid of it (laughter), so we try to keep the historic name to give homage to where our--how our center started, so we still call it the Group for Microgravity.
Story_ID: 27021
Speaker 1: I have a quote that's in the outline where you say that you just love photosynthesis--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do (laughter).
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I do. I can't help it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the more I like it, the more I understand it, the more I read it, the less I understand, and it's one of those things; it's fascinating.  Yeah, it's like well--so I, I do, I absolutely like it. I love it.
Speaker 1: It is a process, that's why we learn it in grade school, by which plants convert sunlight and water and nutrients from the soil into sugar, right?
Speaker 2: That's part of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and will you expound?
Speaker 2: So photosynthesis we think of as a dual process.  You have those things that occur in the light which we call photo-- photochemical reactions, so a lot of things that happen at the cell membrane. Remember I was telling you I wasn't interested in lipids?  So something happens at the lipids with a series of proteins that actually helps that light energy to be eventually used when there's not light, to fix the carbons.  So you're right in the summation that it's for making the sugar, but it's a two-step process, and how one happens absolutely depends--photochemical depends on the light, and then you have a biochemical that can happen long as the things that are made are there, so how do those two things get coordinated?  How they get regulated, where are they in a cell?  How do they influence other things to happen?  How do they move the things that are carbohydrates once they're made from the source material?  How they get to the sink? All those things are very, very fascinating because in the end run, it's the biomass change, so the biomass--how much photosynthesis is able to go, how much biomass you're able to produce either for food or for energy 'cause you can use plants for ethanol protection and all that.  So I'm really interested in that process, it's a step one kinda process.  I have an organism that can do photosynthetic things without light. How do you like that?  (Laughter). Don't ask me (laughter). It's cool.  So, so that's why it's like wow, makes me more--wanna study that more, so how are you able to take on photosynthetic processes without light?  Because in higher plants, light is absolutely required for the photochemical process, but in this alga, it doesn't seem to be required for some of the steps, so that's what I'm studying now.
Speaker 1: Now in this age of global warming and air pollution, how is photosynthesis affected?
Speaker 2: Well you think of carbon sequestering, so photosynthesis is a carbon sequestered process to remove the excess CO2 [carbon dioxide] but there's a composition point so if you have too much--plants can't do but so much work, so we were concerned about the rising temperatures because some plants, like the C3 plants which most of us are crop plants that we are used to, the food can't compete in high temperature and high CO2 levels because they have a process called photorespiration, that interferes with them being able to make the carbohydrates, so we need to be very mindful of that.  There are other tropical plants that are very fine in that environment, it's what we call those C4 plants. They, they won't have a problem but they're not the dominant plant when it comes to our crops, so--example, C4s would be maize, corn, some of the-- pineapples, or canned plants.  But you have very limited ones and so we're interested this CO2 level rising temperature 'cause it really interferes with the plant's ability to make carbohydrates.
Speaker 1: Meaning those are C3s?
Speaker 2: The C3 plants.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, C3 plants are most of our crop plants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you have high temperature and high CO2 levels, you don't fix as much carbon, so if the earth temperature rises, it becomes a (higher?) problem for the plant as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess--now it's--it was exceptionally dry in the last years in the corn belt, so--
Speaker 2: Well it's been excessively dry, now this year has been excessively wet, and so some of the seeds that they put out early--now that's more horticulture crop science, that is not really my area. But I can speak to, speak to that one of the problems we worry about is draught tolerance; biochemically I'm interested in trying to create new cultivars that are more draught tolerant, so antioxidant enzymes seem to be correlated with the ability to immediate draught stress, but that's more agriculture and horticulture.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you continue to--now I know in 2003, I have a note here that you made a lecture about the--you lectured about the Emancipation Oak, but you're not at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] anymore but you still talk about it. (unclear). (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yeah, the Emancipation Oak belongs to me, you and everybody else so I still work on it, and I published a paper recently.
Story_ID: 27022
Speaker 1: There's a paper you wrote in 2004 called 'The Use of Protein Proteomics,' right?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Is that it?  Proteomics, yeah.  What are proteomics?  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Proteomics is generally all the, all the proteins in the organism--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and how they change in response to stress, or how they change in response to changes in the environment.
Speaker 1: So this is what you were referring to before--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and you've been studying this for a while.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I haven't switched what I've been studying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you've been consistent.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so you no longer deal with microgravity--
Speaker 2: Emm emm.
Speaker 1: --but you've been involved in undergraduate research activities right here at Norfolk State trying to get money to give undergraduates research experiences that they normally don't get.
Speaker 2: Yes, since 2003.  I've always been doing that, but since--Norfolk State since 2003.  I wrote my first grant, got it from National Science Foundation and they had a REU [Research Experience for Undergraduates] experience, and now I went through the Officer--Office of the Director of National Intelligence--ODNI.  I still do research with students, like this summer I have five research students; two of them sponsored by--at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], State grant, and the other three sponsored through my research through the ODNI.  So I'm still actively involved in research.  And one project, she left, and my daughter [Koren] is looking at, is trying to use--understand how we use animal behavior models to understand or predict a culture within the intelligence community.  So how animal behavior mod-- animals do things for survival, they do things for--to pass on this information to the next generation, and you can actually use what we call Niko [Nikolaas] Tinbergen's theory for predicting how an animal will survive, so using human ecology and social constructs to try to understand culture within the intelligence community.  That's one of the things that--so she's doing a meta-analysis this summer, looking at what's available in the literature, see if other people have already looked at this problem so that we have another student who is a research student next year and actually follow up on that.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm struggling to understand what this is about so this is a-- can, can, can you break (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I run the Intelligence Community Center for Academic Excellence, and as part of that, I offer research experiences for undergraduates, and one of the projects this summer is what my daughter's working on, trying to see how we can use animal behavior to predict human culture activities along a social--so in the intelligence community there's a culture such as [Edward] Snowden goes on television and gives all our secrets.  What behavior allowed that culture of that--what kinda culture dictated that type of behavior?  And so has there, have there been literature on that?  Have people researched that?  That's just one example.  So I asked Koren to look within the intelligence community in literature to see if she could find anyone's research reached doing a meta-analysis.  You just simply--you look at the research that's been done and try to see if there's a theme, and then I'll have another student to actually dig, dig deeper into the project.  So her summer--this summer as an, as an, a summer internship program that I still run. This time I'm doing one on intelligence to try to figure out what the culture would allow somebody to behave in that way.  You get it now?
Speaker 1: I'm still--I understand cultures fairly well I think, but--so you're saying that there's an intelligence community culture that you're trying to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There's seventeen agencies within the IC [intelligence community] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 2: There's seventeen intelligence communities. Each one of them have their own different cultures. CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] is so much different from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and let's say--name 'em--there's seventeen of them. So my idea is, that concept is, within each of those agencies, they develop their own culture.  What animal model can you use to predict the culture, so the culture is gonna be dictated from the leadership, so has anyone studied this is the question.  Are there papers?  We don't know if there's papers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so the only way you could do that is look through the intelligence literature, so I'm having her to do that this summer. And that's what's called a meta-analysis--to see the research that's already been done.  And she'll compile all that and look to see what trends that she--we can find.  She won't get through all that this summer, not enough time. But she'll start the foundation that I then take her project, give it to another student in the semester, and they can use it as their capstone project to look across all the agencies to see if they can find a cult-- what the culture is for each agency.
Story_ID: 27023
Speaker 1: And I can tell you the culture for most research institutions; they want you to publish, bring money in--you've heard that publish parrots, and perhaps teach (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Okay?  That's a culture.
Speaker 2: And there's a animal model for that?
Speaker 1: There's a animal model called Predictive Behavior--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Yes.  Once you know the ethology of behavior came from the animal science research, you now think of that as psychology, okay?  That's--the foundational stuff came from animal science research.  I'm taking you farther back historically; most people think of it psychology or sociology, but those are new models, there are models way before that.  And so I'm asking her to look as a biologist, from a animal science perspective, not from a sociologist or psychologist. I don't know if that's what she's majoring in.  I'm trying to ask her, "Can you use this animal behavior models to predict what you see in the culture?"
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, alright. Okay, so, okay. What is Ideas, I-D-E-A-S?
Speaker 1: I don't remember what the acronym stands for.
Speaker 2: Internationally Diverse Education and Areas Studies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Is that the project you're talking about?
Speaker 1: That's the project from the--summer research from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.  And part of that is we take some of our students internationally. I'm sure I already talked to you about that.  That's the project we do jointly--together.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Okay, and that's something that's done every summer?
Speaker 1: Well, it's done now until we have funding, and it's been done now since 2006--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's being continued, and now that we have a joint program with Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and us, and along with two other schools--we work with Morgan State to send our students internationally.  In fact, July 1, I go to get them from India.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Arlene [Maclin] took them over, and I have a responsibility of bringing them back.
Speaker 2: So what exactly are they doing in India?
Speaker 1: They're learning a language and the culture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So that if the students choose to, the would be able to then apply for jobs within the agencies that we have--the intelligence agencies.  So now you have these students who not only know the language, but also have some understanding of the culture, they would work for the government, hopefully, or go in for graduate school with a different understanding of the world; that's the hope of the IDEAS, that's why they call it IDEAS.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How many students are involved in that?
Speaker 1: There is--well technically, we choose four students from each university. it should be anywhere between sixteen--it should be sixteen students this year but we sent twelve.
Story_ID: 27024
Speaker 1: In 2007, you were director of the NIH [National Institute of Health] Extramural Research Office [sic, Office of Extramural Research, OER] here.  What did that entail?
Speaker 2: So when I became a department chair, I realized that part of the problem was--I did a survey and people weren't writing proposals, and it's because I learned about Vroom's expectancy theory.  You're like, "What, you're a biochemist, what do you know about all this sociology work?"  So Vroom's idea is to change an organization there's some intrinsic things that people come with that you're not gonna be able to do, you know?  If I'm a runner, I'm wired to be a runner and--but there are some things that you can manage that's an expectation.  So most of us are intrinsically motivated but we have an expectation that you would provide me the tools by which I can have--affect my own change, and so if you want to change organizational culture or outlooks, one of the things you can do is manage expectations by providing students--people with the proper tools.  So what I, what I found--my idea was--this was hypothesis-driven research that I did was trying to figure out how to get people to write proposals and most people would wanna write. I mean most people wanna write but they felt like, "You didn't give us the infrastructure or the tools."  And so I developed a training program when I would train people to write proposals and then I would actually work with them and actually draft the proposals.  And so one of the ones that we had the most success with is this Mid-Atlantic Consortium that we had between Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, University] and that we brought a group of people together and we sat down through the OER office and we wrote a proposal together.  And then we crafted that proposal such that when we submitted it for final submission, it was one of the--it was the top proposal. We were told by the agency our proposal ranked number one out of the forty-one applications that they got.  And it was because of the approach we decided.  I didn't have a work shop just to be having a work shop. I had a work shop with tangible outcomes that when they left, they actually had something that they could submit. They had to massage it a little bit more, and I helped them in the process.  But--so that was what the OER office did. We were a research development office.  And I did that up until last year where I found that it was just a little bit too much--too difficult. In managing that, I micromanaged a lot. I don't do well in micromanaging.  I figure that you tell me what it is you do and I can manage my own expectations, so that was--I just decided that I couldn't be effective at doing it so I'm no longer doing that.  I still help people.  The other day, somebody called me and said "Can you help me write this proposal?"  I helped 'em write it because in the end run, the long run, you want people to be able to get tenure.  The other thing I saw is that a lot of the young women, I thought, were not getting tenure.  I don't know the reason why they were leaving, but I know part of it was they weren't getting it because they didn't have funded projects.  And so I opened up the competition for anyone who wanted to apply. I helped-- helped anyone, but a lot of the young women I guess came because they saw me, and I guess for some reason I was--that translated to them.  I helped anyone who wanted to be helped however, but a number of them were successful in getting funded projects and were able to get tenure, and I think it was directly related to that early grant; because if they hadn't been there, the process--even though we have an officer-sponsored program, it's not an easy process to get through.  So I kinda helped them get through the process and get a final project that they could submit. Yep.
Story_ID: 27025
Speaker 1: Now you appeared on NPR's [National Public Radio] The Best Medicine in 2007 discussing "Frankenfood."  What was that about?
Speaker 2: Genetically modified foods.  That's one of the things I'm very passionate and interested in.  I don't know if you saw my little garden box outside that I started, and people are laughing next door because they don't understand 'cause they were part of a succession as to allow weeds to come in because weeds actually--what we think is bad weed actually provide a different type of nutrient.  Now I can go and get compost and all that stuff and spend a whole lotta money, but I also know through experience that I can kill one of those weeds and grow a different crop and those weeds will actually, actually have nitrogen, extra nitrogen from my plants.  So I'm gone be the one that's laughing.  I'm not--they don't understand what's going on because they're so used to doing science through better chemistry. I don't-- I'm not knocking that but I'm also interested in whole foods.  On average, my family members lived to ninety-something years old and I wanna be one of those people 'cause--and I think part of it is eating good foods that come from the earth that you haven't done all this adulteration with chemicals.  So genetically modified food--they asked me what was my stance on that and so I got to speak about the pros and cons of that, and actually it was a really interesting forum.  I was not the only person that was there, but I can speak from--explain what genetically modified foods are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like in Europe, they label 'em.  Should we have a labeling system here?  Should, you know?  You know, it was that kinda thing.
Speaker 1: In Europe, I know a lot of count-- countries demonstrated and banned genetic modified foods, right?
Speaker 2: They haven't banned them, they--you have a right to know, so it's labeled.  Because there are certain things that you--if you're gonna get bread, unless you are--unless you're growing the wheat yourself, the wheat is gonna have already been genetically modified, but you should know that, you should have a right to know.  And so here they're saying--although I don't think genetically modified foods are, are bad for you, okay?  The concept is to use the genetically modified so you would have to use less herbicides or insecticides, so the concept is a good one.  There's no evidence, and I know people are working on this now, about correlation between eating them and certain disease processes.  So I'm not saying that--what I'm saying about the, the better foods to--better chemistry is during a whole lotta extra fertilizers and things of that nature because that's probably more harmful to you than the genetically modified corn, 'cause the genetically modified corn, the gene that they put in, has nothing to do with human consumption. It has to do with the insects that chew on the corn, so that you can get a better looking corn plant.  So from that point, it's not gonna hurt you but we have gotten so used to putting all the other things in the environment that I think that we may need to take it back but I'm not anti-genetic modified organisms.  I think that there is no evidence to support that. However, I am that you should be informed.  You should be able to make an informed decision so if you choose not to, that's your decision.  I don't see any problem with, with it and so I may choose to eat it, but I should be able to make that decision as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I know that the atrazine are still being used--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --all over the Midwest basically, and I think the belt where it's used is the belt with the highest cancer rate (simultaneous)--.  Okay, tell us about DNIMAS [Dozoretz National Institute for Mathematics and Applied Sciences].
Speaker 2: DNIMAS is an honor program at Norfolk State where they take highly selected students who received a certain GPA from high school and SAT; this was an honors program.  And it was started by a generous gift from (unclear), and Dr. Dozoretz, which it was named after, who gave--given the first $100,000 to start the program until it started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Now was she a professor here?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, Dr. Dozoretz was a physician in the city--a white gentleman who was a physician in the city, and he gave the money to start the DNIMAS program.  And actually he has come back to visit the school, so it was an honors program-
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: --for science students from STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics].
Story_ID: 27026
Speaker 1: You appeared on NPR [National Public Radio] once again in 2008 to discuss--on a show called 'Women in Science'--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --episode entitled 'Study of STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] Programs for Improved Retention, Progression and Graduation' and DNIMAS [Dozoretz National Institute for Mathematics and Applied Sciences] was analyzed on this show and there had been an empirical study of it that showed, you know, a certain amount of success.
Speaker 2: Yes, so what we did, one of the problems is we have a problem telling our own story.  Most people have heard of Meyerhoff [Scholars Program] and Dr. [Freeman A.] Hrabowski which I had the honor of meeting about two months ago. He's just dynamic.  He's done a wonderful job at UMBC [University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore County, Maryland], and has told a wonderful story about the Meyerhoffs, and not to take any credit from that but predecessor to that--preceding Meyerhoff, there was a program started by the president at Norfolk State, his name was Harrison B. Wilson.  Now Dr. Wilson also wanted--before Meyerhoff was ever thought of, came up with this concept and went to Dr. Dozoretz and Dr. Dozoretz funded it, and eventually we got state funding for the program and so we have over twenty-five years of success with this program, but no one had ever told our story; so everybody knew about the Meyerhoff but no one knew about the DNIMAS Program and so we have, through this program--when they were given Packard Fellows--we produced seventeen Packard Fellows which is--produces just as many as Stanford [University, Stanford, California] had.  We had a number of other firsts that the school had.  Over 70 percent of these students go on to become Ph.D.'s or some sort of professional scientist so--but no one had ever documented this.  So Dr. Maclin and I wrote a proposal to the National Science Foundation and actually Arlene [Maclin] was the lead, and I came in as the co-PI [Principle Investigator] to study the DNIMAS Program. So we've been going around the country since 2008 sharing the data, telling the story, and letting people know that this program exists, and some of the things we found very effective for the program.  One of the things we were concerned about is that we've been putting a lotta money in mentoring and we have to be very careful as to how we, we couch the word "mentoring," what we really mean by that.  So with the DNIMAS Program, we asked the question "What was the best indicator of success with students?  Was it mentoring, internships or tutoring?"  And what we call the MIT question, Mentoring, Internship or Tutoring.  And what we found as we interviewed the students is that the grants predicted for them--for their success was having an internship experience followed by tutoring, they liked having peer tutoring, but mentoring was not considered the highest on their evaluation, and then we realized it had to do with what we call mentoring, so you had to be very, very prescriptive when you decide that you're gonna give ment--put a lotta money in mentoring; it's not having just a place for students to go, they actually want more of what we did in the laboratory.  And so we're writing that now, and actually been asking to be revised and so we're working on revising it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so DNIMAS has been going on since the time of Harrison Wilson?
Speaker 2: He started it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know Dr. Wilson?
Speaker 1: We interviewed him. Yeah, we did.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Did he mention the DNIMAS Program?
Speaker 1: I believe he did, I've done--it's been a long time ago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He said, "Dozorets--." It used to be called 'Minorities in Science' and they had to change it to 'Math and Science' because the state of Virginia would not allow us to use the word minority, which is okay.
Story_ID: 27027
Speaker 1: Now you've become the director in 2009 of the IC Center of Academic Excellence and that's--you referred to that already though, right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's the Intelligence Community Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, Arlene [Maclin] was the founding director, she left and I took over the--as the director of the center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry, but I'm just following the chronology of this thing. (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --You mentioned it before it came up on my chronology.  But--so is the program still--
Speaker 2: Yes, we have additional funding, we're still growing. In fact, I'm on my way on July 1 to India to get the students that's part of the Intelligence Community-IDEAS [Internationally Diverse Education and Areas Studies] grant, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And in 2011, you were awarded some funding for the--is this for forming the MACCA [Mid-Atlantic Consortium-Center for Academic Excellence]?
Speaker 2: That's the--that's part of the Intelligence Community Center--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's the continuation funding.  We went from one center to now a consortium of other schools which Arlene is the lead and that's the Mid-Atlantic one with Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Bowie [State University, Prince George's County, Maryland], Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina].  At one point we used to have Virginia State [University, Ettrick, Virginia] but they have no longer asked for participants. We still recruit their students but they're no longer participating members of the consortium.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So one could draw from this that African Americans serving in the intelligence community at some point there would be a big participation coming from the historically black colleges here in the Mid-Atlantic region I guess at some point.
Speaker 2: That's the hope. That's the objective, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To diversify. One of the problems with 9-11 [September 11th, 2001] is that we get the same answer from the same people, and therefore that--we got the same outcome, the same--kinda like what we just had with the financial crisis. You keep hiring the same people who have been taught by the same people, you're gonna get the same outcome so you have diversity of thought, and ideas and regional--you just can't have the same persons; it's great to have people who have gone to the Ivy League but they've never had to make bricks without straw.  So sometimes you need those people who've come from the smaller schools because we add a different dimension into, into the question that they may not have thought about.  Now students are not inferior. In fact, I've taken these students and I've competed against people at [College of] William and Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia], Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], Washington and Lee University [Lexington, Virginia], and my students came out number one.  So it's not that we have anything inferior with the students, it's just important to diversify because they have a different vantage point.
Story_ID: 27028
Speaker 1: What, what have been, I guess, the most important projects that you've been working on for the last three years I guess?  We got to 2009 on the chronology and I hate to just walk us through a chronology, but what are your most important projects?
Speaker 2: I'm not quite--my, my research hasn't changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still work on the Emancipation Oak, I still do oxidative stress, and I still work with the intelligence community and I wouldn't put them in any particular order.  When you first asked that, I was thinking my most important job is to get these three girls outta college (laughter).  I have three daughters in college at the same time, so that's my most important focus at this point; those are top three things I have.  So my research hasn't changed so they're still--and it's still important to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you've already addressed on some level, there's a paper that's cited here that you wrote in 2013, this year, about student retention.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one we're waiting to hear; I gotta revise it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's on the DNIMAS [Dozoretz National Institute of Mathematics and Applied Sciences] Program.
Speaker 1: Okay. About DNIMAS.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Now can you--when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: No, and I think, I think I'm better for all the things that I've gone through and I don't look back. I press forward to the high calling of the (unclear) before me.  I don't look backwards, can't get anywhere.  I do measure what I've done and try to improve upon it, but I can't think I would take--I wouldn't change anything 'cause all those things became who I--have made me who I am, even the bad things, and I've had some really bad things.  Like if I had never got divorced, I would never have been a professor.  I would have never been a full professor because I really felt like I had three little eyes looking--you know, three little faces looking at me and I had no--failure was not an option as Maria [Ragland Davis] told me earlier.  So those things pushed me.  Had I not been able to get what I wanted at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], I would have never tried for the full professor's position, and so the beat goes on, I just keep moving forward and I know that--I strongly believe that all things work together and I tell people God didn't say on occasion (laughter) they work together, he said all, that means everything, so I just take life that way.  So no, I wouldn't change it.  I just think it's pretty cool. I think I ended up where I was supposed to end up and I, I yet haven't figured out what I'm gonna do when I grow up. I'm still trying to figure that one out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  You think you may--do you see yourself in the future as a university president?
Speaker 2: I, I would hope that--you know, I've learned over the years is that if I could be in servant leadership, I would do it, and if that means I need to be at the highest helm, you know, to do that, I'm open to that.  I see myself being in service to others and moving higher education in our community, and making sure equity issues are no longer an issue.  So if it means the way that I can institute the most changes is at the level-- arm of the president-- at the realm as president, then that's what I'd do.
Story_ID: 27029
Speaker 1: In regards to inequity in our own community, say at a black college, are women faring better now than they were before, I mean in terms of how you see progress?
Speaker 2: That's a really interesting question.  So the thing that I think has work-balance issues is not only just for women, but people who have children.  And I see a struggle for young men who want to now be in their children's lives that our institutions have not yet figured out.  Now traditionally for women--now we have young men who say--and, and parents who are of the same gender, wanna be with their children.  We haven't figured that out, and I think at some point we have to have a difficult conversation.  It's not an easy conversation to have but neither was ending slavery so--but we have to do that.  So I think we have a--you know, intelligent people can make intelligent decisions by sitting down, rolling up their sleeves and doing the hard work.  We get nowhere and it doesn't profit anyone if we simply run from the issue, so I think it's more equitable before--and the families are not all the same, and our community has been slow to accept what that may mean, and we might have to have a reality check.  I often tell her "I don't have a heaven to put you in or a hell to send you to, but I do know that I can treat you as a human being, and that is my duty."  And so that's what I mean by servant leadership. It's looking at the whole person and ministering to their whole need and let God do his job and let me do what He commanded me to do, which was love everybody.  He didn't say they all had to be lovable (laughter).  So that's one of the things I'm, I'm looking forward to, trying to help this new generation.  I worry--the biggest problem--this next generation is just debt 'cause I'm experiencing it now with my own children and I really worry about the kind of debt load that we give them.  We have to tell our students to delay gratification. You know, when kids think that they are entitled to go to Cancun [Mexico] or Daytona [Beach, Florida], and spend all kinds of money, you know?  Where do we get this from?  That's a sacrifice, and so try to get our students to understand they could delay sacrifice early so that at the end, when you get our age, you've, you've put in--you're working, able to reap your--what you've sowed.  I think it's a very important concept that I'm really trying to pass on to the next generation.
Story_ID: 27030
Speaker 1: So when you look back again at your career at this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Besides the girls?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Well professional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well I've got two of 'em that's going into science. I think I've done pretty good (laughter).  Twenty-three p-- I've got two-thirds of them going in behind me so I think that's a really good legacy to leave.  That there's more than one way of doing something, and that I didn't turn--I didn't, you know--we weren't born scientists.  Some people--young people think that, you know, we were--that we always had the best grades, we were born scientists, and we always know what we're gonna do, we got everything together.  I think it's so important that we share with them that--like for example, my daughter was sick for three years--for two years. She couldn't walk.  I didn't tell anybody.  I'm a full professor and had--with tenure, and I didn't feel comfortable telling any of my colleagues because I didn't know how that would be used against me.  So even at the highest helm, we still have to work about changing that kind of attitude because I wasn't sure how it would be viewed and so--or how that issue would used against me and I think--I shouldn't have been able to feel like that. I'm a tenured full professor.  So if I felt like that, I know that there are younger people who have--going through different struggles who are younger in their career how isolated they may feel.  So I think we need to tell our stories because that's called edification.  You edify people by telling your story. It doesn't make you look weak, it actually gives them strength.  So the more we tell them that "No, life for me hasn't been no crystal stairway (laughter); I've had ups and I have downs.  There's times I didn't know what in the world I was doing, I just stayed with the flow and stayed in the, stayed in the mix."  Letting you--we, we, we go through those things too because they think we've all got it all worked out.  And I think that's the strength of our stories is when we tell them, and like the project you're doing now, it's magical for people because you can go there and say "Well, if they were able to that--so I'll be able to do it."  So I think this part of my career I'm looking forward, you know, I've raised the girls and--wow, I think that's my biggest accomplishment. I take most pride for that.  So far, they're good upstanding citizens and work--and have a very good work ethic and I think to me--that's my legacy, that I know that the next generation--that my girls will go on to become servant leaders too, so I think that's my greatest gift back.
Story_ID: 27031
Speaker 1: Well tell us more about them [your daughters].  One is an artist, two are scientists, right?
Speaker 2: They're all artists.  They're all artists.  My oldest daughter plays guitar, they all sing very well.  Samilia is working on her Ph.D. in biophysics at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] She is a Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] graduate--the green and gold. She got a degree in optical engineering mathematics.  Elizabeth I struggled with because Elizabeth and Koren are, are eighteen months apart, and when Koren got sick, we had to do a lot of life-altering, so Elizabeth tend to make more of a sacrifice for it.  Everyone--we call her Beth. And so Beth spent two years playing soccer at, at a community college. She got into a very good school but I had so many health things with Koren that I couldn't really make the personal sacrifice to send her to the school, but I think she'll be fine.  She, since doing that, has decided to major in geology or some sort of environmental science. She's away this summer doing research at University of Massachusetts, Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]--in that area. And she sings as well as plays guitar.  And Korenn is the youngest, she was the one who had the health issue. She went from being totally healthy to one day saying "My leg hurts" to--I take her to the doctor, to they're saying "You have to immediately give her surgery."  So it was just like that--bam, bam, 'cause she went from walking to not walking, and the first surgery didn't work. That was in ninth grade and then in the tenth grade we had another surgery and at that point, the public school wasn't working for us and so I had all these things happening at the same time, and I made the decision to take them out of public school because I thought they were gonna get lost in the system because the school was really large and I thought it was not conducive to what they needed.  Physically, Korey couldn't really get through. She was on a walker and crutches and stuff and so we moved up to Norfolk Collegiate [School, Norfolk, Virginia], of course I had to pay for them to go to Norfolk Collegiate, but I had peace of mind; that and safety was an issue for us and--the schools have improved. I will say that Norfolk Public Schools have done a lot of improving but it was, at the time, not a right fit for us.  So they ended up going to Norfolk Collegiate and now they're in college.  Korey is now walking, although they never thought she would, they told me that she probably wouldn't.  It was very stressful and she's now walking and running and doing all kinds of things.  She plays keyboard and she writes music and sings like a little bird.  And it was amazing that out of tragedy--she was a soccer player, a basketball player, she was a very good basketball player.  She dribbled with her left hand and her right hand, she had a really nice cross-over dribble. I told her that (laughter).  And she is left-handed like me and whenever--was very good at basketball, very defensive player.  And that injury happened--she went from being able to--she was a golfer, she went from able to be from playing tennis or golf to not being able to do anything.  So I was very worried, emotionally, that she would be--so I gave her the gift of music and I found this lady, Miss Marsavonian, who is a Carnegie award winning-type artist who lives here in Norfolk [Virginia].  At the time I found her, I didn't know who she was and she gave Korey private lessons and Korey now writes her--Koren, we call her Korey, she writes her own music.  So all three girls, I think, is my greatest accomplishment.  I'm still waiting for grandchildren, but they told me I've got to wait a long time (laughter).  So I guess I shouldn't say, you know, I should just take that as one of the things that I have to wait for in the future but all the girls are doing well.  She's a sophomore at Mary Baldwin [College, Staunton, Virginia] next year, and Beth will be a junior at University of North Carolina, Wilmington [Wilminton, North Carolina], and Samilia, hopefully this year, will be coming out of Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now what about your parents?  Did they get a chance to see you in the school?
Speaker 2: My mother [Luerevia Elizabeth Fullwood] is still living.  My father [Frank C. Moses]--my father and my aunt and my uncle are all deceased.  My aunt passed two years ago and she got to see the girls, you know.  My father didn't get to see much; he remembered when I got my Ph.D. though because I went to see him when and he had a little thing on his wall honoring the fact that I got my Ph.D.  My uncle didn't live long enough for me--to see me finish my degree; he passed before I had actually defended for my, for my degree, but he knew I was doing it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep.
Story_ID: 27032
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: By my dimple. No (laughter).  No, I would like-- (laughter).  Wow, I would like to be remembered as a person who tried to live their life as Christ commanded them to love everybody, and to, to treat your neighbor as you would like to be treated.  And if I could do that.  I try to tend to the needy and to make sure my students--I tell them often when I'm teaching them, "I'm not thinking about you, I really am thinking about the generation to follow you because if I could change your life and give you opportunity, then I know that I can break the cycle of poverty."  And so I wanna be able to remembered as a person who tried to do--just to make some simple change, you know?  And give back.
Story_ID: 27033
Speaker 1: That's my mother. We were at house.  This was about five years ago.  Her name is Luerevia Fullwood Briggs--Moses Briggs.  We call her Pumpkin.  And it was just a Sunday morning and she gets up and she makes us breakfast, as she always does.
Speaker 2: Now I'm gonna be horrible (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear.) Can you name the group as (unclear).
Speaker 2: We were at--I'm not sure if this is the day that AIS Group, the America Institute of Indian Studies.  We were in the Taj Mahal last summer--last July.  (Aunt Pernina?) is to--on this picture where I'm sitting--looking at, she's on my left and that's me in the orange on the right.
Speaker 1: That's me and Elizabeth at her senior graduation recognition for cheerleading at Norfolk Collegiate [School, Norfolk, Virginia].  That was her senior year, that was in December of 2011.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: That's--she's giving me a rose.
Speaker 2: Only picture I want is my little baby picture.  That's my beauty pic--that's my beginning of my beauty queen days.  Okay, so that's my first grade picture and I was at Union Primary School and it was the beginning of my pageant days.  My teacher selected me to be the Class Queen.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) pictures so I'll have you come back.
Speaker 1: That's my-- I'm Miss Rosary County 1984 and that was my ceremony that we had before I went off to the Miss America Preliminary in Raleigh, North Carolina.  My church gave me a function, so I was being honored.
Speaker 2: That's Koren Grace, and that's her graduation picture. She was selected to be a model for the singer experience and it's her portfolio picture and that was her senior picture for Norfolk Collegiate.
Speaker 1: And you have two on here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Here and here). Or here and here?
Speaker 2: I'd like to keep that one.  This is what--I remember them--that one and that one.  That's Uncle Legrand Gore and he was--and my Aunt Vonnie Gore.
Speaker 1: In 2006, I was still doing NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] research and I brought my daughter Samilia, who was a freshman at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] into the lab and started on her career to become a biophysicist. We were showing here how to do a protein gel, and then we got featured in 'Inside Business' and somebody sent me a nice plaque.
Speaker 2: That is (unclear).  That's my oldest daughter Samilia, and I call her Sammy but she told me I had to call her Samilia.  So it's Samilia (Annemae?) Okpodu.
Speaker 1: That's my dad early on in the military.  I think--I don't know-Navy. one of the few that have that picture.  My siblings still want a copy of it but it's Frank C. Moses.  I'm not sure what the C stands for; I was told it was Cameron but I could find no evidence thereof but--that's Daddy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well that's it; that's what we have so far.
Speaker 1: That's my wedding photo; I got married August 17?  Is that right?  Yeah, August 17, 1985 at my home church in Supply, North Carolina, called Cedar Grove Missionary Baptist Church.  That's me in my five foot train; I was influenced by Lady Diana for that dress.
