Story_ID: 369703
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Curt Champagne. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: John Edward Oxendine [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], that's J-O-H-N, Edward is E-W--E-D-W-A-R-D, and Oxendine, O-X-E-N-D-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: All right, now, can you, is there a story behind the name, Oxendine?
Speaker 2: There is a story behind the name, Oxendine. Oxendine is derived from an Indian [Native American] group called the Lumbee, L-U-M-B-E-E, and they're located in Lumberton, North Carolina. And the story is that in the 1500s, about 1580, the British came over to the colonies, to do some colonization. The French had come before, the Spanish had come and now the British and they landed somewhere near the Virginia and the Carolinas. Unfortunately, they had run out of supplies and so I think it was Sir Walter Raleigh, someone who had been sent by the queen [Elizabeth I], went back to England to get some supplies. Unfortunately, the British were having some concerns themselves with another war so they never got back to the colony and, I think, they got back about a hundred years later (laughter), but when they came back, they said, where's the colony? It was a lost colony. But apparently what happened was that that first group of colonists got together with the local Indians. I think the Indians kind of saved them because it was kind of rough living in that part and they moved with the Indians, the Keratins [sic. Croatans], down toward where the North Carolina--they had a North Carolina, South Carolina border and it was interesting because here was a group, the name Oxendine, if you go down to Lumberton, North Carolina, you'll find in the phone book, half the names are Oxendine, the other half are Locklear and I go like, yes, this is wonderful, finally, I found out where my name came from. It came from the Lumbee Indians who were named after the Lumber River and were kind of not accepted as Indians because they didn't seem to have a special language of their own, they didn't have a real tradition and the truth of the matter is it seemed they were descendants of the colonialists who had been rescued by the Indians who had intermarried. So the Oxendine name comes from that and I think we finally got a legitimacy as a tribe, the Lumbee Indians, in 1956 but not the privileges that the, the usual Indian groups, like the Cherokee and Choctaw and others.
Speaker 1: So no benefits from the Bureau of Indian Affairs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No benefits at this point in time, but it was pretty much of a self-sustaining group, this Indian group, the Lumbees because that part of the Carolinas they lived in had great natural resources and they had learned a lot of things from the British colonists who they had intermingled with but they're still pursuing. So now if you go down there, they had a, you know, it's like a black Indian, colleges, Pembroke State College and it became Pembroke State University [University Of North Carolina at Pembroke, Pembroke, North Carolina] and I knew a guy named John Oxendine who had worked, and another Oxendine who had worked in Washington, D.C. during the years that I lived in Washington and he said his brother, Joe Oxendine, was going to be the chancellor of the new Pembroke State University and he invited me down there and so I went. It was very surprising because when I went there, I figured how many years ago that was, I was surprised to see that Joe Oxendine was blond and blue eyed but yet his sister was dark-skinned. And so there was a whole rainbow of colors which kind of indicated what the Oxendines were like. And so they invited me to participate in the, in the ceremony and at the end of the evening, I realized they really were Indians because they invited me to the party afterward and after that we had a whole lot of fun, you know, almost, almost stereotypical but it was fun, fun, fun, and it was the closest I ever got to my, my name, Oxendine.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story, that's quite a story. I'm glad I asked that question. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well I was born on January 20th, 1943 in New York City [New York, New York] in Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, right now I'm president and CEO of Blackstar, Inc. [sic. Blackstar, LLC]. The truth of the matter is, I'm probably retired but in denial. So you ask me what I do, I say I consult.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you were, at one time, you owned how many media outlets?
Speaker 2: Well at one time I owned five television stations. I was fortunate to get in that business. I knew nothing about radio or TV but I got lucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm glad we say that upfront so people know, you know, can take it. This is how you get to that point.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Then how you get rid of 'em and how you, you know, okay. So, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's, today is September 9th, okay, September 9th, 20--2014. I'm saying that because my daughter's [Jordan Oxendine] birthday was just a couple of days ago (laughter) so it's not that I'm going crazy but--
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and where are we at the present time? You don't have to give your address (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we're in Boca Raton, Florida, in my townhouse, condo, apartment, in South Florida.
Story_ID: 369704
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask (background noise) that only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food, okay. Let me see what I favor. I hate to say this but I really love pizza (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and we're, we're talking over construction noise so anybody watching this knows that there's construction noise but you said pizza.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color? My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Preferably navy blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the spring because I, ride my motorcycle a lot and springtime is usually a nice time to ride. It's not too cold, not too hot.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I love to play tennis also, so I like, again, places that are sunny and warm and all of, you know, wherever it might be, usually the islands but right here in Florida is wonderful places that, to play tennis. I live right across the street from the ocean [Atlantic Ocean]. So, if, if the place has oceans, 'cause I like to swim, and it's got tennis courts, 'cause I love to play tennis two or three times a week, I'm happy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What's my favorite phrase? It ain't easy being green (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you know what that means.
Speaker 1: That's a phrase made popular by Kermit the Frog, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in relationship to you, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, well it means to me, in life, I think we have to be open to whatever we deal with and too often we aren't. You know, we, it's like my sister [Hazel Oxendine] who passed, whom I loved, you know, wonderful assets to her, she was, she was never in doubt about anything, you know, often wrong but never in doubt and I think most of us are often wrong and never in doubt. So I think we need to step back a little bit and realize that it ain't easy being green so, not being, apologetic for not knowing everything, you just realize that we just have to listen and try and learn and not be embarrassed that we're not always expert at everything.
Story_ID: 369705
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side so we can keep the sides separate until we put them together. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name was Beulah, B-E-U-L-A-H, Kent, K-E-N-T, and Oxendine [Beulah Kent Oxendine], after my dad.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, mom was born June 10th, 1913 in Burgess County, Virginia [sic. Burgess, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Is that, Vergess, V-E-R--
Speaker 2: That's B-U-R (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, B-U-R--, oh Burgess, okay.
Speaker 2: B-U-R-G-E-S-S, Burgess.
Speaker 1: Burgess County--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Virginia, okay, and all right, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family. How far back can you trace them and, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well I think they were in the Tidewater area of Virginia and so I think my aunts and uncles on that side, or at least my uncles, usually were fishermen or cooks on boats and, and had a lot to do with that sort of thing. There also was some farming, too, 'cause I remember living in Harlem [New York, New York] when her family would come up they'd always come up with, you know, fresh vegetables and things but also hogs and chickens and that was pretty nice and then when I was a kid, I'd go down there, it was always wonderful that I'd have the, you know, the freshly cooked chicken had been freshly, had its neck on, I mean, it's not a nice thing but I never experienced that living in the city. You always think milk comes from the store but in fact it comes from a cow and chickens don't come in package, they come like they do in the wild. So, there was a certain naturalness about them that I appreciated and then I think that's what I took from her side of the family.
Story_ID: 369706
Speaker 1: So your mother [Beulah Kent Oxendine], did she grow up in Burgess County [sic. Burgess, Virginia]? Is that a rural area? (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, yes, semirural area, uh-huh, and then I think she came up to New York City [New York, New York] probably in her late teens, twenties (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now before we get into New York, I just want to, do you know much about her parents and what they did for a living or what they were like?
Speaker 2: I really, I never met my grandparents on her side. I know my grandfather's name was Humphrey Kent and her mom's name was Sedelia [Sedelia Kent], S-E-D-E-L-I-A, and he was a, I saw pictures of him. I think he, he had a son called Humphrey, also, who I'd call Uncle, I mean, he was literally my uncle, and that was my closest to know what that family was like but apparently they looked alike and, you know, you could tell stories and what it was like to live in the South. For them, it had to be in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], and--
Speaker 1: What was it like? What sense did you get or what, like there?
Speaker 2: Well my sense was that there was a lot of separation, you know, and yet the black community had its own, was a thriving community, in its own right and people respected the, the boundaries that were there. It wasn't a lot that was being done. I mean, there wasn't a whole lot of uprising or craziness or anything going on. People kind of accepted it for whatever it was and lived within their boundaries. It has some interesting stories to tell.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of the stories?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, the stories were not unlike stories of most young people. You know, falling in love and, you know, getting, getting married and then, and, one, you do your own thing and, and wanting to go to the big city as opposed to living in the country and, but then doing some of the fun things that people do in the country, like driving cars and we didn't do that up North because there wasn't any room, we took subways. We didn't know how to drive. You know, working on the farms and working with the animals and having a closeness to nature that we never knew. So it was an experience of, it was an oral history in a way, you know, before I got into reading as much as I do now. They would paint pictures with no words and, and then I'd learn something about it when I had the opportunity to visit in the summers when we'd all get in the car and, you know, fried chicken sandwiches and drive down and not stopping off at any hotels 'cause there weren't any hotels for us. We just stopped along the way, family had moved, you know, so on your way down, you'd stop in Maryland, you'd stop D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and then you'd make your way down to Virginia, come on back, but it was very, it was colorful, exciting, interesting and different from how I saw things living in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did your mother, how far did she get in school when she was there? Did she finish high school or did she go to college?
Speaker 2: Well she went to high school and then I think she had a bunch of kids, in a way, and then she had my older brother [James Oxendine], who's fourteen years older and she had me and my twin sister [Joan Oxendine] and then she had my brother [Michael Oxendine] and sister [Hazel Oxendine]. We're like ten year spurts. First she had my brother, fourteen years difference and then had two, my sister and myself, then ten years later had two more. So she, she had a quarter of a century pretty much being a mother. So after that she went to school for nursing and she became a nurse. In fact, she thought--I thought she was Dr. Kildare [James Kildare] because she'd always have her white uniforms and starched. She was very serious about being a nurse and very, very proud about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: More of an education than my dad [Edward Oxendine, Jr.]. His is more of an elementary school, you know, education. He worked kind of on the ships also, but then he worked in New York City Transit Authority.
Story_ID: 369707
Speaker 1: Let me get your father's--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) full name and spelling.
Speaker 2: Edward Agustus, A-G-U-S-T-U-S, Oxendine [Edward Oxendine, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think it was May 26th, 1903, about ten years older than my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine], and he was born in Palatka, P-A-L-A-T--Palatka, Florida which is near Jacksonville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So he's born in Palatka, Florida. Now is there, does he have any, did he have any knowledge of the Oxendines in North Carolina or, or in the Carolinas or--
Speaker 2: Well, I honestly don't know. I know his father [Edward Oxendine, Sr.], who's born about thirty years earlier, 1873, came down from that area. He had migrated south from the Carolinas so I suspect he might have known more than I did, you know. I didn't know until I was, later in life, quite honestly.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I think he may have known.
Story_ID: 369708
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your father's [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side? On my father's side, probably farther back than my mom's [Beulah Kent Oxendine] side. As I said, he [Oxendine's paternal grandfather, Edward Oxendine, Sr.] was born in 1873 and then it probably goes all the way back to like the early 1800s.
Speaker 1: And as you were saying earlier, the history of that name goes all the way back to 1580--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you know, it could, it could conceivably go way, way, way back--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Like everybody's inevitably does or we wouldn't be here today but, but--
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of Oxendines and so, and in fact I have a book, you know, the Lumbee Indians [Native Americans]. I forget the gentleman who wrote it and I had a cousin, Dora [ph.], who's since passed but she had an interest in the family name and so she would always engage me in conversations about that, and I have a bit of a tree, you know, I can share with you that she put together that takes us back pretty far.
Speaker 1: Now did your father consider himself a Lumbee?
Speaker 2: You know, actually my dad never really talked about that even though if you saw him and he was darker skinned than I am and you look at my skin color, this is from sixteen years living in the sun, but when I take off my shoes you can see a little lighter, you know, having covered it with socks so the skin is a little bit lighter but he was more this color naturally and he had black, wavy hair which is unusual, you know, for just someone who's just a normal, a black American experience but he never really chatted about that and my aunts and uncles were pretty much like him. You know, the black hair, you know, those kind of features. My mom, who's a beautiful woman, you know, whose hair wasn't coarse either, but she said, one of the reasons why we didn't go down to see the family was that much was because among the Oxendines, among those Indians, there was a certain, not tribalism but if you didn't look like them, there was some concern. So she said, when she went down there she covered my head with a towel, not out of embarrassment but even though that this wasn't the same black hair that they were used to so there was some intermingling. I don't know if that would have been a problem anyway because they, themselves, were products of intermingling but that was, that was my experience. My dad didn't talk a heck of a lot so I got a lot of my oral history from my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: About dad. He was always working and kind of a very solid, sweet man.
Speaker 1: All right. So you said he had a lesser education than your mother--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but what did he end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: For a living?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked for the New York City Transit Authority. So he was more of a laborer working in the powerhouse that powered the trains and so you have pictures of him in overalls and sleeves rolled up in that kind of a factory environment where all the electricity and power and then I guess he graduated for him to the work, in the token booth selling tokens during the day and then he would work overtime, I guess, in rush hour, 'cause you make more money, you know, I guess, keeping people regulated or what, what he was doing. So I never really got to see him too much, he was always working but a very, very gentle man. Never cursed, you know, never, never, a bad word, surprised--(laughter) my mom was tough as a sailor but dad, and even though he didn't have that much of an education, I wanted to go in the [U.S.] Marine Corps before I did and I wasn't going to college and he's the one who said, "Come on, son, let's go." I thought we were going to go fishing but he was taking me up to Hunter College [New York, New York] to register 'cause I was going to the Marine Corps 'cause, you know, all of my buddies in the projects going in the Marine Corps, they looked so good in their uniforms, nah, you got to go to school, and that's what I did. So he's very effective. I mean, I know when I used to, I know in '65 [1965] when they had the World's Fair [1964/1965 New York World's Fair, New York, New York] and they were arresting people, I got arrested once and he came and got me out. They were down at the Tombs [Manhattan Detention Complex, New York, New York], the big prison down there, at the bottom of Manhattan [New York] and I'm worried like my father's going to kill me in college and getting arrested at the World's Fair and he didn't say a word. He said, "Hey while we're down here, your mom needs an iron, can we stop by and pick one up on the way home?" Just a real gentle, nonjudgmental guy, and he said more, worried about saying nothing and being who he was than had he been loud and judgmental, great guy.
Story_ID: 369709
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Beulah Kent Oxendine and Edward Oxendine, Jr.] met and where did they meet? Did they meet in--
Speaker 2: They met in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They met in New York. There is a story, I think, for what I understand, my mom's older sister, Hilda Kent [ph.], we used to call her Aunt Sis [ph.], she was kind of a stout, older woman, who lived in, on Sugar Hill, that nice part of Harlem [New York, New York], and I don't know how she lived there, quite frankly, because she used to work for white folks and she used to cook for them (background noise) and when they went away for summers, she went with them to their summer homes. (Background noise) (pause) Sorry for the interruption.
Speaker 1: Maybe we ought to pause 'cause they're on a roll now, I don't know.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: Now we're talking about how your parents met, I guess, in New York.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as I said, my mom came up, I think, to live with her sister, Hilda Kent, I called her, Aunt Sis, who lived on Sugar Hill. She lived at like 160th [Street] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were saying you didn't know how she managed to live there.
Speaker 1: I don't know how she managed--
Speaker 2: Now Sugar Hill is like a middle class--
Speaker 1: It's a middle class, kind of a--
Speaker 2: --enclave, one of the--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But interestingly enough, unlike today, you know societal mobility is not so much moving from having nothing to having everything but if you can raise people's standards, then they can move up too. So her standards were raised because she was working for a wealthy family, probably on Park Avenue, and they took her with them when she, in the summers. So she and a couple of her sisters, including my mom, lived with her and I think Aunt Sis knew my father's sister, my Auntie Alma, Alma Oxendine [ph.], who said she had a brother so all these visits, "Oh good, well, when they come up, I'll introduce them." So, it was a family thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My aunt, who knew, you know, my mother's sister, you know, introduced, it was a family introduction.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: One family to the other and they kind of hit it off (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, so they, they got married, what around, 19--in, now you're not the oldest, you're not, when did they get married, in the late '30s [1930s] or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, probably, I don't know when they got married but they, to be honest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know he was forty when I was born, and she was thirty.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, they're probably young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this is, yeah, okay. So he was born in 1903, then yeah, he was, he was born, he was married then the year you were born, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so now when you--
Speaker 1: They were married a long time, until he died, and she never remarried, and they, it was quite a nice story, the two of them. He loved her (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a good thing to think of. These days it seems like marriages don't last that long, you know, anymore but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that one was on for a while.
Speaker 2: But--
Story_ID: 369710
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, their sense of humor, how they walked, how they talked, what they looked like, their views on things, their hobbies, talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, probably my mother [Beulah Kent Oxendine], you know. I don't know if I was a mama's boy or what but, I mean, she, she kind of was crazy about me, too, but she probably cajoled all of us and made us believe we were, 'cause I know my older brother [James Oxendine], who was a great, sharp gun, I'll show you pictures eventually, had to be a pet of hers 'cause they were together, you know, from the time he was born until he was fourteen. And then the twins [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine and Joan Oxendine] came, you know, and I was kind of like a smart guy and so that made her real proud and, but she loved her kids. So I kind of took after her in a way 'cause she was kind of gregarious and involved in everything and curious and wanting to do a lot of things. I remember when I was living in Mexico, she came down and stayed with me for a little bit and it was amazing how she was talking to my maid, who didn't speak English, and my mom didn't speak Spanish. My mother was teaching her how to cook, you know those kind of things. She made me buy her a couple more outfits. I said, "Mom, you know, you're ruining the neighborhood 'cause when you go home, this maid's got three outfits, most of them only have one," and then when I would have dinner parties, 'cause I was the number two guy at the bank, my mom would be sitting there and she didn't want the bank customers, you know, my clients, to treat the maid like a maid. (Laughter) You realize, to her, you know, like mom, that's what she's supposed to be, she supposed to be serving the food. They had a, you know, it was a crazy kind of thing. On the other hand, when my sister came down, all she wanted to do was sleep and do nothing but my mom was out eating everything, going places, so she's a very outgoing place--person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] on the other hand was very, very quiet, very gentle, never said much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So sometimes I, I'm like that, my mom, and then I get drawn, like my dad, and get introspective. So I think I got the best of both worlds--
Story_ID: 369711
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings. Now, now start with the oldest and, you know, put yourself in order and tell us about each sibling.
Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest brother, James Oxendine, we used to call him Ox, so growing up in 19--you know, born in 1929, he came up during the Depression [Great Depression] years, very, very smart but very, very tough and was involved with gangs and all kinds of craziness and--
Speaker 1: And just for the record now, now you grew up in the projects, right, in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well first I grew up in Harlem [New York, New York] for the first eleven years--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and then I moved to the projects.
Speaker 1: So you were around 154th [Street], you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 154th and St. Nicholas [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Sugar Hill.
Speaker 1: All right. So he grew up mainly in that neighborhood, then, right?
Speaker 2: He grew up mainly in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to make that point.
Speaker 2: For that whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact when we moved to the projects in 1954, he took our apartment, 154th and St. Nick. The family kept that apartment, I don't know why. It wasn't like it was leased to us but, Mr. Pestano [ph.], who was the Italian guy who owned that building, paid the fifty-five dollar rent, instead of my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] doing it, my, my brother did it. And then when he left, my other brother took it so it was in the family for a while, it's amazing. I didn't think about that until right now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, he grew up in, in Harlem.
Speaker 1: So he was involved in gangs, you said, in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the names of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Peck's [ph.] a bad boy. I mean he wasn't, you know--
Speaker 1: What's the name of the gang he was in, do you know?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. Ours was the Sportsmen, and you know, I knew the gang, my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine] told me, I can't think of it right now but they were, I can't remember it right now, but at any rate, they were like, well, Spanky [George "Spanky" McFarland] and that gang that you read about in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] in the movies ['Our Gang'] but a little tougher than that (laughter), that they grew up being young teenagers and then young men, gangsters, in the sense that they were, you know, doing some things they shouldn't have been doing, you know, running numbers, you know, the booze, the whole bit, and I think before he got into any trouble he went into the [U.S.] military so he wound up in Guam, as a soldier, and he met in the neighborhood, this wonderful woman, Carmen De Costa [Carmen De Costa Oxendine], whose family came in from Jamaica and, and they had a beautiful love story. Well, they must have been married fifty years. She was small, he was a big, gangster type but he had some interesting jobs. He worked at the Playboy Club [New York, New York] as a manager, I know in 1965, when I left to go in the Peace Corps. I had a big party. He invited me down to the Playboy Club--
Speaker 1: Is in New York?
Speaker 2: In New York City, 59th Street and Fifth Avenue. Here I am with all these bunnies and whatnot and he brings me back up to the Bronx [New York] and I got about two hours to pack to go to Santiago, Chile (laughter), my brother finally brings me home. I'm so drunk I'm trying to put all my stuff in, in the duffel bag and can barely stand up and my mom was so mad at both of us, you know, and then I had to, well actually I wasn't going to Chile right then, I was on my way to New Mexico to do training (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Training, okay.
Speaker 2: --so I wasn't so bad but, yeah, he was, he was quite a character. And so he, he managed the Playboy Club for a while and then he wound up owning a few bars in Harlem and then he had some taxicabs and then he had some buildings, but he's really a sweet guy and, I don't know if he graduated from high school or not but he loved German, you know, and he loved poetry and so here's this big, tall 6'3", 6'4" guy, really good looking, wavy thick hair, right through death, and to see the juxtaposition of this toughness and then this whole street environment with someone who likes poetry and German and then taking these courses before they were in the magazines, and quoting stuff, and I'm like, wow. So he was kind of like a mentor for me because my father died when I was about twenty-one. So he was my father figure and he was always trying to keep me out of doing bad stuff.
Speaker 1: Now you said your father worked quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah he did, he worked all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he was, you know, not home as much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was kind of like a, well he was my big brother but he was also like, you know, father figure, too. So he taught me all the things that you shouldn't do 'cause he had bars in Harlem and, you know, they had all kinds of different people there, you know. They had some women there who were some bad girls (laughter), bad guys, you know, the bars are open from eight in the morning until about three, they only close for a couple of hours.
Speaker 1: So he was over ten years older than you--
Speaker 2: Fourteen.
Speaker 1: Fourteen years old, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So I got to see a lot of things (laughter) that a lot of people wouldn't get to see because he was like the baron of the neighborhood, you know, the bars in Harlem and the, big brother, this guy's got this and so he said, "Man, I'm on zero so I don't want you to do the same things I did, you know. I don't want you to make mistakes," so he was very proud. So I've been fortunate in that respect. I started my mentoring with my brother.
Story_ID: 369712
Speaker 1: And who is next? Now you've got twins next?
Speaker 2: Well I was a twin.
Speaker 1: You were, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was he [Oxendine's brother, James Oxendine], then me and my sister. And then two years later, my brother, Ray [Raymond Oxendine], crazy Ray (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us about your sister, your twin sister.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Tell us about your twin sister.
Speaker 2: Joanie [Joan Oxendine]. Joanie was really a sweet girl. I said my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine] was a nurse, after we got all older, but when Joanie was eighteen, I mean, she used to have part-time jobs like working at Woolworths department store [F.W. Woolworth Company], something like that, and she and Joanie were very, very tight but see, Joanie was eighteen, so my mom was maybe about forty-eight then 'cause my mom was thirty, and Joanie got a job working for the phone company and stayed there for thirty years, retired. She started at eighteen, you know, and she worked her way up from operator. So here we have two different paths. You know, she's just, she was a regular, pretty girl, you know, all the guys liked her, worked in a nice middle class job while I was going to college [Hunter College, New York, New York] and trying to survive. I'd go and see her after, you know, when she got paid on Friday, I'd go say, "Hey Joanie." Sometimes I'd say, well we, she said, "Well meet me over at the restaurant," and I'd go meet at the restaurant and one day I was sitting in the restaurant and Joanie comes in with her girlfriends and she says to the bartender, "I'll take the usual," and I'm going like, "Well Joanie my allowance has gone up a little more this week." "What do you mean?" I said, "'Cause if you don't give me another five dollars I'm telling mom that you have a regular drink (laughter)." I blackmailed my sister, Joanie. I was really good at that but I really was blackmailing her (laughter), you know, like, 'cause she'd go like, what, but, so she was living the life of normalcy, young woman doing her thing with her girlfriends, regular salary, you know, the regular, I'm going to college, starving, you know, even though I always had a job but I never had any money but, and so she had a regular track in the sense that she went to school in the neighborhood with the neighborhood kids and they got to be friends throughout but I never had that opportunity to do that 'cause when I was in school, I got skipped, and she and I started in the same grade but I got skipped from the fourth to the sixth grade. So, that threw me off and then when we moved to the Bronx [New York] in 1954, I went to special classes. I went to seventh, eighth and ninth in two years, she went the regular track, three years. And then I went to a special high school, Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], which is kind of the best high school in New York City [New York, New York] in terms of public schools and she went to the neighborhood school. So I always got disconnected and never had, you know, buddies who I went to elementary school with and junior high, then high, then college. It was always a different group of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bronx Science was like a Jewish prep school, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Bronx Science is a, I've heard stories of Bronx Science (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not like three years, I'm going like, this is crazy. I've got all these Jewish people here and these girls are writing very nicely and doing all their homework and they live in a house, I'm living in the housing project, we got like three bedrooms. I'm sleeping on the folding bed 'cause my bed is in the closet. I've got to wait 'til everybody goes to bed, then I take out my bed and put it in the living room and then, you know, put it up every morning. I've been doing that for years. So when you go to a school where people who live in the house, they have their own bedroom, they have even a living room to work out of. You know, I could only do my homework in the kitchen while everybody was, my mom was cooking, getting ready for dinner, I'm trying to do my homework there and then I've got to stop doing my homework because you've got to wash the dishes, dry them, do the pots and then you have linoleum floors so you have to like, 'cause first of all you spill all the water on the floors after you got through sit--every night I'd have to mop the damn floors and it was linoleum (laughter), and then I could do my homework, you know, and then I'd go to bed, with the thing down, or I'd stay in the library.
Story_ID: 369713
Speaker 1: Your other two siblings came ten years later?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so I imagine you didn't know them as well as--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause they were like--
Speaker 2: And then I became like father figures to them.
Speaker 1: And tell us about the latter two.
Speaker 2: Oh, Big Mike [Michael Oxendine] and Hazel [Hazel Oxendine]. Well, Big Mike died at sixty, a couple of two years, two, three years ago and Hazel died at fifty-eight, she had cancer. Both of them, big, tall, lovely people and Hazel was my favorite. I liked her. She was just very, very special to me, I just was crazy about her, and she was very, very smart and, but very rebellious too, since my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] died, you know, before her time, and so I was kind of father figure. I mean, she was going to high school, putting black power flags on top of the, what do you call that, what are you doing? You know, I've got to go to the principal's office for her.
Speaker 1: She put a black power flag up the flagpole in high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the high school, you know, James middle high school [J.H.S. 123, James M. Kieran School, Bronx, New York], you know. "Hazel, what you, what's up, what are you doing?" They take her out of regular high school, put her in a little private school 'cause my father had died but left a few pennies and so she went to school, but she was spoiled but I loved Hazel. She's just smart, smart, smart. So, and she went to college and she, but she was always with me. In fact, when I came to Florida, sixteen years ago, she came here. I mean, she lived in Washington [D.C.] when I lived in Washington, wherever I was, she wanted to live and I always helped her out. Her last job was, she was responsible for small business management for the Palm Beach County [Florida] and I got her the job through my political connections, but she did a great job. I mean, and then when I worked in the government in D.C., I got her a job. I mean, I was crazy about Hazel.
Story_ID: 369714
Speaker 1: Do you have an, an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory, okay. I'll tell you, this is the strangest kind of thing. My earliest childhood memory was always with my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine] 'cause she always used to, remember I told you about how my father's sister [Alma Oxendine (ph.)] knew my mom's sister [Hilda Kent (ph.)] and that's how they got married, they only lived ten blocks apart [in New York, New York]. And so my mom used to walk us downtown and I always had these memories of walking, here's my mom and here's my little sister [Joan Oxendine] and me and we'd be walking down the see, Aunt Al--Auntie Alma, who was a very colorful lady, you know, who used to take us to Florida in the summertime and, you know, she didn't seem to have, she had one kid but he was bigger than we were. She's like my older brothers [sic. brother, James Oxendine]. So I always had nice memories but I remember when I was growing up, and I hate to say this, I remember learning how to walk, crawling and then trying to get up and walk and that's the strangest, you know, how in the world. Here I'm seventy-one years old, how can you remember something, when you must have been seventeen months or less than two, I don't know how old I was, but I remember that sensation, that pain and pleasure of trying to learn how to walk and falling and--
Speaker 1: That is remarkable but I believe you. I mean--
Speaker 2: That's the strangest thing. Isn't it weird, I mean, I'm going like, walking. It wasn't like in the warzone or, it was just regular, in the apartment (laughter), and that seemed like a changing of worlds, you know. All the big people, I mean they weren't that big but it's a whole another perspective.
Story_ID: 369715
Speaker 1: You started off, you lived for, until you were eleven years old and you lived on 154th [Street], right?
Speaker 2: 403 West 154th Street.
Speaker 1: Right, and then--
Speaker 2: Fifth floor walkup.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, how many rooms did you have in the apartment?
Speaker 2: Two bedrooms.
Speaker 1: Okay. So when the family moved to the projects, was that a step up or a step (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was brand new, there was an elevator, you know. The projects were really nice then. They hadn't even finished the streets. If you did anything bad in the projects in the '50s [1950s], you got thrown out. They had the police, everybody, you got fined for putting things on the grass. It was a whole different world. Not like you see in the movies--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was great. You had like fresh paint, not that we, we didn't live any terrible place, it was a nice apartment but it was still two bedrooms. I still had the folding bed, you know.
Speaker 1: So there's more room in the projects when you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the living room was bigger (laughter) for my folding bed. The boundaries got expanded (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is, okay, but all right, so 154th Street, that neighborhood, what was it like? You spent most of your childhood, I guess there, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: --so, can you describe the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was great. You know, the winters were, in the fifth floor walkup, you've got a lot of fire escapes. So in the summertime you could sleep out on the fire escape. In the wintertime, you can take the snow from the fire escape and make ice cream 'cause they had the ice cream thing. You could go downstairs and go across the street, hang out in the park. You don't have to worry about anybody mugging you and all the little kid stuff. I loved the weekends, after school, you could go four blocks down the street on Amsterdam Avenue to the movies. We'd get there at noon, get out at about six, you see three movies, the newsreels and eight comics and then come home and have franks and beans and, oh man.
Speaker 1: By comics, you mean, the cartoons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cartoons.
Speaker 1: I (unclear) cartoons, okay.
Speaker 2: You don't see cartoon anymore. I mean the movies (laughter) was like a vacation which was a vacation for my mother [Beulah Kent Oxendine] too 'cause we were gone but we'd literally leave around noon, get back, you know, by the time it's getting dark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love that. You know, and then you had the playgrounds and you had the Polo Grounds [New York, New York], and then in those days there was a Polo Ground where, you know, the Giants [New York Giants] played and there's the Yankee Stadium [New York, New York] and as I was growing up, you know, as a young kid, I used to park cars and get a nickel for parking a car. Hey, now, you know, I wasn't parking their cars. I guess they were giving us nickels so we wouldn't break their windows, not that we would, anyway, but I guess that was a price you paid (laughter), 'cause they were in our neighborhoods. We didn't have any cars so the streets were bare, you know, but the beautiful thing about living in my neighborhood was that in that five-story apartment, because in the '50s [1950s] it was segregation, in my building there was a super [superintendent] who lived in the basement, literally, with his five kids. His name was Geach [ph.], had five kids, and in that building we had a doctor, a nurse, a black woman who was a professor at FAU [Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida] but lived in New York City [New York, New York], a dentist, a single lady, whatever, one gay guy, but no one said anything about, you know, but in that building. And so, if the super's kid wanted to be a doctor, the doctor was upstairs and the doctor's kid wanted to be a ballerina, he knew the super's kid wanted to be a doctor so we had all of this, all before integration, it was great because we, as blacks, could not go anywhere else because of the laws.
Speaker 1: So they were like housing the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was fabulous, yeah. You learn about everything and then you go like, how come Ms. Smith [ph.] is gone and don't come back and tell us all. Well, 'cause she was down here, teaching, or Ohio, or wherever, but she was, you know, who knew she was a college professor in some black school [HBCU] and the dentist, and so it was a marvelous array and these people became your grandparents and godmothers and godfathers and the mentoring was right there and your principal was black, your assistant principal was black. I, you know, I went to all black schools through the sixth grade. Ms. White [ph.] said, sit up straight, hit you, you know. Church is around the corner. So it was a wonderful community. So I loved it. I didn't know any different but I didn't feel like I was missing anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, and it still was segregation 'cause black people still did not go into dressing rooms in those places but, you know, come Christmas--
Speaker 1: Even in New York City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't have a lot of money to buy any stuff anyway but I would be, you know as a young guy, go down, 'cause I could ride the train free 'cause my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] worked for the subway, and you'd go down to Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York] on 34th Street but you would go Christmas and holidays, you know, to get some nice clothes or stuff like that.
Story_ID: 369716
Speaker 1: I know the year you were born, 1943, there was a big riot in New York City [New York, New York] over some of those issues.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, white cop shot a black kid just like Ferguson [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Seventy-one years ago it happened in New York City. Obviously, I didn't know about it 'cause I was just born.
Speaker 1: And when you were a kid, I guess, it was, I know Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and some others had boycotted some of the stores in Harlem [New York, New York] for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --not having any black cashiers or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was extra--I know Adam Clayton Powell's son very well. He ain't no Adam Clayton Powell, (laughter) I mean--
Speaker 1: So this is New York City, the epitome of the North and yet, you know, some of the same features of southern life, you know, dominated the scene.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So I think, I think people found that--
Speaker 2: And I don't know if we couldn't go and put on the clothes or not because probably when you go put on a car coat, you could do that in the aisles so I don't know if you got a guy in there but it was still, you know, the prejudice--
Speaker 1: You couldn't go to the dressing room with clothes. Okay, so now what about, was there any nightlife around you and that sort of thing in--
Speaker 2: Nightlife?
Speaker 1: Yeah, music and, and you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, extraordinary. You can put that in the kitchen somewhere, cut it off. Thank you, sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it being Harlem and all, you know, well I don't know, is that still Harlem, 154th [Street] up there? Is that still Harlem?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, from 106th [Street], 110th Street up, to 200th Street, you see, the nicest, the clubs were wonderful, after I even moved to the Bronx [New York], I still came back to Harlem. Oh man, we had the Bell, Cook and Candle [New York, New York], we had the lounges and the lounges you would have, you know, a three-piece band and you'd have great drinks and just nice. You know, as a young man, I'm talking about in my twenties.
Story_ID: 369717
Speaker 1: But as a kid, I mean, did any, I mean what is your impression of the, I mean the cultural life in New York [New York], I mean of Harlem [New York, New York] in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, as a kid, as a kid, what happened is that they would have events where you would bring your own bottle, in a good way. So we as black people would go to the armory or to a local club or whatever and they'd have these events every week 'cause there would be sororities and fraternities, you know, which I didn't belong to, but they would have events and people would get dressed up and look nice and it was a really wonderful thing. I mean, surprisingly, people who didn't really have, you know, jobs that, that great still seemed to have enough money to have, well my uncle, my uncle was a tailor and he made me my first overcoat. So we had some skills, we had some talents all in that community. I think what happened was pretty much what Richard Pryor said that when we had integration, everybody left and the only one left was Willie the Wino, he didn't care about street services or garbage pickup but we had left and I think it, to some of us it wasn't the best thing because the black schools that had a black principal now had, we were assistant principals in a white school rather than a principal of our own school. We got diluted quite a bit and instead of having our communities where we had to, everybody had to live, only those who couldn't leave lived there and it really changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you wouldn't have a doctor living in your building after a certain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, and they came to us, the white people came to us. They came and put the stores there and ran them. They did all that stuff but we looked out for each other. Mr. Pestano [ph.] would come and he would upholster the furniture every couple of years when it needed to be upholstered and get five dollars a week and sometimes we didn't have it so we'd hide when he knocked on the door but, you know, and we'd have to get, you know, new linoleum. (Laughter) It makes me laugh when I think about it, we were using linoleum, you know, in the Bronx [New York], oh that was really weird but we had a community and people came to us and they were, we were partners, all of us.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever, I mean, the Harlem community there's so many different famous people and celebrities moving around. Did you ever meet any of the ballplayers or the celebrities as a kid in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Well, I met the celebrities because the celebrities who came to town had one hotel, the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] but they had no place to stay. So my aunt, Aunt Sis [Hilda Kent (ph.)], who was working for white folks, the food there, I hate to think, I think she might have been a bit of a madame in a way because she seemed to entertain a lot of people. I don't know if they were doing any hanky panky but on a social level, she had booze, and that was a pretty big place with a doorman and all.
Speaker 1: This is the place in Sugar Hill?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, yeah what was it? I forgot the name of it. Yes, that's Sugar Hill, 159th Street, fabulous building, but, so we had, it was a, it was like the roaring '20s [1920s], the roaring '30s [1930s] and the roaring '40s [1940s] in my head, as I saw them as a young person watching and I think the boxers, the Sugar Ray Robinson types and all the entertainers and then the entertainers were different than they are now because you had, instead of one big venue like in Las Vegas [Nevada] you would have small cocktail places. There'd be a small bar, there'd be, very, very nice, nice, nice people.
Story_ID: 369718
Speaker 1: You started school at what school?
Speaker 2: I started at P.S. 46 [P.S. 46, Arthur Tappan School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 156th Street and St. Nick [St. Nicholas Avenue]. It was one block from where I lived. I lived on the corner of 154th [Street], I walked to 155th [Street], go underneath the subway, there's 156th, there's my school.
Speaker 1: And I would guess that you liked school?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: I would guess that you liked school, right?
Speaker 2: I did, I don't know why but I did, you know.
Speaker 1: All right. So you said they, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went home for lunch, you know. There wasn't free lunches, you just came back.
Speaker 1: You said, they skipped you in what, fifth grade or--
Speaker 2: Fourth to the sixth.
Speaker 1: Fourth, okay, fourth to the sixth. So you were with your regular class up until that time and, I mean, so what happened that you got skipped?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I guess I must have been doing, you know, pretty good in my classes and I guess the teacher recommended, oh, you should do a little bit more. So I got to do, I mean, that's why I got to get to college when I was sixteen rather than when I was eighteen. What I, that was a mistake for me because I had to wind up quitting for two years because I couldn't stand just going to school. I was the smallest person in the class, didn't have any money, didn't have a job and the girls were always teasing me.
Speaker 1: Now even in going to fourth to sixth, I mean, that's a, that's a real difference when you're--
Speaker 2: Little.
Speaker 1: Little, yeah, 'cause you're, you'd be like two sizes smaller than everybody in class, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was always the problem. Even though when I was eighteen in college [Hunter College, New York, New York], you know, the girls would go like, "How old are you?" I go like, "I'm a sophomore.  How old do you think I am (laughter)?" I'd be defensive about that. I'd go like, who ever thought I'd be apologizing for being too young and I spent a lot of my time apologizing for being so young. I remember when I was working in Lakeville, Connecticut at Interlaken Inn when I was, 1961, although I really was eighteen then, and, that was a while (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 369719
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors along the way in grade school [P.S. 46, Arthur Tappan School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had this one teacher, Mrs. White [ph.], and she seemed particularly concerned about me comporting myself correctly and, because she was older, I guess she was like in her thirties or forties, well, us little kids gave her respect like we would our mothers and she would always get me on the posture, sit up straight, dah, dah, dah, dah, do this. I guess I was kind of a good, you know, I wasn't trying to be teacher's pet but I listened to her and, and she had an effect on me. So she was one teacher. She really did keep me on the straight and narrow, you know, and make me do the penmanship which I hated but I did it because I respected her. And then, I think, when I finally got, what, to the sixth grade, I had another teacher, she was kind of young and then I was starting to like, you know, people, I guess, (laughter) women, you know, and I was crazy about her. I used to go get her lunch for her. "Can I get your lunch for you?" I got her lunch one day, I came back, and she was talking to this other guy teacher, white, young and I was like devastated (laughter). I was so devastated and he was a cool guy, too, 'cause he used to play tennis and, you know, and he was talking to her that way. I was heartbroken.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't want to get her lunch for her anymore after that but I did keep getting it but--
Speaker 1: So you said you were kind of out of, you know, you're kind of like a fish out of water in school in some ways in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was. Yeah, in many ways.
Speaker 1: --your interest and where they placed you, you were always in a, in a situation where you weren't quite fitting into what the rest of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, never did fit. No, I really never did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To this day, I think about that. You know, my daughter [Jenelle Oxendine], who went to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] and London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] but she started out in Montessori and I had her go to all, you know, and all my kids, just really, but I never had a smooth introduction to any of those things. I was always, having to ad lib and you know, make the best I could with what I had.
Story_ID: 369720
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of friends in Harlem [New York, New York] before the family moved to the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: I had, I think I had the normal amount of friends but I don't think I had more, again, as I said, because I was moving around and studying, I was a little bit of a fish out of water. So, no, I didn't have that many to be honest, when I think about it.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, the projects were even, you know, was more, a bigger challenge than maybe the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the projects, yeah, projects. Well, because then I was getting to be a young man and you had the pressure of the gangs then, really, and then teenage testosterone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where the fighting got into play, you know, after I learned how to fight. Well, actually I learned how to fight in Harlem 'cause I had a couple of cuts across my eyes from, a few fights I had to have but, but really, it got serious in the projects because, as nice as they looked, there were gangs and that was the, we had the local gangs that had no name and then we had some gangs that belonged to the city. One was the Sportsmen, that would be the Sportsmen Tots [sic. Sportsmen Tims], for young people. The Sportsmen Juniors [Junior Sportsmen] and then the Sportsmen Seniors [Senior Sportsmen] and what you have on the back of your sweater would be black, a sweater with a white top hat and cane, that was what you had, that was the uniform of the day. And you had to, you know, as a member of the gang, you had to do some things you didn't like to do. You'd go into the churches, take money out of the thing. I mean, you would just go in there and take it out as such but you would, when they would put the money where they would light, light the candles, you know, they'd take out the money. And then, you know, we'd be in the projects at the community center and you'd be getting, recruiting people to join the gang. You know, if they didn't join, you know they, you'd have, you know, big deals, but we had one big guy, I forget his name right now, he's a movie star, big black guy, Jessie [ph.], Jessie something or another, but I forget his name now, and he didn't want to join the gang and I told him, "Jessie, you've got to join the gang," 'cause I was the right-hand to the guy who was running the gang and I knew what they would do. You know, they would, you come outside of the, outside of the community center and they'd call you over to the car and then you'd be leaning on the car, car, and one guy would hit you in the stomach, he'd bend you over then some guy would get on the car and jump on your back and then they'd kick you. I mean, they didn't hurt you that much but, you know--
Speaker 1: That's, that hurts (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that hurts. And then, and then when the lady who was running the community center would come out, the cops would come, you would just, walk in different directions so the cops didn't know where to go 'cause there'd be like eight guys going in eight different directions but you had to do it.
Speaker 1: So how did you get involved in the gang, I mean, what happened? What was your introduction to gang life?
Speaker 2: Well, my introduction was like when I was growing up in the projects and I'd go to the schoolyard, we'd be playing stickball and basketball--
Speaker 1: So you're about eleven, twelve?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was eleven and twelve, thirteen, and I'd be playing, you know, stickball and basketball with the guys. Lloyd Popu [ph.] was the president of the gang, he got his bones 'cause he took the stick, he had a stick and somebody said something to him he started, he broke the stick over the guy's back, probably, again, that wasn't that bad. It wasn't, it's like a bruise thing, it wasn't like a brick, it wasn't terrible, but everybody was scared of him and thought he was crazy. And so he started his little gang. And so, and I had to join. And what would happen is when you come home from the projects and get off the bus to walk home, the guys would be waiting for you. "Hey, what's up bro? What you wanna do?" And you go like, "Eh." "Hey, let's see how you, let's, let's see how y'all with your hands?" So you like fight one guy. You might beat him during the second or third, it's not real beating but, you know, boom, boom, boom but by the time you got to the fourth guy, you know, that was it, and then I'd go home and go upstairs and my mother [Beulah Kent Oxendine] would say, "Hey, what happened to you," used to call me Junior. "Nothing." But you have like a, you know, a cut on your eye, whatever, but I didn't want to do that because I didn't want my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] to come down to do anything 'cause, you know, I didn't want them to beat my father, you know what I mean. So you never would tell anybody. So sometimes I would not get off the bus where I lived but I would get off the next stop and in the projects you can go across the rooftops, you know, and then work your way down, sneak in another way but you can only do that so long and then you got to join (laughter) but they let me join but they didn't really demand that much out of me because they, they knew I was kind of smart. I was, they were proud that I went to Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] and even when I went to Hunter College [New York, New York] because, you know (shrugs).
Story_ID: 369721
Speaker 1: Now this is Sportsmen, right?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the bad guy.
Speaker 1: All right. It seemed like that logo of the cane and the gloves and the top hat and stuff is used by the gangs around the country, too?
Speaker 2: Oh really, I wasn't aware of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly. I've seen it in Chicago [Illinois] and I can't think of which gang uses it but, yeah. I think the Vice Lords use it, I think--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago, yeah, same logo.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't realize--
Speaker 1: They probably came from New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Oh wow. And so, and, you know, mine was a passive involvement. I mean, of course, you know, when you would have gang fights, especially at school, in junior high school [J.H.S. 123, James M. Kieran School, Bronx, New York], then I was kind of like the war lord to the guy who ran it because like the brains of the group and I would tell the guys, "Look we're going to be having this thing after school, three o'clock, if you're not going to get involved, go around the other exit, don't come out the front 'cause we got a few knives in the gutter," and then the guy who would have the fight with would have like a razorblade in his hand, you know. And so what happens is two guys would go to each other and then one would smack one guy, and you'd give a little cut, you know, and then they'd start fighting. That didn't happen that often but it happened enough, you know. I mean, it only happened a couple of times during the semester.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you're like, you're not even going to school with the same, with the regular guys, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's right.
Speaker 1: So, but you got to come back in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was going to the same junior high school but I was going to 7SP1 and 9SP1, which was the special classes within the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: They still had the seventh, eighth and ninth grades but then they had the special classes, 7SP1, special progress one, 7SP2, 9SP1, yeah, so, those guys and girls were doing one and a half, one and a half rather than one, one, one.
Speaker 1: And you were two years younger than--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was ridiculous.
Speaker 1: --than the rest of 'em, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was really the small guy when I was growing up and when I'd go to parties, I'd have to step on the, you know, soapbox, to kiss the girls to dance. I mean, I still thought I was a cool guy, you know, and they still knew I was one of the boys in the projects, but--
Speaker 1: What kind of music was out there? What did you like in those days?
Speaker 2: Well those are the rhythm and blues, you know, Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson], you know, there was dancing and, you know, wild stuff (laughter), you know, down there, humping your back like a alley cat, catch us, you know, one stroke, two stroke, three stroke, we'd be, we'd be crazy, oh man. And I think about those parties every Saturday night when you're a teenager. You know, you go from one project to another project and that's where the gang fights would happen because somebody would be dancing with somebody's girl too close, then there'd be a fight start right there as you're leaving the apartment or in there and then you go out, downstairs and finish the fight but people are halfway drunk so that's not a problem but the next day, you know, you'd have to go back and get somebody 'cause see, Larry [Larry Crowe], if you did, if you were the bad guy and punched out my guy, well, Saturday morning, Sunday morning, I'd be knocking on your door. Your sister or your brother would answer, "Could you tell Larry to come out please." It'd be better if you didn't come out 'cause you'd have to fight. And I remember a lot of these guys I grew up with are dead now. They got killed in Vietnam and a lot of them went to jail for doing stuff, threw knife on his installment plan, two years, three years here, five to ten here, robbing this little place, robbing that, doing silly stuff--
Story_ID: 369722
Speaker 1: What role did the church play in your, in your family or in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine], you know, made us go to church so, and that gave me some fundamental. Well I had the moral structures from my parents and, and the whole black community. I think if it wasn't for civil rights, black people would be conservative, more conservative than you can imagine. I mean, no one has any idea (laughter) of how conservative black people really are. We didn't stop being conservative until, as I say, crack cocaine and stuff came out and then all of a sudden, women were selling their bodies and their children and all of a sudden, you find these lyrics and these bad languages, calling your mothers this and that because their mothers were this and that. They didn't have any respect but prior to that, prior to the '80s [1980s], we never disrespected our parents, never. It's a totally new phenomenon and I blame it on the drugs, I really do. We never had songs like that, words like that, but it was true and I saw it in my brother's [James Oxendine] bars because we had bars and we owned a little, you know, tenement houses and you'd see women, you know, that were doing cocaine and, with babies in their laps and booze on the table and stuff like that, I mean, that was real underbelly. I mean, I saw some underbelly stuff. It wasn't who we were but it's what we heard about at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: So you were Catholic, you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, still am.
Speaker 1: Were your parents Catholics?
Speaker 2: My mother was, my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he, what was he? He wasn't like a Seventh-day Adventist or anything like that, he was more like Mary Baker Eddy or something.
Speaker 1: Christian Science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Christian Scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting that they would have two different religions?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it didn't, it didn't cause any conflict?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing. I went with him every now and then but I was always at the Catholic thing. I got baptized (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 369723
Speaker 1: I know (background noise) you mentioned movies and going to the movies and that sort of thing but what role did television play at that point. You were like one of the first gener-, you're about the first generation to come in contact with television.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And since you were subsequently buying TV stations, what, what role did TV play in your life at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I got to tell you, my mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine] and my sister [Joan Oxendine] and lots of people grew up on the soap operas (laughter), I don't know how they lived by the soap operas, I didn't, that didn't mean anything to me, I lived by the movies, I still do. I mean, here I am, seventy-one, I go to movies two, three times a week. There's not a movie out that you could mention that I probably haven't seen. The only difference is, I go to the independent movies. The other movies I don't just go into, find myself a critic and I go a lot by myself because nobody wants to go to movies that much. So maybe I got that from my youth. On the television side, I got into the ownership by accident, honestly. I mean, I really wasn't, I didn't know AM from FM or VHF [very high frequency] from UHF [ultra high frequency] at the time I got into business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you weren't really ever thinking about owning an FM--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when you were a kid, you never thought that you'd own a TV station?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that wasn't an ambition, necessarily?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 369724
Speaker 1: But you are like a smart kid in the Bronx [New York], two years younger than everybody else in class, you know, and so, in, you go to Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], well who were, were there any special teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a guy named George Bernard Shaw, like the writer. He kind of looked like you. He had a (gesture), this and that, no hair.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No hair?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was bald too, looked like you, your age, and he wore a straw hat and he had this red convertible Triumph and he lived in Greenwich Village [New York, New York] (laughter). He was the one who wanted me to be an English teacher. He was so cool and he got me to go to the library. So I used to go to the 42nd Street library [Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York, New York], that was like a relief, 'cause then I've got to be young enough, you know, I could travel on the train. So I'd get up on Saturday and Sunday and I'd go down to 42nd Street library and study all day, well most of the day. I'd leave at about maybe three and I'd go to 55th Street and to the Modern Library [Museum of Modern Art Library, New York, New York] and I'd go play chess for a little bit and then I'd go home for dinner but George Bernard Shaw motivated me to read and I liked literature. I wanted to be like him. I really was going to be an English teacher. I mean, I was an English teacher but I was going to be an English major but somebody screwed that up for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now were you taking Spanish in school when you were--
Speaker 2: At that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was taking French.
Speaker 1: French, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: French and German.
Speaker 1: So did you, was it discovered or did you discover you had an aptitude for language at that point?
Speaker 2: No, no because I think when I was taking German, like an idiot, I was taking, I thought I was going to be pre-med so I took scientific German and that was worse than regular German (laughter) because, God, you talk about some long words, talk about, ah, like what am I doing? You see the problem is, one thing I learned in life was that I had to be a quick learner 'cause I always got thrown in places I shouldn't have been before my time and I don't know how long I was going to be there so I had to get as much as possible as I could. That's why I could make a good consultant, you know, assess things all the time 'cause I always had to be aware and always the odd man out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you, how did you, to what do you attribute your study habits 'cause I know you must have had a really good study habits--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and to--
Speaker 2: Well I had good study habits because I was so thirsty for a place to study. So the higher up you go in the education thing, the more you need space to study and I would get cramped all the time because, well it wasn't so bad in elementary school [P.S. 46, Arthur Tappan School, New York, New York], that's not that tough, but in junior high school [J.H.S. 123, James M. Kieran School, Bronx, New York], you know, you just got the kitchen and in the college [Hunter College, New York, New York], you just got the kitchen and it gets even worse. So then I finally went from the kitchen to the New York Public Library on 42nd Street.
Story_ID: 369725
Speaker 1: And I could breathe and I wanted to stay there [Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York, New York] as long as I could. That's why I didn't have any choice. I was going to go home to a folding bed and kitchen table, washing pots and pans.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is, so--
Speaker 1: And doing laundry 'cause there was six kids and in the housing project every Saturday you've got to go do laundry before you did, first you had to go wash all the windows and then you had to use paper, you know, newspaper to clean the windows, then you got five or six loads of clothing for these kids, for us, take them over to the place, you got to put it in the washer, then you've got to put it in the wringer, then you got to put it in the dryer, then you got to fold it, then you got to go shopping. You got ten dollars to go shopping for the family for the week, before you could do anything else you wanted to do.
Speaker 2: So you had to do the shopping?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I was like the oldest. I don't know if it was at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], one of my professors said, "Well, you know, we don't make, we only make gentlemen's here, we don't make regular people." I said, now, "What were you?" I said, "Oh, I was just a staff sergeant in the [U.S.] Marine Corps." He said, "Oh, we only make generals here." He said, "You know, in the civilian life, you know what the lowest paid job is and the worst job in the world? It's a tie between the toll takers on the bridges and people who sell tokens in subways." I said, "Oh, interesting." I said, "My father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] sold tokens," and he looked like (gesture), this is Professor Glover [John D. Glover], my father, was chair. I said, but it wasn't bad because I used to go over there and I'd roll pennies and nickels, quarters and dimes and then when I used to go shopping with the ten dollars he gave me, I'd take my two brothers [Raymond Oxendine and Michael Oxendine] and sisters [Joan Oxendine and Hazel Oxendine], they would take a piece of paper and we would go to the different aisles and when we got up to the thing we would add it up. I'd give them a number, $9.20, they give me a number because if we got too much, it was embarrassing because then we had to take stuff back. There's six people waiting, there you are, "Well, that's $10.15."  "I only got $10." "Well, what do you want to take back?" And then you've got to figure out, shoot, this is really embarrassing. I said, "So my old man with that job that you think is the worst, helped me out. He's the one that got me to Harvard," this guy like, that makes two years, was embarrassed, treated me like a king (laughter), funny thing.
Story_ID: 369726
Speaker 1: In high school, did you, so you, how were your grades at Bronx High School [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty good, pretty good in high school. College got to be a little tough the first two years 'cause I just got it up to here, you know. I didn't really know what I wanted to do, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well how did you choose, you said your father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] just got you and said we're going to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Down to college, yeah. So, I didn't even want to go first of all.
Speaker 1: Did you have any counseling in high school about where to go to college? Did they give you any counseling?
Speaker 2: Well they gave me counseling. I had a scholarship to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] but I didn't have enough carfare to go from New York City [New York, New York] to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: So, and nobody knew how to--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They couldn't figure out how to get you there?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I had a partial scholarship to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] but that was out of the question in terms of going there. I could have gone there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the Howard University, they, you know, a couple of fraternities sent me some stuff. Oh, come on up and visit us in Harlem [New York, New York] at some of their fraternity houses. So I brought some of my friends from the projects to go with me, a couple of my buddies, Morris Wilson [ph.] and this other guy, Roland Penn [ph.]. Well, this big black guy, Morris is my best friend. "You can come in, but they can't." Well, what? Well, you don't want them to come? They can't come. Okay, no. One fall off of one. I said, I'm out of here, 'cause you don't want to fight us, 'cause that's what we do, nicer tone. So I kind of messed up Howard, anyway, on the fraternity side, 'cause I go like, no, man, you can't do this. You know, my boys here, we just came to the party to see what college is like, you know. "Well, you can come in, but," you know, they were all wearing those white, you know, the white sweaters with the blue, red, white and blue, and my guys were looking, they looked like gangsters, not bad gangsters but what was I supposed to do? Am I going to go into a fraternity thing to go to college or leave my boys outside? What are you going to do, wait for me until after the party, then I got to go home? And they go like, "What's up? What was it, you left us outside? We're your boys, we grew up together, since we're eleven and now we're like, you know, eighteen, nineteen years old, we did everything, and you're going to leave us for these jerks," 'cause you know, they could have creamed them, they would have launched them. I go like, no man, don't do that, I'm going to get in trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't have no coun- I didn't have the counseling in that sense.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no, I think there was very little help from the school in terms of where you're going to go to school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I just got lucky, they didn't think I was going to pass all those tests so they didn't know what to do with me.
Story_ID: 369727
Speaker 1: Your father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] gets you together, says you're going to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so how did, did he have a way to finance it or did you--
Speaker 2: No, well that was free, city.
Speaker 1: Okay, City College of New York [sic. City University of New York, New York, New York], right.
Speaker 2: I could have gone to City University of New York, which is City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] downtown, Hunter College, Brooklyn [Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York], 'cause I had an uncle who was teaching in the college system but I didn't want to, again, you know, I couldn't, I didn't have a whole lot of money to go to Manhattan [New York] from, you know. I used to use my bus pass. When we moved from Harlem [New York, New York] to the Bronx [New York], I used to have a bus pass and so we could get credit. I could come back to Harlem and Sam's Grocery [ph.] on 155th Street, we could get food until my father got paid on the weekend. So I would come from school, all the way back, and then when I tried to get on the bus to go to the Bronx, the guy goes like, "It's too late, you know, it's 4:00, 4:30," I have to walk from Harlem to the Bronx. Go down, past the Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], cross 149th Street, Southern Boulevard, pass my school, I didn't have to do it that much. So we would, so you pace yourself in your head. First I'm going to the Yankee Stadium, then I pass the Polo Ground [Polo Grounds, New York, New York], the first Polo Ground at Yankee Stadium, and you, you know, you do what you've got to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, anyway, so Hunter, so, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Hunter was close.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Hunter was close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] was here, Hunter was one train stop away.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, well how did--
Speaker 2: City College was all the way, isn't that a stupid reason not to go. I really wanted to go to City. I didn't want to go to an all-girls school, you know, even though it wasn't at the time but in my head, I don't want to go there, I want to go to the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: So Hunter at the time was a, was a, it had been an all-girls school or was--
Speaker 2: It was still all-girls school in 1959, in Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was co-ed in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: In the Bronx, okay, I got you now, all right, I understand. Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So here I'm going with all these Jewish girls and whatnot and they went to Hunter, (laughter) you know, oh.
Speaker 1: So how did you do at Hunter?
Speaker 2: The first two years I didn't do that well.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, you said it was a struggle, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I quit. I was in the bathroom, and I'm going, I can't take this, I quit.
Speaker 1: Well what was the hardest thing, what were you, what was on your mind then in terms of a career?
Speaker 2: In terms of a career, I just wanted to be like a school teacher and I really loved English but what happened was when I was up at Hunter, I had a professor named Tishey [ph.], Professor Tishey and she was tough and she was chairman of the department of English and she liked me. She says, "You want to be an English major?" I said, "Yes ma'am." She said, "I'm going to help you out, I'm going to teach you how to write 'cause your sentences are too long, dah, dah, dah, dah," and I still have, I still got that book on this table right now, (unclear). She said, "Every sentence has a subject, a verb and a predicate. You only need those three things and sentences make paragraphs and paragraphs make dah, dah, dah, dah. If you do that, you can be an English major," I said, "Okay." So I did really, really well and then it was time for our paper and I wrote a paper called, 'A Comparison of Women: School to Scandal and Lock's, Rape of the Lock,' [ph.] it was, yeah, 'Sheridan's School for Scandal and Lock's,' and somebody's 'Rape of the Lock,' but I didn't have a typewriter and it had to be typed. So this one kid in my class was bad in German, I was doing pretty good in German. I said, "I will write your German paper if you type my English paper." "Okay." He meets me in front of the class, gives me the English paper, I didn't proof it. I gave him the German paper, I got my paper back, it was D minus, minus, minus. I go, and she called me in her office and she said, "You will never be an English major," but like, "What did I do?" "Look at this, and I really believed in you," and I'm going (gesture), well me being the strong silent type, instead of saying, "Professor Tishey, here is the written thing, I just wanted to get it typed," I didn't say anything, except I put out the word on the campus that when this guy came about, just put your hands up because I'm going to kill you and I was really ready to do that. He transferred schools (laughter) 'cause I was, I put that total guy, I said, "Hey man, you see me, just put your hands up, you're going to die," and he knew I wasn't kidding 'cause I used to work at night with my buddy, Ronnie Gomez [ph.], Puerto Rican guy who passed also, we used to work in the bowling alleys at night, we would wax down the bowling alleys, scrub the floor but we would go to the bar, siphon all the booze out of the things and sell it, you know, on campus, so we could have some money, but yeah, I wanted to be an English major.
Story_ID: 369728
Speaker 1: So this incident in the English department [at Hunter College, New York, New York] was like a final straw or something for you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I just decided, this is not making any sense.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just got, now you got a job, or did you already have the job or what did you do?
Speaker 2: No. I had different kinds of jobs, part-time jobs. You know, I had a job working at Crumbs [ph.] on the Concourse [Grand Concourse], that's where they make ice cream sodas in the Bronx [New York]. So, that was kind of a fun job, even though I was first starting out in a job. You have a fifteen minute break. When you first start, you make yourself an ice cream sundae and a banana split and all the stuff and you put it underneath the counter so when you have your break, you know, you become a glutton and try to eat all that stuff and after you get sick one or two days, when you have a break, you just have a cup of coffee and a piece of cake (laughter). And then I worked at, all in the Bronx, I worked, I forget the department store in the Bronx, big department store, Alexander's Department Store and what I did there, I worked in the boutique department and they would ask me to, you know, when a customer would buy a boutique of sorts, a piece of crystal or-, I'd have to bring it down from the warehouse, which was up at the top of the store. But there wasn't a lot of sales there so I would be sleeping in the racks, or studying, but there was this mean guy who was in charge of the warehouse and he'd be looking for me every time I'm there and he'd make me separate hangers. I would have barrels of hangers to separate. Can you imagine like (laughter), what a job, separating hangers. In a department store you never, there's always hangers to be separated.
Speaker 1: You never run out.
Speaker 2: And then I had a job working, still in the Bronx in that same community, it was a ribs and chicken place. So my job was to go get the crates of ribs and chicken, put them in the freezer, open up the crates, take out the ice, spit the chickens and the ribs on the spit, put them in the barbeque thing, so we could barbeque the chicken and then take the grease pans underneath them and put them in a grease barrel and every night, when I left there, I had grease from here to here, riding on the train, going back to the Bronx, going home. That was a traumatic, I had a lot of jobs 'cause my old man [Edward Oxendine, Jr.] only made about a hundred bucks a week. And so, you know, six kids, so I made the money and I gave it to him.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By that time most of the money--
Speaker 1: Was your sister [Joan Oxendine] staying at home? Was she working too by this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was working, generally.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you said she--
Speaker 2: My twin.
Speaker 1: --worked for the phone company, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and your brother [James Oxendine], who was already out of the house--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --older brother.
Speaker 2: The older one, um-hm.
Story_ID: 369729
Speaker 1: You were out of school [Hunter College, New York, New York], how long? From '60 [1960] to what?
Speaker 2: About '61 [1961] to '63 [1963], which is about two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went back in '63 [1963] to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What made you go back or, or--
Speaker 2: What made me go back was I realized that it wasn't that great out there. You know my friend, Morris Wilson [ph.], who I grew up with in the housing projects, his sister was my first girlfriend, Lavinia [ph.], he was working as a dental assistant making teeth, or something like that. Roland Penn [ph.], the other guy, he was working places, you know, stealing more than he was making, you know, working, you know. Wherever he was, he was always stealing something, but I realized that that was not the way to go and I didn't want to spend the rest of my life in those kind of jobs, you know. It seemed to be kind of romantic when you're not doing them and then when you're young and you go into college and everybody else is working and they got some money and you got none, then it seems like, oh man, the grass is green, let me get a gig. Well, one day I was like, no, this is not going to get it and plus the people were stagnant. They didn't, they weren't doing anything. They weren't broadening their horizons. They weren't learning anything and they weren't going anywhere. So I went like, nah, so I decided, and I was working, you know, nice little, that last job working 435 East 55th Street as a switchboard operator was great because I worked there and it was a building of airline stewardesses and nurses and that's when my buddy, Tom Bellucci, he was working for American Airlines as an executive. He was young then, now I've known him forever, and so I had parties. They would call me, "Hey, who's in the building," and I'd tell them and I'd arrange the parties and I'd go up there and check 'em out. The girls, when they wanted to, this is funny about women, I learned a lot, the stewardesses and nurses. They always had three or four boyfriends. "Hey, John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], did so and so just leave yet?" And someone else would be coming and then they'd be cooking for their boyfriends. "John, what do you think about this?" And they would send the spaghetti plate down on one elevator, I'd check it out. "Hey Princess, too salty, you need a little more pepper," dah, dah, dah, dah. I mean, I'd be doing, I was having a good time. And sometimes I'd party too much, "Hey I'm tired, do you want to take the board for me?" "Oh, okay, John." You know, I'd go over to their apartment and, I wasn't spanking them or nothing, I was just, but I realize that, that wasn't the way to live, not for me. I didn't always want to be the switchboard operator. I didn't always want to be the guy spitting chickens. I didn't want to be separating hangers, I didn't want to be at the bottom of the rung.
Story_ID: 369730
Speaker 1: On your second trip back to, I mean, Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York], the second go around, it was easier than it was the first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I was focused.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And I liked political science, that's why I went into the Peace Corps. You see, I really wanted to go to Africa, I didn't want to go to South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your major was political science and sociology?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any special teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 2: In the political science department?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't really remember their names but there were. What amazed me were these white teachers who know so much about Africa and that was a time when Africa was being liberated from all the colonies.
Speaker 1: That's right, a real dramatic time for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was amazing. It was fascinating. I've never been to Africa. I'm working on a project now, they want me to run a operation in South Africa now, I'm debating. It's taken me all this long but I always wanted to go to Africa and I've never been. I've been all over the world but I haven't been to Africa. They sent me to Santiago, Chile instead. Well you don't get to choose.
Speaker 1: So did your political science curriculum, what was it, heavy on international politics?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did--
Speaker 2: And I loved it better than I liked domestic politics. I mean I couldn't relate to, I couldn't relate to the way they were teaching U.S. politics.
Story_ID: 369731
Speaker 1: Now were you very much politicized in those days? I mean, did you, I mean, were you closely watching the Civil Rights Movement? I know the March on Washington was in '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2: Yeah I marched there.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there.
Speaker 1: All right, so what happened?
Speaker 2: I have pictures of me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dave Singleton, big tall white guy, loved our family, came in the community, he and I went down there.
Speaker 1: Were you part of any organization or did you just go on your--or did you just--
Speaker 2: Well it was with his church--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and group, yeah.
Speaker 1: What church was it? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I forget but he was a Presbyterian.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But he's working with other people in projects, I was Catholic, but he and I really hit it off. We still are friends to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have an idea that that was a historic trip, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --I mean a historic march, all right.
Speaker 2: I was just young, hanging out with David, doing some good things, that was happening, I thought it made sense.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know shortly after, well, yeah, shortly after the march, President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, right? Did you have any, what were your thoughts about that at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was really devastated. I was devastated because I knew how powerful and tough the strong could be, you know, I always knew that the strong preyed on the weak until they get weak and are preyed upon but I never thought the president was weak but he got preyed upon and that defied all I knew in the street. The strong prey on the weak until they become weak and are preyed upon. What did he do to allow himself to be preyed upon? Well, now, I think he did some stupid things. Stalin [Joseph Stalin] would not have done that. Hitler [Adolf Hitler] would not have done that and neither would a few others. The guy in Korea wouldn't do that, they all travel, but he was obviously not that strong but that devastated me 'cause I'm going, whoa. If they can do that to the president, what can they do to us? We've got to do something to get rid of these people like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now during this time period, you've got like, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr] and Malcolm X, you know, highly, they were New York [New York] figures that were highly critical of, of the United States government, especially overseas and international politics. Were you listening to what they had to say in those days or how did you, what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a bit of a conundrum for me. It was, I begin to realize everything wasn't black and white. I had a lot of respect for Malcolm X because I thought what he said made a lot of sense and being young and physical in a way myself, I wasn't really supporting what Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was saying, even though I understood, I saw a certain weakness in them, so I kind of leaned toward Malcolm, quite honestly, but rather than, well, then he got killed, you know, right before I went into the Peace Corps, you know, that shocked me. So, I wanted to be on the side of strong but the good strong and while he was strong, there was a stronger strong, which is the United States (laughter) where I lived, that's why I joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You see, so everybody throws a bit of a contradiction for me. They're going like, "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], you understand this, you got the political science stuff, why would you go in the Marine Corps?" I said, "Because our country is at war," it's a lousy war [Vietnam War], so what, it's still our country but the mentality of the Marines was, it doesn't matter, man, we go where we got to go and then after I got out of the Marine Corps, I was going in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. They're going like, "Have you lost your mind?" 'Cause I was living on the east side of New York, you know, "What do you mean?"
Story_ID: 369732
Speaker 1: Let me back track a little bit to, you went to Peace Corps first, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --before you went into the [U.S.] Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, Peace Corps was new, it was one of the New Frontier initiatives of President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, what, what attract--you know, why did you--
Speaker 2: It was international politics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was going to get me out of the Bronx [New York] and I was going to go to Africa in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: So did you have a chance, now you said you were mustered into service in New Mexico, right, or that's where they have training--
Speaker 2: The Peace Corps yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right, and so when you went to, and you describe the--
Speaker 2: Albuquerque, New Mexico, I was at the University of New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you described the party your brother [James Oxendine] (laughter) had for you the night, the day, the night before you left, right--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: You got in trouble. So, so here you go to Albuquerque, what was your first impressions of the Peace Corps, you know, training?
Speaker 2: I thought the Peace Corps training was excellent and I hadn't gone to the Marine Corps but subsequent I think it was as tough as the Marine Corps in a way because we had to run, you know, you had to run like a seven and a half minute mile or maybe a ten minute mile, seven and a half--
Speaker 1: Really, to be in the Peace Corps?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't have to but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but you only run a one mile. In the Marine Corps, we ran a lot of miles but there we are, you know, so you had to run a seven and a half minute mile, we were rappelling off the sides of mountains, we were going across dams and rivers and some big guys there and in, and there were all kinds of people in the Peace Corps, much like in the Marine Corps. You know, I used to think there were white guys can't fight but that was wrong. I ran into some white boys who were bad boys. I mean, they can handle themselves, big, medium, small. I mean, so it got me a whole look at different things. I mean I was a young college guy but they had older guys, all kinds of people and rigorous training and, you know, learning language and political science and stuff. They had two cuts in the, they had two cuts. The first six weeks, if you didn't make it, they cut you and the next six weeks they would cut you but I made both cuts. Now I fell in love with my teacher, she was like this Asian woman, and she treated me like a king. I wasn't fooling around with her but she treated me like a king, you know, she let me drive her car. She'd invite me over to her place for dinner, she was my teacher. So, and then I made the second cut, I called my house, I say, "Hey mom [Beulah Kent Oxendine], I made it, that's the good news, the bad news, I ain't going." "What do you mean, you're not going?" I said "'Cause I'm going, I met this great teacher and I'm going to grad school, at her school." She said, "You better get your butt home right now," even though I was just coming home to go to South America, she wanted me to not go with this teacher and she put the teacher, "Put her on the phone," and she talked to her like, I went, but I was leaving too, so the Peace Corps was fantastic. I subsequently saw that teacher again but that's another story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now by this time, now you've, you had Spanish, I guess, in Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York], right? Did you, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --speak fluent Spanish at all?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were going to Chile with no language skills?
Speaker 2: Once again, we had zero.
Speaker 1: You had some French and some--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not really.
Speaker 1: And it was scientific German at Bronx [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: I didn't find out that I had a thing for language until I went in the Marine Corps because they give you a test, esperanto, to learn to see what your proficiency and I scored really high for being able to learn languages and that's why they put me in the language school. I never knew that I had proficiency for language.
Story_ID: 369733
Speaker 1: So Chile, though, 1965 and, you're go- on your way to Chile and what do you, what do they tell you about Chile and what were your expectations?
Speaker 2: What were my expectations? One, I wasn't, I didn't have any expectations 'cause I didn't want to go to Chile in the first place, I wanted to go to Africa but having said that, being in that twelve week course prior, it was exciting and so we learned about Chile and it sounded like an exciting place and the politics were interesting and I was living in a (speaking Spanish) junta de vecinos. A junta de vecinos is where the neighborhood wherein, the woman, the mother of the house was in charge so it was very political. The father drove a bus. The only time he had off was when they painted the bus. He and another guy, they drove the bus all year and he was a great cook and a nice, nice guy and they were very political. So I got involved in teaching and doing stuff in the community. I used to get up every morning, take showers, I did, I did a lot of stuff there, it was wonderful. I was almost like, you know, I was against the power structure in a way 'cause like the rich social women would want to come into the communities. They'd go like, you could come but don't bring your cars 'cause it's embarrassing, you know, just walk in and whatnot. I mean, I really got involved and they kind of really loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were teaching English, right.
Speaker 2: Teaching English, helping, you know, building little stuff here but it was urban community development more than anything else. It wasn't, you know, bricks and mortars stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you working on building a school or something or something else?
Speaker 2: No, we weren't doing that but what we were doing was helping, well we would help little things that, you know, didn't take a lot of talent but it wasn't doing a little teaching and that, that was good and neighborhood clubs, you know, to help the people. We weren't spies but we were involved in the community.
Speaker 1: Now you all were accused of being spies, right, in the paper? Now tell me that story. You were telling me that when we came in but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One of the first days it says, (speaking Spanish) "Llegaron cuarenta y siete de los Estados Unidos," forty-seven spies, that was us, arrived from the United States, we're going like, what, wow, but you can kind of see that the country was moving a little bit toward the left because when you walked into the Chamber of Deputy [Chamber of Deputies] you would see the Communist Party was the first one there and while we had our community organizations, junta de vecinos, the Communists were really well entrenched in a good way. They were doing things in the community.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now were you shocked to see Communist in, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with such power?
Speaker 2: I was.
Speaker 1: This is Cold War time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so really, you know, it was like a wakeup call.
Speaker 1: Yeah, even though New York [New York], you know, did have like Communist and Socialists run for office from time to time but it's probably the most cosmopolitan of the places--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in the country but--
Speaker 2: But I was surprised to see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Now while you were there, I think the year you were there, that's the year that Salvador Allende was elected. Was that his, yeah, Salvador, right, Allende?
Speaker 2: Well he came in right after--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eduardo Frei [Eduardo Frei Montalva] was there when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and Allende was elected after you left too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 369734
Speaker 1: So you were in the Peace Corps for how long though?
Speaker 2: Just for a short period of time. You know, I had to come back to the states, you know, for a couple of reasons. One, my brother [James Oxendine] was getting ready to go in the [U.S.] military and I wasn't there so they didn't really have, they were kind of missing me in one respect and another respect, I was kind of getting upset with the Peace Corps and some of the things they were doing in terms, I thought they were being too catering to some of the wealthy folks in Santiago [Chile] by the way they were coming into the neighborhoods and not doing the thing they were supposed to do. And so I was at odds with some people there so rather than bang my head against the wall, you know, I kind of left.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So was it difficult to leave this post in the Peace Corps or did you have to--
Speaker 2: No it wasn't, well actually, and I was really involved in the community. I really did a whole lot of stuff but then I got involved into a little argument with one of the guys there. When I was in the Peace Corps my buddies and I met, one of my buddy, Jimbo [ph.], my roommate, we met this wealthy family and they got involved with us and we did a lot of things together and then met some other folks there who were a little disrespectful of the women and I got into a little fracas with them and they weren't happy with that. They go, "Well John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], since you're kind of like a rabble-rouser, we want you to go either, Puerto Montt [Chile], which is at the bottom of Chile or Arica [Chile] which is the top," I'm going like, "You know, I think I'm just going to go home 'cause I don't want to punch anybody out." Well when I got back to Washington [D.C.], the guy who ran the Peace Corps there, had been out of town and came back, "John, why'd you leave without, you know, talking to me and, dah, dah, dah, we love you," and he really did, but I said, "I'm back, what the heck, I'll stay." I could have gone back, 'cause he was, he was something else, the guy who ran it. I forget his name right now but wonderful. He would speak wonderful Spanish and then he would say, (speaking Spanish) "Pero que se yo," what do I know. I was so impressed that, you know, he would be so fluent but then, but what do I know, (speaking Spanish), "Pero que se yo." He really was what I liked but some of the people were from like, I didn't like so much and they didn't like me either and they knew he really cared about me.
Speaker 1: It just dawned on me, was Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] in charge of the Peace Corps when you were involved in it?
Speaker 2: Don't know, don't--
Speaker 1: Samuel F. Yette, Y-E-T-T-E, he's black, black journalist, basically.
Speaker 2: No I don't think so.
Speaker 1: He, he was in charge of it for a minute, you know, in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: I think about it now, you know, that someone tells me about, they have this International Executive Corps [sic. International Executive Service Corps], similar to the Peace Corps where, if you're an international executive you might be able to go and spend some time, six months here, a year here, whatever in different places, providing your skills. Someone said they were going to send me that. I need to check it out. I mean, they don't pay you anything but they pay you room and board but you do some fun things at a senior level, and I thought, hm, that might be an interesting thing to do. If I don't find myself gainful employment between now and the end of the year, and I probably, for me to find gainful employment means I have to have a senior management position where I have a current pay in terms of dollars and an appreciation in terms of the interest, 1, 2, 3 percent, I mean, that's what I do. And so I do a lot of stuff for free. I mean, it's almost like I want my job, that's looking for a job but I don't really want one. I mean, I have enough to live for the next fifteen years, if I live that long, ten years, if I live that long, so, but I often think the Peace Corps is something else. It was my first opportunity to deal at a high level even though I was a little guy, to make a difference, and I always wanted to be that little guy who could make a difference, 'cause I had been that little guy.
Story_ID: 369735
Speaker 1: --You were addressing it earlier like why you joined the [U.S.] Marine Corps. So you join the Marine Corps and you come back, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, yeah, well it does seem an odd choice for a politicized kind of person to, to do that, but, but you were explaining (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I did not want to get drafted into the [U.S.] military and as a school teacher, you're off in the summertime and they had the draft during my years. So I would have, I could have got drafted in June, July, August, every year, and I said, "I don't want to live like this." I don't want to be in the [U.S.] Army 'cause I didn't think very much of the Army, but I did like the Marine Corps because I thought they were pretty sharp people, that made a difference. So if I've got to do war, let me do it, you know, of course the truth of the matter is, you know, the smart person, why would you go in the Marine Corps 'cause you'll probably be cannon fodder but I was young and fortunate (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think it's part of being young and being, you know, kind of having a gung-ho type of mentality?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I grew up in the housing projects and we, you know, we were fighters and, you know, and my brother [James Oxendine] was a gangster-type and, you know, I grew up in John Wayne and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: And go for bad--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I saw 'The Expendables,' you know, I say, now I bet there's some young people who felt like I did fifty years ago. Right now I laugh when I see those movies, it's a total joke. I mean, how can five people come and take, what, an entire army. The movie opens up, they get all the Somalis, that's Africa, then they go to the Middle East and take the Easterners and, you know, they ain't prejudice, they just kill whoever there, I mean, but it's, you know, it's a joke but I'm much older now but I bet there's a lot of people who probably, the enlistment went up significantly (laughter) from that crazy movie.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I have a little bit more balance.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were mustered in at Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia], I mean, did you go to Quantico to train--
Speaker 2: No, I went to Parris Island [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Parris Island, okay, all right, and--
Speaker 2: And it was just like they say in the movies, you know, "The next exercise will be done in four counts, one, two, three, four, get ready, exercise," and I'm going like, "What am I doing here" (laughter), you know. You know, "Ready in the right, ready in the left, ready in the firing line," you wish, you were, you're doggone tired, tip of the front side blade, halfway up and center, from left to right. In my head, '77 [1977], '87 [1987], '97 [1997], 2007, forty-seven years later, tip of the front side blade, halfway up. I got shotguns, pistols here.
Speaker 1: So the training is effective?
Speaker 2: It was fantastic, for me, you know, NRA [National Rifle Association], the whole bit, when I'm not a right wing, crazy guy, I just think if the rabbit had a gun, hunting wouldn't be so popular.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So if you live in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] like I did and you got people in Virginia and West Virginia and Maryland with guns, people in D.C. should have it. They still have a million guns out there but I believe, moderately, we need to be sensible in what we do.
Story_ID: 369736
Speaker 1: What was the toughest part about [U.S.] Marine Corps training? Or did it, or did it, you kind of get into it after a while?
Speaker 2: What was the toughest part? Hm. I think the toughest part about Marine Corps training was trying to reconcile having to be tough with also being kind and considerate 'cause while I was in it, I had tattoos put on my chest, one was a black panther, the other was a rose. The black panther stood for power and stuff, what you needed if you were going to be a killer, the rose is for love and I was always torn. You know, we used to have like blanket parties for people who did things they weren't supposed to in the Marine Corps. So there would be like eighty privates, you know. "The count on deck is eighty privates, count off, one, two," you know. Every now and then, somebody would sneak off or do something they weren't supposed to do and then I would be in charge of the blanket party. So, when you have a blanket party, you're not supposed to tell the people about it but I would say, "Larry [Larry Crowe], you know, you were supposed to be doing your pushups but you were cheating 'cause you put your hand in somebody else's puddle, for what you were making us look bad, I got a blanket party for you tonight." So I'm telling you beforehand and what I would do, and you're not supposed to do that, but I would tell them because then I'd tell the guys that, "You know, yeah, we're going to do this but you could be next so don't try to hurt the people." So we'd have the blanket parties and so I can reconcile the good with the bad. So when I had to like smack somebody, whatever, I didn't feel too bad because you know how to do it. You know, for example, you know people who do things they're not supposed to. If you smack them on the cheeks, here and here, with your hand, boom, boom, they'll probably bleed a little bit and there'll be blood maybe trickling, but it's very superficial and very effective and that's all you have to do. You don't have to bang 'em over the head or do all kinds of bad stuff, you know. And so my challenge has always been, how do you reconcile not going to extremes in what you do?
Speaker 1: A blanket party for those who haven't seen 'The D.I.' or something (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: So when a blanket is pulled over a guy's head (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 'cause he's lying in his bed and you just pull the blanket over his head and start pummeling him.
Speaker 1: So at night, I mean, they don't, they know that probably everybody participated but they don't know who did what?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So they, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right. So, but if you know you're going to have a blanket party so that you go to sleep like this. Now you can't get hurt too badly, you just get, you know, arms, but you're okay, as opposed to be sleeping like this--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and then, and you're sound asleep and, you know, somebody start--and that could be very traumatic. So nobody in my platoon ever had to worry about that 'cause they knew.
Story_ID: 369737
Speaker 1: Were you deployed to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go but they wouldn't let me. I'm glad they didn't 'cause I probably might have been shot or whatever. I, I wanted to go, they wouldn't let me because they said, "Look, we spent too much money on you and you're going to be with the 20th Interrogation and Translation Team, your job is to interrogate prisoners of war or translate documents we have or listen to the enemy, that's it, period."
Speaker 1: What was your entree to the translation team?
Speaker 2: My entree was, you know, that I could, that my language skills were so good in Russian (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, the test--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was my badge.
Speaker 1: And they taught you Russian in the [U.S.] Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any idea, this is kind of maybe off the--
Speaker 2: But you go to jail or you go to, if you don't go to class, you go to jail.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you, at the time, did you have any idea who Pushkin [Alexander Pushkin] was?
Speaker 2: No, the black man, no, with the lights, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I say that for anybody watching this 'cause Pushkin actually structured the Russian language, you know, a black man--
Speaker 2: I can believe that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --structured, gave structure to the language. So--
Speaker 2: Extraordinary, we were an extraordinary people.
Speaker 1: So at any rate, that's--
Speaker 2: No, but that, that's important.
Speaker 1: So here you're learning Russian and so you said you're, the way the, oh, what unit were you in in the Marine--well, Marine Corps? What was your unit?
Speaker 2: Well that was the 20th Interrogation and Translation.
Speaker 1: Twentieth--
Speaker 2: Twentieth Interrogation--
Speaker 1: Okay, Interrogation--
Speaker 2: Twentieth, ITT, 20th ITT, Interrogation and Translation Team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All teams get deployed anywhere.
Speaker 1: Right, and we've interviewed quite a few Marine Corps sergeants and master sergeants and, you know, sergeant majors and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I mean, marine generals, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, did you ever, did you ever interview Gary Cooper [Jerome Gary Cooper]?
Speaker 1: Gary, no, I've heard about him.
Speaker 2: He was a two star, black Marine general.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I wonder if he's still around.
Speaker 1: We never did.
Speaker 2: He was fabulous.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he's passed now.
Speaker 2: Did he pass, he may have passed.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: He looked like a Marine, too. I mean, he was big, real tall.
Speaker 1: You know we talked--
Speaker 2: He was a buddy of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I saw him in '91 [1991] when they had the situation in Iraq and I said to him, and he was working as undersecretary of the [U.S.] Air Force, or something like that, and I went over to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] I said, "Coop," and I just had some foot surgery, I go like, "I understand we're at war. You know, the president [President George Herbert Walker Bush] sent people over to Iraq, I mean, yeah, to get the Iraqis back into Iraq and getting us in Kuwait, so I'll tell you what Coop. I'm willing to volunteer (laughter), I'm going to come back for a bit so we can put this," he said, "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], with all due respect, if they need you or me, we're in big trouble," (laughter) and he allowed me to put things in perspective, you know, like yeah, I'm going like, dah, and he said, "John, you know, you're a good guy, I'm a good guy," he said, "but, if they need you or me at this point, we're in big trouble (laughter)." I said, "Okay, Coop, where are we going to lunch," and he took me to lunch in the Pentagon.
Story_ID: 369738
Speaker 1: So your translation, so how long did you study Russian?
Speaker 2: Twelve, fourteen months.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good solid year of Russian, and that was your job, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my job, from morning 'til night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you started out with little books like little kids and you learn the alphabet and then you have to tell the story, you know, Dick and Jane, almost like, and so by the end of the year, you can look at a picture and describe a whole, speak a paragraph but at first you just start with, "My name is, you know, John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine]. What is your name?" To, "There's a third battalion getting ready to attack, you know, the fifth infantry and the fifth columns inside waiting for the four columns to attack," you progress that much, and you would have grammar, you would have literature, you would have, these were Russians who were teaching us. You'd have your Russian lady would come in in the afternoon and she would sit there and tell you and read you Russian literature, stories, and it'd be so great to see all these killers, marines, you know, all kinds of guys, tough, tough guys sitting there listening to, like little kids in nursery school (laughter). We loved it. It was so beautiful. The language was beautiful. The stories were wonderful. They didn't have nothing to do with war. We had our war stuff, too. The ranks, the serial, the names, dah, dah, dah, but we also had the beautiful part and then, you know, since it was in the Presidio of Monterey [Monterey, California], in Carmel [California], first of all, I'd be going down to, where was it, Cannery Row [Monterey, California], all the jazz places and then I'd go to Carmel and you and I would go together and I'd say, "Hi, Larry [Larry Crowe] is a Russian diplomat and I'm his attache and he thinks you're kind of cute. You want to go out tonight?" We did this so much that the people in the department store would say, "We know you two guys, you're not buying anything, out of here," 'cause I'd wear my uniform one day, he'd wear his the other day, we had more dates, we'd take them to Denny's or whatever, but it was like ridiculous. We had a lot of fun (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Say something in Russian for us for the, for our--
Speaker 2: I could say, (speaking Russian), hello, how are you, and what was most interesting was when one of the guys who had to quit because he couldn't learn the language and he wrote on the board, (speaking Russian), "Byt' ili ne byt'," to be or not to be, "vot v chem vopros," that's the question, "ya dumayu, chto eto ne budet do svidaniya," I think it will not be good-byes, "ya dumayu, chto eto ne budet do svidaniya."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And when I went to Russia, when they had perestroika, when they opened Russia up, I went there with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and they knew I spoke Russian and man, when they knew I spoke Russian, they took me all places. I'd go to a restaurant and they'd take me downstairs, below the restaurant, (speaking Russian), "Chto ty khochesh'," what do you want? And they'd start serving me booze, it's vodka, and I tell you. I would have to take the booze and pour it in the plants, in the sink, 'cause I would have been just drunk. I'm, because you know, a black guy speaking Russian, of course my Russian was only about 30 or 40 percent of what it used to be then but they were so impressed, you know, it's a great language, still is.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, a lot of great Russian authors. So, now you would actually do duty in Japan, too, right, in the Sakhalin islands.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they wanted me to do that, yeah, to stop by to make, just in case, but they were regular guys, [U.S.] Navy, you know, we'd do it too, 'cause we had all kinds of people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Military intelligence.
Speaker 1: You know what Rocky [from 'Rocky and Bullwinkle'] said about that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, oxymoronic, almost, huh.
Speaker 1: Right, but you're engaged in it and so, so you're in the [U.S.] Navy for what, two, two years?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Marine Corps, Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Marine Corps, I'm sorry, Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Well, no, you, you're right because you see, the Navy, the Marine Corps is part of the Navy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I was, I just--
Speaker 2: I didn't realize, you know, we used to tease the guys because our checks were Navy checks. "Yeah, you're part of the Navy." I said, "We're not part, we're partners with the Navy," but we're not partners, we were a part of the Navy, I knew that, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a big difference. I don't know why I said that, that's a big difference.
Speaker 2: But that's the truth, though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: And so we don't like you guys.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in 'til, from '68 [1968] to '73 [1973], right, four years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, you know you had to do like '67 [1967] to '73 [1973], six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so, you became a staff sergeant, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: An E-6, which is pretty good, you know, because you only got ten ranks in, officer or enlisted.
Speaker 1: Right, right. Now did you ever consider becoming an officer? Is there a way to go through OCS [Officer Candidates School] or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I could have. Yeah, but I didn't do it but I should have, I could have. I could have opted for OCS or for the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and when I, I had made a mistake of opting for the FBI, I should have gone for OCS.
Story_ID: 369739
Speaker 1: Now that's a story you told, you know, off-camera too, about the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and what the--
Speaker 2: Well the thing is at that time, they were trying to recruit FBI agents and, before, to be an FBI agent, you had to either be a lawyer, an accountant and I forget the third was but, or linguist, that was one of the three qualifications to be an FBI agent. So I met a lot of agents when I was in the language school, the Defense Language Institute West Coast at the Presidio of Monterey [Monterey, California] and I took the test but, as I said, when I first went there, they looked at me and said, "Hm, that's a nice sports jacket you have and a nice tie but in the future, wear a suit," and that was like an insult in a way. And then they told me about the story at that time about two guys who were FBI agents, living together, one brought his girlfriend to the place and his partner turned him in and they kicked the guy out because his girlfriend spent the night. I mean, that's how strict things were in 1968, '69 [1969]. Can you imagine? That agent calls up his boss and says, "Hey, Larry's [Larry Crowe] got his girlfriend, spent the night," and he got thrown out 'cause it was that way in those years, that was two. Then the third thing when they realized that I could qualify to be an FBI agent, they said, "Well, you know what, you're going to have to infiltrate the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]." I go like, "What?" "Yeah, you're going to have infiltrate the Black Panthers." I said, "I don't think so." I said, "I've been watching these FBI movies on TV, I don't mind kicking down the door, I don't mind doing that, but I am not going to go pretend I'm Larry's friend and then when he discovers me, I don't feel bad that he does, 'cause from where I come from, you don't do that kind of stuff, so count me out. I'll do anything you want, but I'm not going to pretend that I'm somebody that I'm not, Black Panthers or whatever. If I'm doing Black Panthers, it's going to be for real. They ain't going to be because I'm, you know," so that's how they got me not to join.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: If they hadn't said that, I would have been an FBI agent and probably retired twenty years ago, shot or whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, now let's, I'm trying to get the sequence straight now but you were on active duty with the [U.S.] Marine Corps, you weren't active, completely active from '67 [1967] to '73 [1973], right?
Speaker 2: No, I was active reserve, not active, active.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like fourteen months active but the rest of it was just once a month and two weeks in the summer.
Story_ID: 369740
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start working with Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think that was in '68 [1968], probably after I got out of the active, active [U.S.] Marine Corps duty. I went back to teach school but they were on strike and so I didn't want to cross the picket line so I went to work for something like Publix [Publix Super Markets, Inc.] and one of the teachers had a husband who worked in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] and his name was Barry Lemieux, L-E-M-I-E-U-X, and her name was Lillian Lemieux, she was a school teacher with me. She said, "Well, my husband's working at this new organization that, you know, Kennedy got started, Senator Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and I think they're looking for people, why don't you go on in and check it out." So it was the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, which was mainly black managers and also D and S Corporation [Bedford-Stuyvesant D and S Corporation], which was white managers. So I went to the black one and Barry Lemieux was working for the black organization 'cause my mentor, a guy named Al Puryear, who got me the job, a guy you might want to interview, Alvin N. Puryear, P-U-R-Y-E-A-R, he lives in Virginia and also has a place here in Marco Island [Florida]. I just saw him not too long ago, but at any rate, I went down there and Barry Lemieux worked for him. Al Puryear had worked at Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] and Ph.D., smart guy, was the number two guy under Frank Thomas at--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Franklin A. Thomas, right, the--
Speaker 2: He was, Al Puryear's was his number two guy and he had hired Barry Lemieux because Barry worked for him at Exxon and he wanted to integrate the black side of this whole effort to help communities. So that was, they had something comparable in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and probably in your part of the world, wherever the big black communities. I went down there and I saw Marge Thomas [ph.], that was Al Puryear's secretary. I said, "Ma'am, I came to see about a job." She said, "You got a resume?" And I go like, "Nope, what's a resume?" "You don't know what a resume is?" And in comes Al Puryear, big, big Al. "What's the problem," he says? Said, "Well, sir, look, he's trying to find a job, he doesn't have a resume," and so Al said, "Well give him some resumes and let him sit down and create a resume." "Where's he going to do this?" "Let him sit in my office," and he left. And I didn't have much to put in there, you know. Went to college [Hunter College, New York, New York], was in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, Peace Corps, school teacher, they're on strike, and left.
Story_ID: 369741
Speaker 1: Couple weeks later, I get a letter, "Dear Mr. Oxendine [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], this is to offer you a job as management assistant advisor at Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York], ten thousand dollars a year, annually, a couple of weeks," I'm going like, what? In the [U.S.] Marine Corps I was making sixty-nine dollars every two weeks and seventy-one [dollars], every other two weeks so I made a total of a hundred and forty dollars a month. Now I did some work outside of that. You know, I worked at night as a bartender at the Monterey Peninsula Country Club [Pebble Beach, California] so I made a lot of money on the side but, as a marine, I wasn't making anything. School teacher, I was making a hundred bucks a week. So this was heaven.
Speaker 2: Now that's not a lot of money. If it was a hundred dollars a week, was not a lot of money for those days, even.
Speaker 1: Right. So I wound up being his [Alvin N. Puryear], kind of right-hand guy and he took me under his wing and I'd drive up to Columbia University [New York, New York] where he'd be teaching sometime and sit in the back and then drive him up to Riverdale [Bronx, New York] where he lived and he just kind of mentored me. And one day, one of my classmates at Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York], I found out was working at Bed-Stuy and he was making more than me. I'm going, "Hey, doc, how come he's making more?" He said, "You gotta, you got a, do you have a master's [degree]?" I said, "Nope." He said, "What would you get it in?" I said, "I'd probably get it in English." "Why?" I said, "'Cause I want to be an English teacher or at least an assistant principal." He said, "Okay." And then he puts an application on my desk to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] a couple of weeks later. "Fill this out and see me, Big Al." Now my boss, Dick Easton [Richard Easton], was an older guy, he must have been around twenty-nine or something, married. He got the application, too, but he threw it in the garbage and I was scared, so I filled it out but I'm going like, "Dr. Puryear, why, why this?" He said, "Because I think you need a degree in finance. He said, "You need to know business." "Harvard?" He said, "Yeah, just don't go there," he says, "you need two things. Ironed pants, keep your knees under the desk and don't walk around with your mouth open in awe because you only get flies. If you do those two things, you're going to be all right, trust me," and I went to Harvard, and he's the one who put the thought in my pocket, he's the one who got me to do it.
Speaker 2: That, that is quite a story. I mean, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, in the summers, between Harvard, I would come work for him in Brooklyn [New York] and I wrote a couple of things, you know, how to set up some, start small businesses and all and I got my, my basic training, so to say, in Bed-Stuy, setting up small black business, before I went to Harvard. And I went to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] at night to take some courses in accounting so I could learn about finance 'cause I didn't know it, a thing about finance, I didn't care (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now just a couple, just a couple of things. Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] was known nationally as the, as one of the most crumbling places in America, at the time. '60 Minutes' did a piece on it.
Speaker 1: It was one of the what?
Speaker 2: Crumbling, you know, I guess wild urban areas in the country.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: I mean, Bed-Stuy was the--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --armpit of New York [New York] 'cause in those days--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's why they choose it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, I mean, there were movies made about it even, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Well I was there at the beginning of the renaissance.
Speaker 2: And you got there just after the, I guess the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you were saying--I was asking you earlier that it had all gone down before you got there.
Speaker 1: Right, it had.
Speaker 2: A lot of abandoned structures. There was urban homesteading going.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People were just moving in buildings, abandoned buildings and taking them over, you know, good and bad people. So, one of the wilder places. I just wanted to make that point and did, what, do you have anything, any comments about that?
Speaker 1: No, it was pretty much like you suggest and I think, when we had the opportunity to go through the community and make some changes in little ways. There was some housing development opportunities, there were some small business development opportunities, there were some banking opportunities and we were able together, both D and S [Bedford-Stuyvesant D and S Corporation], which was the white side and Bed-Stuy, and so it was a training ground that made a big difference in a community that had been decimated by riots and all the changes that were happening in the late '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 369742
Speaker 1: I want to go to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] now. Who was, what was your, what was your reaction at Harvard? Who was there? Who were the, how many African Americans were involved in the M.B.A. program at Harvard when you got there and, you know?
Speaker 2: Well it was the beginning of us being at Harvard in any big numbers. I think there were seven hundred and fifty in a class at Harvard. I was the Class of '71 [1971]. I mean, you got there in '69 [1969], two years we graduate in '71 [1971]. So there's Section A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, I was in Section I, one of ten and I suspect out of the seven-fifty, maybe we had thirty or forty blacks and a good percentage of us graduated but it was an extraordinary experience because it was brand new. Yeah, when you first arrived there, instead of having one drink at a cocktail party, they gave you three. Wait a minute, you know. We didn't have to do the reverse, you know. We weren't invited at all and now we're over-invited, you know, and I think, and the attitude was, even among, I think, the faculty, we'll give them a gentleman C and that's it and we're going like, eh, you know what? We are the bell curve, most of us are probably okay, some of us are very bright and some of us are at the end. So our grades ought to reflect that. Don't, we're not looking for a gentleman grade C, and so that had to be changed, you know. Those of us who don't belong and others, those who are doing great, let us know, and those who are in the middle, let us know but don't--
Speaker 1: Just so you think, there's a preconceived notion--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you're all the same?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that changed over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was fortunate enough to work for Larry Fouraker [Lawrence E. Fouraker], a Texan, dean of the school of business, took me under his wing. He was a mentor, too, and when he invited me up there, "Well young man, how you going to, where you going to sleep because we're pretty much full in terms of enrollment." I said, "Well in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], sir, I could sleep anywhere," and I really meant that. So he liked that, and he kind of took me on his own, he made me his bartender. So whenever there were any events where he had deans of all the schools come, I'd be tending bar, with a couple of other people, and I'd throw the football with his son and I'd get there early and stay late. When you go, "So John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], what you think about today," (laughter) he'd be asking me all these questions. It was almost like 'The Butler,' I swear (laughter), I mean, because he didn't need me as his bartender, you know. He didn't need me to stay late but, but he meant to me, you know, and he was always a great guy. I felt very fortunate and I would ask him to speak to certain events that we had, the, you know, African American Student Union, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So did the African American students form the student union?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I've heard about that before and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but sometimes we got a little bit too militant, I'm going like, you know what? You guys are going to have to be a little bit more respectful of Dean Fouraker. Now I'm going to get him to come here but this is not a time for you to be saying, "Yeah, right on brother and I want to," you know, give a plaque for this one for making the discus. Why do we, you know, you got, we got to honor the dean for even coming here, doing this. We can party later on our own, we don't need that here, but this is an opportunity, so it was a whole learning experience. And then, you know, the second year we started to boycott, you know, well that was the first year we decided. We were supposed to take, we played this game and there were like, as I said, ten classes, ten sections, and it'd be like thirty students to a section and so we created an all-black corporation to go against all the rest. We came out number two, though, out of all of them, and the dean's going like, "John, I don't know, man, you changed, you guys are changing things up here, I mean, this is really crazy, you know." The few blacks that are in Section A should stay in Section A, B, B and C, but we did make a difference. He said, "You don't have to do this, man, because your grades are good enough that even if you didn't take a final exam, you're going to be okay," but some of these people, if you mess up, you're not getting your M.B.A. So it was an extraordinary experience and now that I think about it, Dean Larry Foraker was, you know, one of the great mentors I had.
Story_ID: 369743
Speaker 1: One of your classmates was Herb Wilkins [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.], who I understand, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a good buddy. He, he was a bit of a mentor too because he was involved in venture capital funding of minorities in, in the broadcast business. And when the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB] decided they wanted to do something, he was one of the people they emulated. The NAB represents the industry. You've got about like ten thousand at that time, radio stations, half of them, AM, half of 'em FM and a thousand TV stations and we, as minorities, had we, 10 percent, we had a hundred television stations of the thousand and of the radio, we'd have about, out of ten thousand, we'd have a thousand, if we had 10 percent but we, the numbers are bad, just like they are now. Today, fast forward, we got about like four television stations, it is 2014, I know, I didn't remember the date (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At one time, you had five.
Speaker 2: I had five by myself--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but today we only have four stations owned by minorities and about two, three hundred stations of radio that own, crazy, but anyway, getting back to Herb. At that time, Ken--well Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president and the NAB was concerned that he might be president in 1980, of course Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] won but they figured that if he became president, he would insist that there be more parity with regard to ownership. So rather than be forced to do anything, they created their own fund and that was Broadcast Capital Fund [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.] and I, fortunately, was a guy that got to run it after, well, they had one guy before me, Sam Ewing, was a great guy, he was my boss. He and I worked together at FSLIC.
Speaker 1: This is Sam--
Speaker 2: Samuel Ewing, E--E-W-I-N-G and he was the director of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp [Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation] where I worked and he had the job before but for some reason it just, things didn't happen like they would like and I got the job. And so Herb was a guy that I could go to, to figure out how we go about helping minorities own radio and TV stations since you've been the guy doing that, and he was very, very helpful and we also did some deals together. He and I, we traveled together. I did, I funded a television station, KXL-something or another in Minnesota and he and I went there. It was so cold, the first thing we did was go to a army navy store and get a mask to cover our faces, that was so cold, but he was a great, great guy. I mean, he had a dry sense of humor, didn't have a lot to say but when he said it was pretty pithy and worthwhile and is a fun guy, for me.
Story_ID: 369744
Speaker 1: Back to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]. Now what was the toughest part about, you know, getting your M.B.A.? Was there a tough part at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was some tough parts. What I found out about the culture at Harvard was despite looking at the resumes of the students there, the seven hundred and fifty, some of them were English majors, architect majors, art history, whatever, what they all had in common, for the most part, were parents and relatives who were captains in industry and at the table they would talk about all sorts of things, stocks and bonds and businesses and acquisitions and mergers, over dinner, something I didn't have the opportunity to do. I don't know about other folks but I didn't have the opportunity, so it was a bit of a disadvantage. So while it was great having, learning something with the small business at Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York], it still did not cover this vast business capitalist system that we live in but it did give me a toe hold in. And so, I had some troubles trying to understand telemarketing and, and, and production and some of the other things and, fortunately, I had a professor, he was called S.K. Bhattacharya, from India, he was a visiting professor. I didn't even know how to use a slide rule. And so he took me under his wing 'cause he knew I was having a little bit of a problem there with some courses like MERC, managerial, economics, reporting and control, it's tough, tough stuff, and what he did was he mentored me also. He said, "Look, John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], I'm here," and he lived in Harvard Yard [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he was from India, just a regular looking guy, he said, "Look, why don't you come over to my house after dinner, a couple nights a week and if you don't mind, you know, we'll go over some of the basics." He taught me how to use a slide rule, he taught me some basics and was one of the reasons that I did well while I was at Harvard. He, again, mentored me. So I've been very fortunate to have some strategic partnerships that made a difference. So when I listen to people talk about, "Well, we going to do this by ourselves," nobody can do anything by themselves. Well there's some things you can. There's some things you need to do alone but there's, you know, it's hard to throw the ball and catch it too. And so, I've learned over, you know, many, many years that it's not bad to have a strategic partner in any number of forms, number of fashions.
Story_ID: 369745
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the business world, now you were alluding a few minutes ago to, well you were saying, exactly, that you're, you're being introduced, just being, being at Harvard school of business [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], you're, you're immersed in a world that you would never be in otherwise. You're hearing conversations about, about business procedures and deals and things that you wouldn't, you know, where you going to hear them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it had no meanings to me, yeah, which is why I think it's so terribly important for those of us who have the opportunity to be able to be a walking wakeup call to the rest of us because it's just basically learning the ABCs. So if we can teach each other the ABCs, once we learn the alphabet, we can write our own stories, our own words, our own novels, our own vignettes, but we first have to learn the alphabet. And I think that what I realize that we, who have not had the opportunities in some instance, for whatever reason, have parallel universes and while we may not have some of the perks that the others have, in our own way, in a parallel economy, we do. So there's some entrepreneurial folks out there who managed to make it work for themselves. Unfortunately, it looks like Cadillacs and cars and pimps, you know, and drugs and things like that, but you find that there's some management skills there too, you know. It takes a certain skill level to build a business, whatever that might be and it takes you showing, taking a concept, proving that it works, making some money so that it's viable and then scaling it, we've done it but we've done it on the other side. So I think if we can teach ourselves these ABCs, we can take some of that very same talent and channel that energy in a way that is mainstream and when that's happened, you know, it's been incredible, and it's happening, slowly but surely, so that's what I see as being, you know, our mission, those of us who have been fortunate enough to be awakened to all that reality around us.
Story_ID: 369746
Speaker 1: You were basically privy to information about the business elite and who they know and what they know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for two years at least, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It made a difference. So when I got out of Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I was an apprentice. So when I got out of Harvard in 1971, so '81 [1981], '91 [1991], 2001, 2011, forty years, forty-three years, out of forty years, I spent the first ten years being somebody's assistant, ten years carrying somebody's water. They say in life, if you have five hours to chop down the cherry tree, should you spend four hours sharpening your axe and one hour chopping or two hours whatever? Each of us is different and my instance, out of that forty year span, ten years of carrying water, I left Harvard and I went to California, Fry Consultants [Fry Consultants Inc.], carrying water, financial management systems in Portland [Oregon] and Seattle [Washington] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California], San Diego [California], yes sir, no sir, and no excuse sir. It's just reading the book called, 'The Long Gray Line' ['The Long Gray Line: The American Journey of West Point's Class of 1966,' Rick Atkinson], you see, there's only three things that's important when you're learning, yes sir, no sir, no excuse sir and no ego. So there I worked, '71 [1971], for a short period of time as an assistant, and I learned a lot and when I'd come back, and it was a short period of time when you look at it in terms of time, but it was a long time because as a consultant, you would have to be five days charged so you're gone most of the time. You say, "Boss, can I come back?" Sometimes you're out two weeks, sometimes you're out, whatever. "Can I come back so I can change my clothes and say hello to my girlfriend or lie in my own bed?" You're, that's intense apprenticeship and I did that for a while and then I left there and went to Korn Ferry, an executive firm, 'cause I met Dick Ferry [Richard Ferry] and Lester Korn who bootstrapped themselves up from Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] White House and I learned there. I learned about how businesses operate, major corporations finding jobs for people, being somebody's assistant, did their EEO [equal employment opportunity] thing. Then I went to bank, international bank, just when First Chicago [First National Bank of Chicago] was starting its international presence and I worked for a guy named Jay Allan Dawson [ph.], he was a right-hand man to Bill McDonough [William J. McDonough]. Bill McDonough was, we called him Willy McD [ph.] behind his back, but he was, ran the New York Fed [Federal Reserve Bank of New York] and he was running the international bank and Bill McDonough was quite a guy but I worked for this guy, Jay Allan Dawson as his assistant and he sent me around the country and the world doing things. He sent me to London [England], deal with real estate investment trusts, we had some problems there. I spent several months there and I knew I had finally gotten to be one of the people when they invited me to have tea for a change because the first couple of months they didn't do that, and every week I'd go like, "Boss, I got some more information, can I come home, I ran out of money?" He said, "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], you work for a bank, go downstairs (laughter). I'm the guy, I'm your boss," okay. I was so young and dumb that I was over there living in Europe, in London, and never went to Paris [France] 'cause I was just afraid, all I did was work and then he sent me to Mexico. He sent me to New York [New York]. He sent me all over the place and then finally, and then I went, came back to New York, I came back to the states after working for the bank because I got tired of being overseas. They were going to send me some place that was crazy but, you know, and then they didn't really think that black people could do much.
Story_ID: 369747
Speaker 1: I was in Chicago [Illinois] and my boss there, Benjamin, what was, Ben, Ben Hart, Jr. [ph.], Benjamin Franklin (unclear) Hart, Jr., married to an heiress, chewing gum heiress out of Chicago, he was running the bank [First National Bank of Chicago]. "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], you're going to be the number two guy here. Why would you be the number two guy here? I have correspondent banking for the banks, I've got multinational corporations, I've got the local companies. I've got three guys, each who speaks Spanish fluently with a parent. Why are you going to be lower to the guy? As far as I'm concerned, you've got a junior high school education, I'm going to give you a Ph.D., okay." "Okay." So six months there, I was studying Spanish and I gave a party and I said, and Ben loved me, he really did. He invited me to his family, I met his mom and stuff, I met his kids but he didn't respect me. I said, "Ben, I'm going to have a little party and I'd like to invite you and your wife." "Well what kind of party?" I said, "Well, I'm going to invite our clients." "Who you going to invite?" "I'm going to invite correspondent bankers, I'm going to invite multinational corporation people and I'm going to invite some other local people we lend money to, my house, Saturday night, okay? One thing though, you can't speak English. Well, you can only speak Spanish, it's going to be a Spanish party." "Right." And he came to the party, nobody spoke English, including me, but him, and it turned him around. And he said, "John, God, I want you to do this," I said, "Bob, thank you very much but I got to go." I did my time, I made my point. A black guy named Sam Ewing [Samuel Ewing] was running FSLIC [Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation] and I knew him from Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. He said, "John, if you're in the states, come see me sometime." So I came to see him on my own dime. He, you know, he's government, what does he have, and I became his right-hand man and then the president changed and he lost his job and I was almost forty, about to lose mine, ten years out of Harvard, but I was through with my apprenticeship and then the next thirty years, I was ready to run stuff. So I got the job in Broadcast Capital [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.]. Said, "Why would we offer you this job," there were three guys that were looking for the job, one was a black guy who was FCC [Federal Communications Commission] lawyer, smart, we even thought he was smarter than he was. Another guy was a broadcaster, black, really sharp but he had a checkered suit and they couldn't hear a word he said from the way he looked, and there was me. Red tie, blue suit, white shirt, "Why would we give you the job?" I said, "Because I always wanted to run something." "How could you run anything? You never ran anything." I said, "Yeah, but I worked with people who did." "What would you do the first day you got here?" I said, "The first thing I'd do, is I'd find out what the board of directors wants and within two weeks I'll give you a package you couldn't refuse." "Really, okay." And they gave me the job and I never looked back.
Speaker 2: Is this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those are the people who were running that fund, they hadn't done anything and I kept that 'til the next fifteen years.
Speaker 2: This is '81 [1981], right, Broadcast Capital Fund?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1981, okay, and so this is a venture capital organization based in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that provides, was dedicated to provide an assistance to minority, black, control, communications businesses?
Speaker 1: More representation because we live in a post-literate world. People don't read anymore and they either are alliterate, which means they can read but don't or illiterate, and the world itself is post-literate. So if you don't have your hands on the media, you don't have anything 'cause that's how people communicate and that's why we needed to have a piece of the action. And so that's, was dedicated to that and that was what I did. So I spent my life, we funded about forty-six radio stations, four TV stations and trained three thousand people in how to get the business to stay in business.
Story_ID: 369748
Speaker 1: Talk about the, the FCC's [Federal Communications Commission] tax--
Speaker 2: Certificate program [Minority Tax Certificate Program]?
Speaker 1: --certificate program, right.
Speaker 2: Well it no longer exists but the way it worked was, if you were able to sell your property to a minority, then you wouldn't have to pay the taxes and so consequently you could sell it at a discount. If you had a property that was worth $10 million and you sold it and you had to pay 20 percent capital gain tax on it, you would wind up paying, you'd only be getting $8 million. So it'd be smarter for you to sell it to a minority for $9 million and make more, even if you could sell it to the majority firm for ten, at the end, the net would only be eight. Sell it to a minority for just a little bit more, you make more. So that's how the tax certificate worked. Even I didn't really ever use any tax certificates for my people, I want them to stand on their own, and they did. I was in the business I could have but I didn't, too complicated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: 'Cause see a lot of people who used it took advantage of the minorities and I didn't, you know, I said, look, you stop being black, you stop being female, you stop being whatever when you come play with me. Well let's pretend we're in Las Vegas [Nevada]. When you play poker and you play blackjack, the dealer says, "Do like this if you want a card, do like this if you don't." So now, we deal with one hand. Want a card, do like this. You don't, do like that. You only get one time to make a mistake and after that, you ain't black, you ain't white, you're just playing the game. So I told him, you ain't black, you ain't white, you're just playing the game. You can play whitey with the others. When I worked in Brooklyn [New York], when I worked in California, wherever I worked, "Oh John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], let's go to the community," and I said, "I don't need to concentrate in studying property, I came from that." Even the people I worked for, "Hey Ox Man, you know, you come to the community," I say, "No man. You know where you're going to find me, at the bar, at the pool or in my room, doing work, or at your office. I don't need to come to the community, man, I come from the community." Now you can bring nice little girls and boys who want to--but eyeball to eyeball, nose to nose, you're either going to produce or you're going to be out, okay. That don't mean I ain't coming to community but don't think I'm one of those people who come to community, man, I come from the community (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how I play the game and that's why it worked.
Story_ID: 369749
Speaker 1: Did you have any stories about Broadcast Capital Fund [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.], about, you know, projects that, that worked and those that did not?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Well, I had some fun projects. I had a guy name John Pomeroy, he's my lawyer. When I met him he had a lot of hair, red hair, not married, fast forward thirty years, his kids are grown like mine, in a way. He was an [U.S.] Air Force guy, a pilot--he was a co-pilot in the Air Force in Vietnam, he got shot down and he said when he hit the ground he thought he was dead and blind but when he lifted his head he realized that his visor just covered his eyes and he was otherwise all right but Pomeroy was as straight as an arrow, okay. I mean when he went from the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] to go home, he'd pick up a hitchhiker, but if the guy was smoking pot, he'd drop him off and then go the police station and report the guy, not in a bad way. I mean, this is how Pomeroy was, this is my lawyer, but one of the most wonderful guys in the world. So here is, me, a black guy, and Pomeroy, redhead, and he's from Mississippi, and we're down south doing deals. He put together all my deals. He was a frustrated writer, even though he's a great lawyer from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the whole bit, worked for Dow Lohnes [Dow Lohnes PLLC], a great guy, but he got all this partnership and stuff through me and I gave him part of my company and he made a lot of money. He'll tell you that if you interview him but what I remember, a great story, is that here we would go to these small towns, you get there late, we didn't take credit cards and it'd be black and there's Pomeroy, I mean, I said, man isn't this, this is, this is amazing how the world is turned around. I'm taking you to my community for you to fund us, you know, and, here's this little town and you need me and my people to keep you protected, that used to be the other way around, you know, and I had a lot of those experiences with Pomeroy, but I also had some experiences where as soon as the ink dried on the check I gave the person, I knew the deal was going to be a failure. So I learned one thing, that in business if you do four deals, one will be a homerun, one will be a complete failure and two will tread water. So every four deals you do in life, three, well okay, and they only need, but you only need one homerun and you ought not to quit because you got that failure because you got two that are treading water, 'cause the two that are treading water, you might help, but the other one, and there's nothing you could do about that one that looks bad. You had a feeling that something was wrong and they look good, they smell good, they say all the right things and they're the biggest problem you ever had and I've had some. There's nothing you can do about that. You can't feel bad about that. I used to like, ugh, so yeah, out of all those deals I had some that, man, I go oh, wow, but I had some that are like, yes.
Story_ID: 369750
Speaker 1: What were the characteristics of the deals that went, you know, that went sour as opposed to the homeruns? I mean, are they, did they share like some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The ones that went sour was, where I trusted and didn't necessarily verify or I wanted badly for it to work even though I knew they didn't really have the fundamentals. I knew that they understood broadcasting and station operations but they didn't understand finance or they didn't understand marketing and that there had to be a balance or, you know, basic finance is, if you have, there's two kinds of accounting, cash accounting and accrual accounting. If you have $10 in revenue and you got $6 in expenses, you got $4 left, that's positive cash flow. Revenue is 10, expenses is 6, you got $4 left, cash flow, that's the month of January. February, March, for 12 months, 12 times 10 is 120, 12 times 6 is, what, 84. You got something like a nice 30 plus balance. That's on an accrual basis. You say, "Look, John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], I got a great deal. I got $10 in revenue and I got 6 in expenses, I got 4 left, fund me." "I get it, that's true but what do you have on a cash basis?" "Huh? Well look what I got." I said, "We don't have a cash basis." The $10 in revenue that you have for January, you only get $2 in January, 2 in February, 2 in March and the other 4 in April, 2, 2. The $10 you get in February, you get 10 in February, 10 in March and, I mean, 2, 2, 2 and 4. So that first month, you told me I had 10 in revenue versus, you know, 6 in expense, you got 4 left. You had 10 but you only have 2 in cash, 6 in expenses, you got a shortfall of 4 bucks [dollars], and we just started business and you didn't tell me that. The second month, you only got $2 in revenue out of that 10. You still got, you got a shortfall. So you have to understand, accrual accounting, on that basis I'll help you but on a cash basis, you're in trouble but only for a while, so I'll give you a line of credit and we'll be okay but if we don't have this discussion before, at the end of the month, you're running around figuring out how you're going to pay these guys 'cause you only got $2. You didn't understand some basic stuff, don't be mad at me. So the basic things are that we know some truths. You've got to distinguish between truth and love. Love is exaggerating the good and downplaying the bad, that's love. My mother [Beulah Kent Oxendine] loved me to death. I'd be in Washington, D.C. with her and my aunt, Big Mama [ph.], we'd just going from Washington, D.C. to New York City [New York, New York] and my sense of direction is so wrong I'm heading toward the wrong direction and my aunt says to us, "Junior don't know where he's going 'cause I just--didn't we just pass this place an hour and a half ago?" "Don't talk about Junior." What is the point I'm making? The truth was, my aunt was right but my mother loved me. She exaggerated the good part. "You ought to be glad you're in this car, girl, 'cause (laughter)," and business is the same thing. Love has nothing to do with it 'cause that's exaggerating the good and downplaying the bad 'cause love is the only thing that makes us go to work every day. We exaggerate the good parts and downplay the bad. The only way we can deal with our lady, our wives and our children is we exaggerate the good and downplay the bad. The only way we can do anything is by love, truth is another matter.
Story_ID: 369751
Speaker 1: Has there ever been a situation where you could actually educate a, like the scenario you just gave, could you actually have a project you really wanted to succeed and then try to educate the--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) business person as to what they ought to--
Speaker 2: Could do.
Speaker 1: --do, yeah.
Speaker 2: But my own personal sentiments, sometimes I personally get, you know, look, I got a gym across the street, it cost me fifty grand [$50,000]. Why do I have it? Because my personal trainer is a great guy and he was about to lose his job. I like his wife and stuff like that so I gave him fifty grand. It's my gym. Five years he makes a little money, I knew he wasn't going to make any money looking at it from the beginning. Today, I was there, yesterday, Randy Fine [ph.], nice guy. I said, "Randy, you can close this gym down." "No man, I got to work to save," "Yes I do. You got a nice offer at Pei Wei [Pei Wei Asian Diner], they love you, you've been in the food business, it's okay," I wrote it off in my head, and I'll write it off in my books but I knew that in a community like Boca [Boca Raton, Florida] where the people are gone half the year, there's thousands of gyms, I'm going to Life Time fitness, I own that gym there, I'm going to the Boca Resort and Club [Boca Raton Resort and Club, Boca Raton, Florida], I live here, there's a gym, I need a gym like a hole in the head but I did it anyway. It didn't make any sense. I mean, you might just, you know, piss it down the drain 'cause this time was going to come sooner than later. So we all know that, it's a matter of what we do about it. So, I've educated some of the people, yeah, but I want to give them a chance. I got, see all these, these are all deals that you're looking at here but you know what I do? I do four and one of them are going to be a homerun. Three of them are bullshit. I know that but I didn't know that people went out on a limb for me and I have to be the walking wakeup call to the world for them to be, you know, legitimate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so quantitatively, what kind of a, you know, where did we go with Broadcast Capital Fund [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.], I guess, from its inception to, I guess, when, when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where did we go?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of increasing the number of black ownership--
Speaker 2: Well we increased it--
Speaker 1: --owners of media?
Speaker 2: We increased it, we put forty plus radio stations out there that weren't owned by minorities before and we, we put five television stations that weren't owned by, plus my five.
Speaker 1: And the other five would be Granite, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Granite Broadcasting [Granite Broadcasting Corporation].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, and I got, you know--
Speaker 1: So ten stations, ten television stations and forty radio stations--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and now we're down to what, four--
Speaker 2: There's only four plus.
Speaker 1: --television stations and there are some radio--there are more radio--
Speaker 2: About two hundred.
Speaker 1: About, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but what's two hundred out of twelve thousand?
Story_ID: 369752
Speaker 1: Who invested in the BCFI [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Okay, the investors were the major networks, ABC, NBC and CBS.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They made commitments, major commitments. They had committed two and a half million each, which is $7.5 million and they wanted us to raise another 7.5 from the rest of the industry. At the end of the day, we probably wound up with 7.5 committed from those three and maybe another 50 plus for another 2.5, so roughly $10 million. However, the catch is, half was cash and half was loan guaranty. So, 7.5 really was only 3.75 and 3.75 is loan guaranty. Now the good news is, the end of my journey there, I manage to turn that 3.75 into cash but that wasn't the story. So, less than $4 million to get almost 50 properties out there, over a decade and a half, not a bad run.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when, now you left in 1987, was that true? Did you leave in '87 [1987]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I never really left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What happened was, I came here in '81 [1981], so six years later, at '87 [1987], we'd done a lot of deals, and Bud Paxson [Lowell "Bud" Paxson] was a member of our board. Bud Paxson started Home Shopping Network, selling goods on television and he was a board member and he contributed to Broadcast Capital. He was one of the investors and he said to me, "How'd you like to go into business together," and I thought, why not? You know, I had apprenticed a lot and I was running a company and why not own one too. And so, that's when we decided to go into business and I told my board, Don Thurston [Donald Thurston], who was running Berkshire Broadcasting [Berkshire Broadcasting Corporation] up in North Adams, Massachusetts, who wanted to be the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] chair but lost it, partially because he was supporting Broad Cap rather than, and that's kind of a, you know, they weren't sure, if he ran NAB, you know, is he too, too, you know, liberal?
Speaker 1: Too corporate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, even though he was a Republican. Anyway, long and short of it, I said to him, "Hey, Don, you're the one who pressed me into service." He put a plaque, said, "Pressed into service, John Oxendine [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine]," in gold, I wish I could find it to show it to you and maybe it's here some place, 'cause when he gave me the job he said, "Look, we did this with Sam [Samuel Ewing], big contracts, didn't work, I'm not going to do a big contract with you, I want to shake your hand. If you do good, I'm going to take care, if you don't," but we have one of the best relationships ever, Don Thurston, okay. So, we wound up, saying "Hey, Don, I'm getting ready to leave, it's been fun, I'm going to run my own business." He said, "What you going to do?" I said, "I'm going to own some TV stations." He said, "What you going to be showing?" I said, "I'm going to showing, Home Shopping Cent- ." "Don't worry about that, you can still run Broad Cap." So I kept running Broad Cap and I owned stations and I promoted some people but as I got more stations, like in '94 [1994], 'cause I started a company [Blackstar Communications Inc.] in '87 [1987], I got my first station in '88 [1988], got another one in '89 [1989], then bought a couple more in '94 [1994], so I was getting kind of busy.
Story_ID: 369753
Speaker 1: Now the first one, let's, let's start with the first one and just, just walk us through what happened with the first station.
Speaker 2: Okay, two stations (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How you got it.
Speaker 2: Okay, Bud Paxson [Lowell "Bud" Paxson] had some television stations. He had one in Portland, Oregon, was really, then he wanted to sell it to me for five million [dollars] and he had another one, right up the street from here, WMOD [sic. WBSF-TV; WOTF-TV, Melbourne, Florida], that he wanted to sell for five million dollars. And I think he owned WMOD and he had the ability to, or he was, he could assign the other one in the Portland area to me. So we started a company called Blackstar [Blackstar Communications Inc.] and I started Blackstar and I said, let's name it after Marcus Garvey's steamship lines [Black Star Line] 'cause that's what we did to take us to freedom, even though it came out of New York [New York] port and sank, I liked the symbolism. So this is going to take me to freedom, and Don Thurston [Donald Thurston] said to me, "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], it's always good to have, row your own boat. You can go on a cruise ship, fantastic, got a lot of fun, the problem is that when the cruise is over, you've got to go home but if you row your own boat, you meet somebody you like, you stay and you say to the big, who are those people, bye, how you going to get home?" I said, "Well, it'll take me a little longer but I'll get there when I get there." Well, I like to paddle my own canoe and so this was a chance to paddle my own canoe and I thought that Marcus Garvey was showing us that with a big boat that sank. So, I put up $55,000 and he put up $45,000. I had 55 percent of the company, he had 45 [percent] and said, "What are we going to do now?" He said, "Well I'm going to put $5 million in as preferred stock, we got common stock, preferred stock is like common stock but it's preferred, it gets paid first. Preferred stock, 5 million at 14 percent, that's 700,000 a year, hm. If you get 10 television stations, only 70,000 per station, 10 times 70,000, so let's shoot to get 10 television stations but I'm going to give you this preferred stock, that's what you're going to pay me plus my 5 million back." "Okay, let me," I didn't like that number, 14 percent and I changed it eventually down to about 9 but I wanted to get in the game. So we had a company, 55, 45, I had 55, he had 45, we had 5 million. Then he said, "You need to get $5 million, 'cause this first $5 million I will buy, you can buy, the company will buy 1 of my stations but you need another 5," so, I said, "Why? Where am I going to get $5 million?" He said, "Go borrow it." "And why would they even lend me 5 million?" I said--he said, "Well 'cause, you're going to have $5 million that you own in one station and if they lend you 5, you can buy another. The bank will have 2 stations, 10 million bucks [dollars], and they only put up 5 million, and I, Bud Paxson, will give you a loan, I will give you an affiliation agreement for 5 years at X number of dollars that will cover your debt service, operations, et cetera." "Let's dance, that's a good deal." I went to the bank and I said, "Banker, could I have 5 million." They said, "Why would I want to give you 5 million?" And I told them the story, he said, "Okay." So I closed on one in '88 [1988] and shortly after the second one and then in '89 [1989], there was an opportunity to get one in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. The first two, WMOD, made that WBSF for Florida, Channel 43, and those in Daytona Beach [Florida] really covers Orlando [Florida], which is a bigger market. And then the one I got in Oregon was for $5 million. That was, you got a--that's a K, KBSP [KBSP-TV; KPXG-TV, Salem, Oregon], for Portland, for 5 million. I didn't think either one of them was worth 5 million when I looked at it but when I got the affiliation agreement from Bud, then it made it all right.
Story_ID: 369754
Speaker 1: And then, there was an opportunity to buy another one in Ann Arbor, Michigan, University of Michigan. They had, the person who owned, they owned a television station and cable, you can't own both in the same markets, so he sold me 4.3 million [dollars]. I said, "Well, I only have 4.3 million." He said, "Give me 10 percent," so I borrowed 430,000 and gave it to him and I had the affiliation pay them, you know. He took 10 percent down and I eventually paid him. So for 14.3 million, I had 3 television stations, and by the way, those stations were good because when I sold all the stations in '98 [1998], those three, 14.3 I sold them, about 90 million. Subsequently, after buying those 3, I got an opportunity to get a relationship with Fox [Fox Broadcasting Company] 'cause they were trying to, Fox didn't get into business until '87 [1987] or '86 [1986], when they started to be the fourth network, and they needed some help so they wanted to get all the minorities and they got involved with me and I got, two stations I bought. First I created an LLC, a limited liability company so that I could incorporate other strategic partners. I'd already had Bud Paxson [Lowell "Bud" Paxson] but now I wanted to have Fox and I wanted to have H--HSN [Home Shopping Network], USA Network and you can only have that through a limited liability corporation and they became my limited partners, so I changed (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, this is '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: This is 1994--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --or about, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So Blackstar Communications [Blackstar Communications Inc.] became part of a new entity [Blackstar, LLC], LLC, that's when LLCs were being created. So I helped fund creation of LLCs in general and specifically use it to buy 2 stations, 11 million bucks. I lost money on that deal 'cause I sold it for 7. That was a bad buy in the first place because they were NBC affiliates when I bought them. It was KEVN [KEVN-TV], I think channel TV in, in--
Speaker 2: Rapid City [South Dakota].
Speaker 1: Rapid City and then KIVV [KIVV-TV] in Lee Deadwood [sic. Lead, South Dakota], where they did 'Dances with Wolves.' That was a--
Speaker 2: Lee Deadwood, yeah, South Dakota, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where they did 'Dances with Wolves.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but at any rate, the long and short of it is, you can't buy an NBC affiliated station and cut it off during the Olympics and make it Fox and think the community's going to love you. So, I really pissed them off but I couldn't get the stations otherwise. I would have loved to have bought them and kept them NBC, I would have made a lot of money. I made a lot of money anyway but I would have made really a lot of money but it was okay. I made enough on the others that I could take a loss. Like I told you, four deals, one dies, one's great.
Story_ID: 369755
Speaker 1: But the question was, what about Broad Cap [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.]? So, yeah, in '87 [1987] when I got in my own business [Blackstar Communications Inc.], I still ran it but then about '95 [1995], I stayed on the board and got some other people to be, be the president, you know, CEO, who did a halfway decent job but it, it wasn't doing that well, so I came back and to clean it up, I bought it, which was an ego trip but, you know, hindsight, I think I should have just kept my money (laughter), kept on rolling but it was my baby so I wanted it to be okay. So--
Speaker 2: So this is 1999 you buy it back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, go on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I paid a million dollars for three-fourths of the company. I should have paid a million for the whole thing but I wanted to give Broadcast Capital Fund who got me started, you know, all this love (laughter) versus truth. A good business person like Herb [HistoryMaker Herbert P. Wilkins, Sr.] would not have said, "Hey, give me seventy-five," they would have taken the whole thing but I did deals with Herb Wilkins, I mean, he would charge you interest rate, I would charge less because I was trying to help people get the business. He would take a piece of the company, I would take less because I was more interested in putting out more minorities and less for us but more for them so they could be successful. Herb was right, 'cause that's how business is, and that's one of the reasons why when I wanted to create my own fund beyond this, when I sold those stations, it wasn't for the purpose of saying, goodbye. I told you, I'm in denial about being retired. I got papers all over here. I went to ABC, NBC, Fox, all the rest of them and said, "Hi, now let's really dance. I'll put up $5 million and you guys put up one 150 million. I'll put up 5 personally, let's really have a fund. I know how to fund small, medium and large. I'm going to take color off of, I'm going to do it, anybody that's good," but that was when they were having the deregulation and the politics was bigger than the practicality. You need, you know, good old boy from the Bronx [New York], the Harlem [New York, New York] to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] story, it's nice, but they were busy consolidating the industry and they wanted somebody else. Cat Hughes [HistoryMaker Cathy Hughes], you know, was okay, she did a, I don't, I'm not mad at her but I really wanted to start a real fund. They started some funds but they had some figurehead people and this country, often figureheads run things. They look good, great symbols but they are not accountable because when you look at who brought them to the table, and if we're not in the crowd, our story won't get told.
Speaker 2: Yeah the, yeah I should ask, I didn't ask you earlier about Pluria Marshall [HistoryMaker Pluria Marshall, Jr.] and, you know--
Speaker 1: I knew Pluria very well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Very well, I know his son.
Speaker 2: Yeah, his fight, you know he was in there finding out Charles Tate was involved in the early days of cable and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was with some tough Viking, tough guys. They were good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But then we got sanitized, homogenized and politically correct. They didn't know that. I didn't want this for me to have more, I wanted for us, as a people, to have more and I said, prove the concept and show it to be viable, then I want to scale it but they didn't want to do that. That's okay, you know. It was not my intent to come to Florida and live on the beach, play tennis.
Story_ID: 369756
Speaker 1: What do things look like now? I mean, does it look like that you'll ever be able to, you want to get back into--
Speaker 2: Well I do think that I'll have another bite at the apple. You know, I'm looking at a fiber-optic opportunity right now. The chairman of the board of the organization is showing them how to get started out in, out in the West. I'm trying to help them raise some big bucks [dollars] and I'll take a piece of the action, current pay and give them some of my experience.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you take a big hit during the economic apocalypse, 2008?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody lost between 30 and 75 percent of what they owned, everybody. I don't care who you were. You could have been with Morgan Stanley, Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], you could have been with Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Bank of America Corporation], you could have been with whoever, everybody lost thirty cents to seventy-five cents on the dollar, unless they were all in bonds and nobody was all in bonds. Only old people like me now are in bonds, which is good, 'cause you can make money in bonds. Zero coupon bonds, high premium municipals, double A's, make a lot of sense but, no, everybody lost bucks but I had made enough that it didn't hurt that much. It still hurt and we're just recovering.
Story_ID: 369757
Speaker 1: Do you see any potential in the next generation of people involved in a black entrepreneurs that want to be involved in media or is there a next generation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is a next generation and I think that, you know when you look at the social media, you look at the apps [applications], there's so many opportunities for them that we can enhance the print media, we can enhance the broadcast media, we can enhance cable, we can enhance Internet, all of this is intertwined and now the challenge is just to find out what's wanted and needed and produce it and communications will be a big part because the name of the game in life is, what other service is needed and how can we be, how can we make it more efficient. If you can show how you can make something more efficient, this is great. Whether it's B to B, business, the business or business to C, business consumer. Take something like Uber [Uber Technologies, Inc.]. So, you know, an old Neanderthal guy like me, now I can, my daughter [Jenelle Oxendine], who's twenty-eight puts an app on my phone and I can order a car. We as black people, we love that, these are black cars. We get the prize that comes back to us and they ask us how was the service. Now there are a lot of taxis out there. There was some genius, it wasn't a businessperson, it was the lawyer 'cause a person like, the barriers to getting to this business is tough 'cause the only taxi, you got a medallion price to pay, you got all these regulations. If you're a bad boy or boy, bad girl, they take your license away, they suspend this. They found a lawyer who got through all those barriers to entry to create Uber and you can believe, the taxi drivers and the unions have closed that gap and so Uber is going to do really, really well. All they did was make things more efficient, that's all. They weren't geniuses. They use apps, et cetera. And so young people are going to be able to do the same thing. They have the basic, and they're going to still be doing it in radio and TV no matter what, maybe wearing it on your wrist or on your forehead or on your shoes but there's still going to be that basic concept there. So, yeah, I do think there's going to be some opportunity but it all is back to basic fundamentals. Do I, you know, what is wanted and needed and can you produce it, that's how one makes a difference. The only thing you need in life is to be loved and to make a difference. To be loved is a personal thing, to make a difference, all you got to do is find out what's wanted and needed and you practice by, every time you get up in the morning, not because the alarm clock rings but because you got something to do, whether it's to help the kid across the street, your grandma, yourself, whatever, and all of a sudden you begin to make a difference in life and you attract people who make a difference and you broaden your horizon and that's pretty classy. That's not a, class is not a function of money or how you were born, that your awareness, your exposure and in this world we're getting more and more exposed. More and more people are waking up and the rest of us have to be walking wakeup calls for all the rest, that's our job. You got to be able to use that when we go and I don't think we go. I think we have a past, future and a present.
Story_ID: 369758
Speaker 1: Now when you came out of Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] with an M.B.A., why didn't you go into Corporate America? I think I know the answer already but, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Why do you think it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have to ask you because it's--
Speaker 2: Why do you think?
Speaker 1: --I've been asked to ask you.
Speaker 2: Why do you think it?
Speaker 1: Well, I'd rather, I think, well, you, you seem to be more interested in doing what you can do for yourself rather than, and doing something for our people yourself, generated by what you learn than you are in to join in somebody else's corporation.
Speaker 2: No, I think you're absolutely right--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --however, what I believe is an apprenticeship along the way. You become an apprentice, a journeyman and then a master. Now, the funny thing for me, entrepreneurship was an asset class, it was a way to do things. Through the additional asset class, has been the banks. Oh, there's a lamp, here's something here, let's figure out what it's worth, let's see what the metrics are to make it work, but in a world we have to learn and be really sharp. The world can be your asset class where you can create metrics for it and figure out how it works and that to me was more fascinating than just taking somebody else's old metric. So while it looked, I did go in the corporate world but in different, I did an apprenticeship but in a different kind of way and on a faster track, that's the only difference but, hey, I got offered jobs in Corporate America to do some things.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, could you start off like basically working with consulting firms and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I started with a consulting firm because, you know, I've been in New York [New York], I wanted to get away. So I got a job out there in San Francisco [California], and that was great. Took my Volkswagen, put all of my worldly belongings and drove cross country and stopped off at classmates' homes along the way to San Fran, almost got arrested in some of the places, one was in Ohio. Was it, Shaker Heights [Ohio], some place?
Speaker 1: Yeah, near Cleveland [Ohio], yeah, near Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there. One of my buddies, I stayed at his family's estate. He was a captain in the [U.S.] Marine Corps, a buddy of mine and I stayed there. The house was so big. When I got up in the morning, I couldn't figure out how to get downstairs. (Laughter) It's that big, I'm serious. Who's this black guy driving through that part of the community? The police, "Sir, can we help you?" I said, "Yeah, I'm trying to find Peter Haynes' apartment." Peter Haynes still lives in, he's an architect now, married to an Asian woman, living at, in Boston [Massachusetts], in Cambridge [Massachusetts], but he's, you know, Marine. Amazing how people's lives--I got a piece of his artwork. He made that for me, Blackstar [Blackstar Communications Inc.], when I went to one of our anniversary things. But, yeah, so I just wanted to get away, so I just got in my car, went to San Francisco and, you know, the rest was history.
Story_ID: 369759
Speaker 1: When you came out of business school, there was a, I know there was a big black business entrepreneurial push, you know, you had a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] founded Black Enterprise. You had Tony Brown, 'Tony Brown's Journal' on television.
Speaker 2: I love Tony Brown.
Speaker 1: Yeah, pushing, you know, black entrepreneurs and, you know, they had to, some of the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] programs actually, you know, the small business loans and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Nixon made a big difference. Nixon created a minority, you know, the small business investment corporation [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Corporation], I guess, started, he created minority enterprise, small business investment and he did a heck of a lot for us so I appreciate him. My problem is I never had a good wingman. I've always been a lone ranger. That's why I think strategic partners are so important for us to have. See, when Fry Consultants [Fry Consultants Inc.] was getting bought by ARA Associates [ph.], the reason why I left was because a guy who ran ARA called me to say, "John [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine], we're going to do something about Fry." You know, like, why you calling me? Only because I went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and I think the dean probably told me that, you know, you're going to join, this company's getting bought and you've been here six months and Hadley Ford [ph.] who ran ARA invited me to New York [New York] and I sat at our first board meeting and I'm sitting there like a young associate. And so they're discussing Fry and they're talking about the operation and they say, "Well, regarding Fry, which we own, we went out there and we did a little interview and we decided we'll no longer have a West Coast presence," and with that statement, they fired everybody in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], San Francisco [California], San Diego [California], Portland [Oregon], Seattle [Washington], the whole West Coast and this is the first time I ever saw such power in my life. Nobody cursed, nobody yelled, no nothing but they just wiped out an operation that was power and he was trying to teach me a lesson, that was Hadley Ford and he said, "So John, you go back, you can stay there but they ain't going to be around very long, he was wrong, or you can come to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]," and I came to D.C. 'cause I was scared and the guys who ran the West Coast didn't care 'cause they still were able to get the job from the [U.S.] Department of Labor and the Office of Economic Opportunity, it was okay, it was all okay. It's funny how business operates but speaking about opportunities, because I didn't have any mentors, and all these strangers in L.A., I mean, in San Francisco, guy says, "John, I want you to meet the guy who runs Arm and Hammer. You know who Armand Hammer is?
Speaker 1: Armand Hammer, the rich Armand Hammer, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know Occidental Petroleum [Occidental Petroleum Corporation] and Arm and Hammer. He says, "So young man, I heard about you at Fry Consultants." He invited me to his house. He invited me to spend the night at his house, Armand Hammer. You know, I just came here in the afternoon, he asked me to stay. So he says, "You speak Russian?" I said, "Yes sir," and then we started speaking Russian. "And you speak Spanish, too?" I said, "Yes sir," and we started speaking Spanish. He said, "I'll tell you what. I've got an operation in South America, I've got a problem and the problem is the people in South America, every time I come down there, they don't tell me the truth about what's going on, they all speak Spanish." He said, "I've got an operation in Soviet Union, and I don't know what's going on because nobody speaks Russian." He says, "You think you'd like to come work for me as a consultant, that you work in there? First I'll send you down to South America for a little bit, since you lived down there already, come back and give me a report and then we'll send you up to Russia," and I said, "Thank you, I'll think about it," and I didn't take the job. I went to work for Korn and Ferry [Korn Ferry]. Now if I knew what I knew now, or if I had a father or mother or someone said like, "What, you got an opportunity to do this for this guy in South America and then go to Russia, too, what?"
Speaker 1: Was it just that you didn't want to leave?
Speaker 2: No, I was scared. I just got out of Harvard and, you know, like God, this one job Fry is about to, you know, be gone. I got a chance to work for Korn Ferry, they're going to let me stay in San Francisco, commute to L.A., which I did, give me a Malibu car, give me two plane tickets every week to go back if I wanted to so if I stayed there for two weeks, I had four tickets. So if I met a little teller in a local bank, "Hi, do you want to hang out this weekend?" "Where?" "We'll go San Francisco, I've got an apartment up there," versus, Russia. I didn't have that. We got it now but didn't have it then. But, yeah, I do want one more bite at the apple before they tuck me in.
Story_ID: 369760
Speaker 1: So you're looking for that next bite of the apple. What do you think is going, so you were saying that maybe in the realm of apps [applications] and the cyber world, maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it might be in terms of fiber-optic. Some people put some fiber-optic all around, in this broadband, they're putting up fiber-optic in Oklahoma and trying to do something with the Indians [Native Americans] out there, so how ironic that would be to be involved in doing some things there, you know, the last mile fiber-optic for communities. I had an opportunity to work down in, well down, down in what South Africa there's some things that they're doing to diaspora, trying to make, doing some business development, helping some folks doing that but, you know, I honestly believe that, I don't know what it is I'm going to be doing. I touch a whole lot of things and I would hope something comes to fruition. You know, you might see me cross some paths and I'm on my way to do that International Exchange Corps [sic. International Executive Service Corps] (laughter) experience or I might be, my daughter [Jenelle Oxendine] just sent me a list, I said, "Hey baby, what, where is daddy going to go when it's time to retire, 'cause you can have this place here." So she sent me a list. I said, "Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama are great places," and she sent me ten other places. A place in France, one in Italy, one in Turkey, I said, "Well, I don't know about Turkey 'cause they got the border Christian thing, I don't think they'll be arguing." "Medellin [Colombia]," I said, "No, I know Colombia's supposed to be getting clean but I'm not, I don't run that fast anymore." I said, "But I might find a place that I live that, you know, my, in Chin- what is it, the place in Thailand," and I said, "So, that might be a thing," you know, in my head. So I just like to stay constantly hungry, constantly interested 'til I'm all used up. I mean, I want to be like the seagull. You see the seagull never gets sick. You can't tell an old seagull from a young seagull. They don't have arthritis, they don't have, you know, tennis elbow, 'cause they've got to fish and the only time, you know, a seagull is old versus young is when it falls out of the sky so, (laughter) that must have been an old seagull 'cause he stopped living. I just want to be all used up when I drop out. It doesn't matter when I drop out but when I do I want to be all used up. I want to be like a seagull.
Story_ID: 369761
Speaker 1: Do you have a business philosophy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that at the end of the day, despite the metrics, despite anything else, each of us has an inborn policeman that tells us what to do and what makes sense and after we've had an opportunity to look at whatever we're examining, it's open and as unbiased as we can, and then we've got to go where our inborn policeman, and that will be our truth, not love, but the truth because the truth is exaggerating. Well truth is reality, love I told you before, my thinking is exaggerating the good and downplaying the bad. So I think we have to err more on the side of just being aware and honest with ourselves, win, lose or draw.
Story_ID: 369762
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns today in terms of the black community's access to media?
Speaker 2: To the media?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that we've had sufficient exposure as these years have gone by that we have a certain legitimacy. When I first got involved in the business, we were just looking for good, sharp, intelligent people who wanted to be in the business, now that people are already in the business who can, you know, do some other kinds of things. So I think we, ourselves, instead of really looking, you know, when we look at the consumer, look at our economy how much we have, we have something like $900 billion in our community. I think we need to create our own funds and do some things for ourselves and I think it's going to be so attractive that other people want to come and do it. We have enough. See what happens is we get, our attention spans aren't very long. I mean, I've worked with Bs of the Black Entertainment Sports Lawyers [Black Entertainment and Sports Lawyers Association] advancing, going to the events and I find major corporations have black lawyers, production people, videographers, interviewers, hosts and all just waiting for somebody to build it so they can come but we, we are the answer.
Speaker 1: Okay, go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, that's how I feel. We've just got to be awakened to that. And so our job is to be a walking wakeup call and we have to nourish that.
Story_ID: 369763
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about what happened at BET [Black Entertainment Television] where--
Speaker 2: BET?
Speaker 1: Yeah, BET, Black Entertainment Television where you have a, this cable network that the black community feels invested in, in fact it was marketed to potential sponsors as a, you know, well--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --potential sponsors were told our fan base is so loyal, they feel ownership would be to, and, and indeed the community did. A lot of people were shocked and dismayed when the company was sold. Do you think that, and I've been told by some in business, that it was inevitable that it would be sold at some point because it got big enough where somebody bigger wanted it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that, do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it's easier to take the easy path than to take the difficult one. You know, it takes a lot of courage to do things that, at the end of the day, make a lot of sense and I think that we have lost a lot of opportunities as a result of that, not only BET but I think the whole country. You know, after World War II [WWII], we had a growth in business and the middle class moved up and it was a fair share, this capitalism, and now it's become like feudalism. It's like the French Revolution. You said there's a problem, it going to--let them eat cake, for this is a few who own everything and the rest who have nothing. We have a society where at one time we, I think the numbers were, the bottom, the top 1 percent owned 8 percent of the GDP [gross domestic product] and the bottom 1 percent owned 18 percent, now that's down to 12 and the bottom's up from 8 to 24 percent and that 12 for that 1 percent is going down to 6 and this is going up to 33. That's not capitalism, that's feudalism and that's when you had the French Revolution come in and they had to change things and I think we were approaching that, on a macro level and on a minor level. So BET didn't need another paycheck. They could have spread the wealth both in terms of participants and in terms of the programming. So that's a challenge. Now the question is, how good are we willing to have it and that's what we've got to tune in to be continued (laughter).
Story_ID: 369764
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point and you may still have something big to do, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy today? Wow. I think my legacy today is that you can, ordinary people can do some extraordinary things if they stay conscious, clear and interested. Too often we're interesting, and we get wrapped up in our own residue and if we stop doing that, we'll be surprised what happens. So once we realize we're all right the way we are and make it contagious, wow, but too many of us have been programmed and before we realize that, it's too late, we can't do anything about it.
Story_ID: 369765
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family. I know you have a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other children or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I have three down in Memphis [Tennessee] with their mom, you know. I've got a thirteen year old, Jordan Alexander [Jordan Oxendine], she just had her thirteenth birthday, she's born on, what, September 7th, 2001, she wanted me to come and hang out with her, but she had a big party and she's doing quite well. And she has a brother, David [David Oxendine], who's seventeen, he's my little gangster guy and he, I don't know if he's going to college, he'll probably go to the police academy, where he's cool breeze. And then his brother, John Edward [John Oxendine], my namesake, is twenty, and second year at University of Tennessee at Knoxville [Tennessee]. He's got a car and called me the other day, "Dad, what do you think about boxing?" I said, "Son, not bad, as long as you're not Glass Jaw McGraw, you're going to be okay." And there's his sweet mom, she's a great lady so I feel blessed and I have a twenty-eight year old daughter, my fourth one, she's Jenelle [Jenelle Oxendine], a real doll. Her mom, Joslyn [ph.], just found out she had cancer, colon cancer and being on the board of the American Association for Cancer Research, I'd been a bad boy, I hadn't been to some board meetings so I was able to help her out. She's a great caretaker but didn't take care of herself. She worked for the nurses association for ten years, now works for Fox [Fox Broadcasting Company] but fortunately I was able to make a call or two and she got this Dr. Lou Weiner [Louis M. Weiner] who runs the cancer institute [Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center] at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], to take her under his wing and while I was up there a couple of weeks ago, so when she woke up, we were there saying, hi, and she's clean. They had done a lot with the ascending colon transfer, it's the other, but they got everything, so they think, and I said, "Hey, you're just sixty, you're too young, you ain't leaving me alone here with my daughter," so she kind of agreed. So, that's where we are.
Story_ID: 369766
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier, and I forgot to raise it when we were talking about growing up, but you were a member of the youth, the youth, Urban League youth, right--
Speaker 2: Oh, the National Urban League, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were growing up and are you still a member of the Urban League or some of the other--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just the past, you know, former board member of that thing, want to contribute, as all past organizations want you to do. It was a great opportunity, it was with Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], was there, Don McGannon [Donald McGannon] was running the Urban League and Don, and then was running Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company], I think at the time, and he made Vernon go from being executive director, living in Harlem [New York, New York], to being president and CEO, living up in Connecticut and Vernon was young and his daughters were young and I was young and the Urban League was doing some nice, nice things. You see, you know, forty years later, or you know, Vernon's good friends with the president, the ex-president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], you know, supposedly our first black president (laughter), whatever, but it was a great, great experience.
Speaker 1: Are there any other organizations you volunteered for that you, were really close to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, well right now, you know, I was chairman of the Paragon Foundation [Paragon Foundation Inc.] up here in Palm Beach, West Palm Beach [Florida] that does minority economic development, vice chair of the Palm Beach International Film Festival for the last ten or some years. Adopt-A-Classroom down in Miami [Florida], Jamie Rosenberg started that, I was chairman for the last six or seven years. I sit on a lot of boards, you know, trying to help a lot but I've got to find some paying boards (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not in any, any corporate boards?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on the Equity Media board for a while. I was on Home Shopping [Home Shopping Network] board for a while. I was on Paxson Broadcasting board for a while. I was on USA Network board for Barry Diller, so, yeah, I've had, I've had a taste of the experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, well is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, this has been an extraordinary opportunity. I mean, I should be paying you guys. It's almost as, false, it's cathartic, I'm like ah.
Story_ID: 369767
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The last question is a lot, similar to legacy but it's a little bit different, a little bit more personal. Sir, how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? I'd like to be remembered as a guy who really cared about people and wanted to be as honest with them as I possibly could without being hurtful but not exaggerating, you know. I didn't want to love them in the traditional way, by exaggerating the good and downplaying the bad which helps as day to day. I just wanted to really see my reality and their reality and therefore our reality 'cause I believe that we're all one. Yeah, I put on my brother's tombstone, "Take note my friends as you pass by, as you are now so once was I, and as I am now, so will you be, so prepare my friends to follow me," and by that I mean, do all you can be, all used up before you follow me.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 369768
Speaker 1: Graduation from Hunter College [New York, New York], 1965.
Speaker 2: Fundraiser at the Kennedy Compound [Hyannis Port, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You can put it on the side, that's fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's put it like this.
Speaker 1: Sorry, what did you say?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): These lights too. How do I turn those on? There we go.
Speaker 1: It's a fundraiser for the Kennedy, at the Kennedy compound for Mario Cuomo when he was running. No, that wasn't, was it Mario Cuomo? Who was it that follows Mario? Who's the governor now?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Cough) Fund, okay.
Speaker 2: What happened to that plastic thing you had?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I was, I wanted a little bit of a, it's over there.
Speaker 2: This might be a glare.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's very shiny.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Funding for Mario, for Governor Cuomo at the Kennedy Compound.
Speaker 2: Okay, now that's, fundraiser for Cuomo in Ft. Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 1: Are you shooting with the close up setting?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, I'm filling the frame as much as I can.
Speaker 1: No, this is good. I didn't say what that was but that's okay.
Speaker 2: You go right ahead and tell us.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. That's a picture of my teenage years with my brother.
Speaker 2: And your brother's name?
Speaker 1: That's Big Ray.
Speaker 2: Ray, his full name.
Speaker 1: Raymond, oops, oh my God, sorry. I'll hold it.
Speaker 2: If you give everybody's full name, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That you, as much as you can.
Speaker 1: Okay, right. That's a photo of myself and my brother, Raymond Oxendine, in my teenage years (cough).
Speaker 2: And you're on the, are you on the left or--
Speaker 1: I'm on the left.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Is this, is this working right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you're fine.
Speaker 1: You can go ahead and describe the next one.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a photo of myself and my friend, Roland Penn [ph.], in the, when I was living in the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: He was a member of the, what do they call it the--
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's a photo of me, what year was that? I'm not sure. I'm not quite sure, probably in my twenties, late twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, a photo of me and my classmate, Fred Stevens [ph.], at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1970.
Speaker 1: A photo of me and a friend of the family in San Francisco [California] in 1972.
Speaker 2: A photo of myself, my daughter, Jenelle [Jenelle Oxendine], when she was about a baby and she's twenty-eight years old now and her mom, Jenelle, I mean Joslyn [ph.].
Speaker 1: That's just a photo of me and my mom at her home in the Bronx.
Speaker 2: And your mother's name?
Speaker 1: Beulah Oxendine [Beulah Kent Oxendine].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a photo of me in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: A photo of me and my secretary in Mexico City [Mexico], in 1975.
Speaker 1: A photo of me in Moscow [Russia] in 1992, right after perestroika.
Speaker 2: A photo of me and Cuomo on one of his fundraising campaigns, Governor Cuomo.
Speaker 1: A picture of me being an urban cowboy in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Another photo of me, one of my hobbies riding horses out west, playing the urban cowboy.
Speaker 1: Another photo of me on horseback on that same trip out west.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of me at a fundraiser when the vice president [Joe Biden] was running for president, now he's the vice president for Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 1: A picture of me in the Soviet Union, in Russia, with a family I was staying with.
Speaker 2: Another photo of me with family member in, in Russia.
Story_ID: 369769
Speaker 1: A picture of me and three of my children and Marsha, having the children blessed, before they moved to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: A photo of Marsha D. Johnson [ph.], the mother of my children.
Speaker 1: A photo of me giving a lecture at the University of Redlands in Redlands, California in, I think in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: This is me testifying in [U.S.] Congress on behalf of the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters], I forget what year that was.
Speaker 1: Another photo of some testimony from me. I often did that, representing the NAB.
Speaker 2: A photo in the early '80s [1980s] when I was president and CEO of Broadcast Capital Fund and Broadcast Capital, Inc. [Broadcast Capital Fund Inc., Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Another photo, one of my trips to Las Vegas [Nevada] during the '80s [1980s] when I was working at the NAB. What year was that?
Speaker 2: Another photo when I was working as a young banker for First National Bank of Chicago in Mexico.
Speaker 1: Photo of me in my summer service, a Marine uni--a [U.S.] Marine Corps uniform in Monterey, California.
Speaker 2: A photo of me and Don Thurston [Donald Thurston] over in Berkshire Broadcasting [Berkshire Broadcasting Corporation], North Adams, Massachusetts. He's the one who got me to be, hired me for Broadcast Capital.
Speaker 1: Photo of my mom, my twin sister, Joanie [Joan Oxendine], and my sister, Hazel [Hazel Oxendine], all Oxendines, at my mom's seventieth birthday. My twin sister is in red.
Speaker 2: (Background noise) Another photo of me and my twin sister, Joanie, in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: This is a family portrait. It's my father [Edward Oxendine, Jr.], my mother, my brother, Raymond, my brother's wife, Carmen [Carmen De Costa Oxendine], my brother, James [James Oxendine], and me, John Oxendine [HistoryMaker John E. Oxendine] on the end, 1954, when my brother got married.
Speaker 2: So this is--
Speaker 1: Another photo in the '70s [1970s], my banking years. I had hair (laughter). What were you saying?
Speaker 2: So that's Ox, the 6'4" brother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can we get the whole thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this is just an article, an article for an award I got from one of the organizations in Florida and it was, I think, 2013, 2014.
Speaker 1: I said to myself, I was only going to do this one hour and it turns out to be nine o'clock. This is an article describing the opportunity in 1994 for me to have a strategic partnership and an investment from News Corp [News Corporation], Fox Broadcasting [Fox Broadcasting Company], run by Rupert Murdoch.
Speaker 2: It's another article that was in Variety magazine in October, 1994 outlining the merger agreement with Fox Broadcasting and Rupert Murdoch.
Speaker 1: And this one talks about, again, the relationship with Fox and the agreement to put in $20 million, for me to form Blackstar, LLC to buy some affiliates that would be affiliated with Fox.
Speaker 2: And this is an article in the Fifth Estate a broadcasting magazine in 1994, April 9th that kind of describes the lending activity for my three years working at Broadcast Capital.
Speaker 1: That's it--
Speaker 2: Black Enterprise.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is Black Enterprise article, I think in 1994, talking about the relationship I have with, I think it's with Home Shopping Network. I was surprised.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is that it, no?
Speaker 1: No, I see more, almost it.
Speaker 2: What year is that?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Eighty- '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Okay, again, this is another article describing my activities with Blackstar, buying properties and affiliating with Home Shopping Network with Fox.
Speaker 1: This is a brochure outlining the funding activity--
Speaker 2: Can I hold it up--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah.
Speaker 2: --funding activity in my first ten years of running Broadcast Capital.
Speaker 1: I want to get you with the management team. There's one good picture of you, here it is.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was a great team.
Speaker 1: I think this might be even better, the graphic of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's probably better, yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's shoot this page and then shoot the other one too, graphic of what they did, stations they owned and everything.
Speaker 2: And this is just the graphic of the stations we funded throughout the United States and that's a picture of my management team, Ray Suarez [Raymond W. Suarez], Ken Harris, myself, John Pomeroy, my lawyer, and Victor Hugo Brown, the best accountant and numbers man you could know.
Speaker 1: Is that the Ray Suarez that was on NPR [National Public Radio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, not that one.
Speaker 1: No, not that one?
Speaker 2: No, but that was my management team.
Speaker 1: He was the host of some show on NPR.
Speaker 2: Again, a picture of me in my Marine Corps uniform in Monterey, California.
Speaker 1: Photo of me graduating from Parris Island Marine Corps [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina] training depot.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of myself and my buddy, Tom Bellucci on the end, the shorter guy, when I was working in 1966 in New York City [New York, New York] in that department of airline stewardesses and nurses, I was the switchboard operator.
Speaker 1: A fun job.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is just a snapshot of my induction into the Minority Media Telecom Hall of Fame [Minority Media and Telecommunications Council Hall of Fame] in 20- in 2001.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me in 1965 in Juarez, Mexico doing my training for Peace Corps service in Santiago, Chile.
Speaker 1: And that's the last one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bronx High School of the Arts [sic.], I guess.
Speaker 1: Finally.
Speaker 2: Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: My Bronx High School of Science yearbook, 1959, getting best wishes from my classmates.
