Story_ID: 28532
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Kacee Deener.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Kenneth Olden, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, O-L-D-E-N, like in olden times.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's appropriate for an historical interview.  And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July the 22nd, 1938, Newport, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am Director of the National Center for Environmental Assessment in the division of--I want to say Intramural Research, but it isn't.  ORD, Office of Research and Development.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In ORD, Office of Research and Development in the Environmental Protection Agency [EPA], and I forget the other part of the question.
Speaker 1: And your title.
Speaker 2: I am
Speaker 1: No, that, that's it.  The, the, the director.
Speaker 2: Director of the division.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, National Center for Environmental--
Speaker 1: So you're an administrator primarily now, though you were trained as a biologist, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was trained as a cell biologist, biochemist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in order to have a bigger impact on, on science, science policy and, and the application of science, often you have to leave the bench, in, in other words the, the laboratory research, to take a, a leadership role.  And I made that decision in the--1979, and so I left the NIH [National Institutes of Health] and I was a bench researcher, I was a tenured scientist in the National Cancer Institute.  But I made a decision to go to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] Cancer Center to become scientific director of the Cancer Center.  And I did that for about six years, and then I was promoted to become director of the Howard University Cancer Center.  I did that for about another five years, and moved back to the NIH, also in a, a leadership role as director of the Environmental Health Science Center at the NIH, in the National Toxicology Program.  So I made that decision because I wanted to have a bigger impact on science than what I could do with my own laboratory.  So you know, you can publish two, three or 400 papers in your lifetime, and that's important, it's not trivial.  But, but in the end, you don't impact science policy and practices unless you're willing to take a leadership role.  But while I was in an administrative role as director of the Howard University Cancer Center, and as director of the Environmental Health Institute at the NIH, I kept my research program going and I just closed my laboratory last year, 2012.  So I've had a laboratory since I finished, I got my Ph.D. in the, in 1970.  So I had post-docs [postdoctoral researchers] working in my laboratory even when I went to--was at the City University of New York [CUNY].  I went there in 2008 to become dean of the--founding dean of the School of Public Health at City University, but I kept a laboratory with post-docs at the NIH.  And so we are now writing the final manuscripts.  I still have one manuscript under review at, at this moment.  So the last post-doc has gone and I'm officially out of business as a researcher.  So--but that's a long time.  So from 1970 to 2012, so--and I, and I felt if you're gonna run a research program, you need to be a card carrying member of the organization, it's a fraternity.  So if I want to sit in judgment and decide what research is important, I have to be nationally competitive and producing high quality research like other people that you're sitting in judgment of, and, and trying to lead.  People pay attention to you if you can do it yourself.  And so I just felt you, you, you--in science it's a very close club, and people want you--you're no longer a scientist unless you're doing science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So no matter you can be running an org--a scientific organization, but unless you're practicing science, you're no longer a scientist in the view of scientists.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to get that--just--
Speaker 2: So I think that's very important for anybody who's going to take, take a leadership position as a, a director or head of a program.  You need to practice science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most do.
Speaker 1: All right, and what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Laughs].  I think it's the 20th, 20th.  I'm not 100 percent sure of that.  It's--
Speaker 1: I think--
Speaker 2: 21st?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, what, what year?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: This is May 21st.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2012, '13, '13 [2013].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at Potomac Yard in Crystal City, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28533
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Just as a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they only require short answers.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, I love food.  I don't have a favorite.  I, I, I actually cook.  My pastime, hobby is cooking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And matter of fact, many, many years ago back in post-I was in the style section, a whole page, in the Washington Post [newspaper] style section featuring my recipes and so I'm, I, I worked my way through college as a first cook in a first class dinner house, in Wildwood, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, so if you did have a favorite food, it would have clout.  I mean it would have clout behind it--
Speaker 2: Well and I prepare--when my wife and I entertain ten or twelve people, large parties, I'm the one who usually prepares the meal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well I, my wife would say red, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: That's clear, spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well that's clear as well, we've been going to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] for thirty years.  We, we lived in Boston [Massachusetts] for four and half and we could not afford to, to spend a week, a night in Martha's Vineyard, but we would go over on day trips.  But after we moved from Boston to D.C. [District of Columbia], we de--we, we love--knew we loved New England because it's cooler in the summer.  So we started going up there and we would go to Maine, New Hampshire, and then we just--at the end of one trip decided to go to Martha's Vineyard and we liked it.  So we've been going--it'd be now thirty years.  So we go every summer.  And no matter what else we do during the course of the year, we always go back to Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I, I'm sure I do, but it depends on what the subject matter is.  I have phrases that I always use in reference to certain subject matters, and I would say in the last twenty-one or [twenty] two years, I've been in environmental health.  So I think the, the phrase that I always use in giving talks is that "Genetics loads the gun, but the environment pulls the trigger."  And it's just simply a simple way of communicating that the import--the environment is just as important as genetics in the ideology of complex diseases.  I think the public tends to think that most diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson, cardiovascular disease, I think most people think these diseases are caused by genetics.  Well in, in part they are, but you would never have these diseases in most cases without the environmental triggers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28534
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to go over your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm going to--we're going to talk about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her--it was Mary, M-A-R-Y, Augusta, A-U-G-U-S-T-A, Christmas, like Christmas, C-H-R-I-S-T-M-A-S was her, her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Newport, Tennessee, and she would be, I believe we decided 102 [years old] if she was alive today, so that was 2000, that would be 2010, 2009, I mean--
Speaker 1: 1910.
Speaker 2: Nineteen, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And what, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well I can trace them way back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother, her name was Flora Gore, she re-married.  And, and she was a domestic, as my mother was a domestic.  And but it's my great grand, grandmother that I know best.  My great grandmother lived well, well over 100 [years], and she was born in--as a slave, and so we could hear--but she was seven or eight years old when slavery was abolished.  And she actually lived with us toward the end of her life.  So we know her very well, all of us.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was again, August, Augusta Foster, FO-S-T-E-R.  And she is--so the local newspaper featured stories about her often from a historical perspective.  And so I have a lot of information about her and, and pictures that others dug out for me for the, the, the newspapers.  So she--
Speaker 1: She, she would have been born around 1857 or something like that?
Speaker 2: I guess so, yeah, that's about right.
Speaker 1: '56 [1856] or '57 [1857].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And, and you know she was a child in slavery for years.
Speaker 2: Yes she was, yes.
Speaker 1: And so did she live until what, about 1957 or ['5]8 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 1: About the time I was going off to college.
Speaker 2: Now did she tell stories about what slavery was like and what Reconstruction was like?
Speaker 1: No, she actually never talked about it.  And well six or seven years old.  My guess is she didn't know much about it, you know, six or seven we were just happy-go-lucky because she would not have been old enough to work in the fields or anything, so no she never--she just would tell us that, that she was a slave.  But I would say she never dis--and if she discussed it, I must say I was so young it didn't, didn't have a impact on me at that point.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you never really fam--family members never talked about that period of time?
Speaker 1: Never talked about that period.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Never.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I regret that, but we didn't.
Speaker 2: Well did she have anything that she passed down to you?  I mean having lived, lived so long, you would think there'd be some wisdom that was passed down.
Speaker 1: Well, by the time she spent much time with us, she was pretty old.  And, and she was--I would say I remember her mostly as being quiet and frail.  That age would be.
Speaker 2: Now was she from the same area too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my family is, is from Tennessee and North Carolina.  So my mother's side--mostly Tennessee, but the early, early members of the family is North Carolina, they're adjoining states, so we're talking a few miles, with North Carolina and Tennessee.  My, my--on both sides.  My--some of my father's ancestors were originated in North Carolina, some of--on his mother's side.
Speaker 2: Well what, what was your grandmother, your, your great grandmother, was she from Newport as well?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was she born around Newport?
Speaker 1: She was born in Newport.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, but if you trace us farther back, my--her side would have been born in North Carolina.  Originate in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the family goes back to North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And also my, my dad's side.  His, his mother's family originated in North Carolina, my dad's from Tennessee.
Speaker 2: All right, well I'm gone ask about him separately.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now in terms of your mother's side of the family, now what, what about your grandfather, do you remember anything about him or, or your great grandfather?
Speaker 1: My, my great grandfather I certainly never knew.  But my grandfather I do know.  His name was Alex, Alexander Christmas, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R Christmas.
Speaker 2: Is there a story behind the last name Christmas, how they got the last name of Christmas?
Speaker 1: No, I've never looked it, I never, no, I don't, I don't know.  I, I don't know.  I don't know how we got that name, it's unusual.
Speaker 2: Now there was a editor of the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] named Faith Christmas.
Speaker 1: Right.  I've looked up the Olden part, but I don't know a lot about that.
Speaker 2: There was Jerry Christmas in Chicago [Illinois] I knew and--
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think there's a fellow that played for Temple's [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] basketball team named Christmas about two or three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A star.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Alexander Christmas, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: Kind of odd jobs.  He, he wasn't, you know way back then he was not gainfully employed with--I mean minimal education but kind of odd jobs, made a living.
Story_ID: 28535
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Mary Augusta Christmas] have a chance to go to school or finish school?
Speaker 2: She finished third year of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she talk about what her aspirations were, you know, growing up?  Did she, did she want to go further?  Did she want to, did she want to teach or--
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, no, now she did, she did not.  I think her dreams and aspirations were pretty limited.  And I would say for people in that region [Newport, Tennessee], they are still fairly limited.  I was just there two weeks ago, three weeks ago, and spent a weekend and the opportunities and--for people to see what the world is really like, cause I was commenting to my wife after I left that I felt saddened that most people, my friends and families' vision, view of the world is pretty limited.  I mean I felt that--very privileged and, and sad that I was gonna leave and get in my car and drive back to North Carolina and catch a plane back to a very thriving metropolis like Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].  It just seemed like a different world, it is a totally different world that they don't know anything about.  And their--I was there on a Saturday and Sunday, and once Monday comes, their world was pretty, pretty bland, pretty disinterested.  And it's sad.
Speaker 1: Now what's the main economic activity in Newport [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well there are small industries, but no major industries.  When I grew up, it was farming.  And but there are small industries, canning factories, some leather tanning factories, industries, nothing major, so people don't make much money.  I mean they just make--you learn what the phrase "making ends meet" means.  So the cost of living is, is not very high, I mean there isn't much.  People mostly own their homes, but they are not, you know, they're pretty, you know pretty dilapidated.  And they eat pretty much what they, they raise.  People have little, small gardens and what they call farms.  They raise a few--but they, you know, beef, cattle, hogs for pork and things like that.  So it's--so people don't earn. I would, you know I, I, I would take all my cousins and all together I would guess I make more money than all of them collectively, and I don't make much money, okay.  And that says something about the quality of life and their earning.
Speaker 1: And it hasn't changed in a long period.
Speaker 2: Hasn't changed.  It's right along the, the Blue Ridge Mountain range, so it's pretty, it's--I think, I've heard that--I haven't looked it up, I've heard politicians tell me from that region that it's the--probably the most impoverished region in--state county in Tennessee.  It's Cocke County, and it's--when I grew up, there, that was the bootlegging capital of the, the U.S. [United States].  So people made liquor and corn liquor, and bootlegged that and it was, you know, they thrived on it and but when, when alcohol became--after Prohi--Prohibition, they clamped down on that and so that's pretty much a dead industry now.  But that's how people made a living, farming and bootlegging.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your mother have anything to say about growing up in particular?  I mean in terms of the, the--
Speaker 2: No, I would say my mother, my mother really--her ambition was for us to finish high school, 'cause you realize she didn't get to finish.  And so she never had the vision or understood going to college, but she wanted all of us to finish high school.  And all of us did.  There were five of us that lived to be grown.  There were seven of us but two, two died early.  And of the five, we all finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and of the five--I finished college and my sister went to college.  She didn't finish, but she did go, and she has a good job that's consistent with that.
Story_ID: 28536
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side.  Can, can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Mack, M-A-C-K Leonard, L-E, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, Olden, O-L-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was July the 4th, I know that.  And he was born in Newport, Tennessee.  I can't--don't know the exact age, I have it in my record book someplace when I need it, so I don't know his exact age.
Speaker 1: Is, is he--
Speaker 2: But I'd say--
Speaker 1: Older than your mother [Mary Augusta Christmas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he would probably be 107 or eight if he was alive today, my guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so okay 19, 1906 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would guess that, about that time.
Speaker 1: All right.  What, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I can't even go back--I can go back to my grandparents, I can go to his parents, but I don't know any relatives beyond that.  I know his, his father was--died before I was born, but I do know his mother.  His mother lived to be--during my time, and so I knew her very well.  His father was a farmer, but he was--as farmers go, go, farming goes, he was pretty enlightened.  So he had a, he had accumulated a fair amount of land, land.  And--
Speaker 1: So he actually own, owned his own land?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He owned his own farm.  And he was, he at least had a high school education.  He was literate and so he was pretty visionary for the times, it seems.  And--
Speaker 1: Now this is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was James.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if he had a middle name, I don't know it; James, J-A-M-E-S Olden.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so that's pretty good for those days.  I mean he had, he had a high school education, owned his own land and--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure he had a high--he was literate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I doubt if he had a high school education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was literate and he was kind of the person in the community that drafted agreements when people had land agreements or purchased things.  He was kind of the, the, the dealmaker.  So he did very well.  He had a large family and they lived pretty well, given the times, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any stories from that--on that side of the family about he acquired land, or is there any special story about how, how he got land?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now did, did your father have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: He finished the eighth grade.  And, and, and he--that happened because his dad died.  And, and my father was the third oldest, and boys dropped out of school in those days to support the family, so that's what he did.  He dropped out of school with his two oldest brothers to support the family and because there were very little means for women to make an income in those days.  So yeah, so he didn't have a chance.  So again, he was very pleased that we went on and particularly that the two of us went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 28537
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents [Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden] met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that story.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know they're right, they're there in Newport, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Well you know I think that, yeah they--I'm sure they went to church.  The church is the center of the community.  They didn't go to the same school.  He, he was, he was brought up in a little community called Parrottsville, and that's a, you know if you want to walk a long ways, seven miles or eight miles to the little area my mother grew, a place called Bridgeport, which is a part of Newport.  So they--I'm sure it was a church because the one black church was in another little community called Allen Chapel, and that's where both, both families were.
Speaker 1: Was that the name of the church too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Allens Chapel.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This a AME [African Methodist Episcopalian] church?
Speaker 2: No, it's a Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Baptist church, okay, Allens Chapel, okay.
Story_ID: 28538
Speaker 1: And so I was just there [Newport , Tennessee] two weeks ago, I said.  I went down because there was a celebration that we have every May, it's called Mayday.  And families come in from miles as I did, and you know you can see old people, old friends and, and if you go back, and family.  And so my brother and I, my sisters, decided we were going home.  So we all--
Speaker 2: Now when was this?  When, when was this trip?
Speaker 1: Trip was the first Sunday in May.  It was first weekend.
Speaker 2: This past year?
Speaker 1: This, this--
Speaker 2: This year?
Speaker 1: Yeah, two, two weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, but is this the first time you'd been down in a long time?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: I mean this is, this is the first time you've gone back in a long time?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I go back every year or two.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I would say I'm there at least every two years.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Right, I stay in touch with home.
Speaker 2: Okay, well go on.  I didn't want to break it up.  I just want to make sure I got the date of the trip.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So I don't know what I was saying before that.
Speaker 2: You were, you were talking about the trip back, it's like the latest trip.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well so, so that's kind of the center of the community.  So everybody comes there and indeed I did see a lot of people I hadn't seen for years and hear about family and, and friends and so we, we went in on a Saturday afternoon I think, Friday, Friday.  We went in on a Friday afternoon, and so we spent the first Friday afternoon with just my sisters and brothers and nieces and nephews.  And then Saturday we had a picnic with comm--the community.  And Sunday is--everybody goes to church.  And, and then they have a picnic at church.  So that's the celebration.  And so we, we did that and at the end of the--and the church service is all day.  But we left after the morning service because I had to drive back to North Carolina with my family and then fly back here.  And our daughter, our youngest daughter also joined us, and she was leaving to go to Chile for the summer.  So we, we--so it's a, it's a good way of staying connected.  And I said to my wife and I take that seriously, I think that keeps me grounded because when I go back, you see poverty and pain and suffering up close, it's not something that you read about.  You get it.
Story_ID: 28539
Speaker 1: So you don't know exactly how your parents [Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden] met, right?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know exactly, but they, they didn't go to the same school.  He went to Allen Chapel, I know where he went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I guess she went to Bridgeport.  And I know she ended up going to Tanner High School.  Tanner, which is exactly the same high school that I went to, and that's in Newport [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Tanner High School, probably named for Bishop Tanner out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] I'm thinking, but I don't know.  Tanner High School.  Okay, so is, is it Benjamin Tucker Tanner High School?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that.  I, I think it's a different Tanner.
Speaker 1: You think so?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is it a black Tanner?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right, okay so and your, your father went to Allen Chapel School--there's a school actually associated with the church then, right?
Speaker 2: No, just in the community.  It happens to be across the street, I mean across the road, not the street, it's not a street.  Across the road, but it's in the same community.  And matter of fact, I went to that school.  It's a one-room school that is now owned by the church.  Church bought that property when they closed the school many, many years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now from--there's a lot of schools that are--
Speaker 2: Right, so the little, little school is still there and I was--went in it while I was there two weeks ago.  It's a one-room school.  It had little benches in it and, and that's where I went for eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So well, so we know your parents met and at some point and they fell in love and got married.
Speaker 2: Yes. (simultaneous)
Story_ID: 28540
Speaker 1: Now when, when you think about them [Olden's parents, Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden], when you think about their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, what they're interested in, what their hobbies were, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well my disposition is probably--and is probably more my, my father's, everybody tells me that.  But I, I, I learned probably compassion from my mother and maybe all--many of us did in those days.  But my dad was very compassionate, he never showed it.  And matter of fact I was very surprised when he passed we were looking through his things, and the very first paper I ever published I sent to him.  My, my mother I guess was deceased at that time.  And he had saved it.  And I never thought he--it mattered to him, but it did.  He had that, so we found it in his possessions.  So he cherished that.  So--and I think when my mother was alive, he would always inquire about us through my mother.  So he never said oh, how you doing, or, or called to see if we were okay; she would do it.  But we discovered that when she passed then he had to do it or not do it, but he did.  He stepped up and that's when we started having the fam--we have a family reunion every year.  And that's when we started doing that.  He didn't want us to come home just for sad occasions.  He wanted us to get together for happy occasions.  So we started doing that and he lived for many, many years.  My mother died in 1969 and he lived until I guess--well I was already director of the Environmental Health Institute and living in North Carolina, so--and he actually got to come and to visit.  So he, he passed I guess maybe at the beginning of 2000 or 2002, something, yeah, right.  So he had a long life.  But he was tough.  He, he, he was--well to have five children to live and support them, and to stay loyal and dedicated and committed to a family as he was, it took a lot of, of courage, commitment to hard work, and sacrifice, and he did that.  He--and he, and he never had much else except he'd go to work every day, come home, he was involved in the church, the community, but he never had a lot of the other things in life.  So I remember we, we didn't have an automobile in our family.  And I had a, you know, a job shining shoes at--when I was in high school in a barber shop downtown, in downtown Newport [Tennessee].  And I would shine shoes, clean up the barber shop before school, and go back and work after school, and then work on Saturdays.  You made the money on Saturdays, so you shined shoes on Saturday, you make a fair amount of money.  So I did that and in order to shine shoes on Saturday where you really made money, you had to clean the barber shop up at the beginning and end of the day, so I did that.  So--but I was able to save.  I always knew I wanted to go to college.  So I was able to save enough money to pay my first year in college.  But I tell the story because my dad--we didn't have a car in the family and so I loaned him the first money to buy his--for a down payment on the first used car that we had for the family.  So that's hard for somebody to work his whole life and, and he never had a new car.  And I remember when he passed, I, I eulogized him was--made comments at his funeral, and I pointed that out.  He was somebody who worked his whole life and never owned a new car.  Now that's not--to most people that's not important, but he could have.  I mean he could have left us, he could have done things that a lot of other men were doing, but he didn't do that.  He stuck by his family.  He raised us, he fed us, he clothed us and we have an opportunity, all of us, that he didn't have because of his dedication and my mom's dedication and hard work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's important to me.
Speaker 1: You had two steady role models.
Speaker 2: Two steady role models.
Story_ID: 28541
Speaker 1: So can, can you name your brothers and sisters for us and put yourself in the--insert yourself in birth order, in the order of your birth.
Speaker 2: Right.  Of live ones that grew up, that lived to, to be grown, my, my brother is named Charles and he has a middle name, Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D.  He's the oldest.  And I'm the second oldest.  And the sister next to me is named Emma, and she has a middle name, Emma Ruth and she's married and it's Emma Ruth Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  And after her it's my other sister named Thursteen [Ph.]--and it sounds funny for a girl, and she was named after my grandfather who was Thurston, so they named her Thursteen.
Speaker 1: Thursteen, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and Jill was her middle name, or is her middle name.  And she's married and you know what's her last name--wait a minute.  And then there's the youngest sister.  And her name is Charlene.  And Charlene like me does not have a, a middle name.  And, and her name is--last name is, is Canady, C-A-N-A-D-Y.  And the other sister is named, last name is John, John--let's see what's her--can't remember.
Speaker 1: Well we'll go back to it.
Speaker 2: We'll go back to it.
Speaker 1: This is Thursteen Jill.
Speaker 2: Thursteen Jill, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with two of you not having middle names, did you ever discuss that with your parents [Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden] and why you didn't get a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess they'd run out of name--run out of names.
Speaker 1: Did you have a nickname growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I don't like to talk about it, but yes.
Speaker 1: Well you don't have to tell us if you don't want to, but--
Speaker 2: I, I had a goat.  Everybody had a pet and I did, I had a pet goat, and the goat was brown and, and I loved that little goat.  And he and I--I took him everyplace with me and so my nickname became Brownie.  So that, that's followed me when I go home [Newport, Tennessee].  So that was my name, nickname.
Story_ID: 28542
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?  Earliest.
Speaker 2: Well I guess the thing that impressed me most growing up when--early, I mean very early, was having to walk to school from age six through high, through grade school.  Having to walk every day to school, winter and spring, it didn't--summer wasn't a big issue because school was out.  And also, and I mean so the kids would be out so they could participate in the harvesting of the farm products.  So--but walking to school nine months out of the year, particularly during the winter months make an impression on you, when it's a long distance.  The distance there was six or seven miles.  So that, that makes an impression on you.  So you, you--and, and so that's the other thing that impressed me, in hindsight, my mother's [Mary Augusta Christmas] and father's [Mack Leonard Olden] dedication to education.  They made sure that we first of all, walked to school, got to school every day.  But imagine to send your child out to walk six or seven miles every day--and we, we didn't go around the roads, we went across fields and you take the most direct route because in those days it was okay to cross somebody's field.  It wasn't the way it is today.  So we took the most direct route from our house to the school and it was through people's farms and, and so it worked.  But imagine a six year older, I don't think I'd send my six year older out--I mean even in those--I mean you didn't have to worry about safety, that wasn't an issue.  I mean nobody's going to harm your kids in those days.  But, but even six years old when it's cold in the middle of January or February, and I remember our hands sometimes would be so cold that you'd, we'd cry.  I mean you know they were just frostbitten.  My parents would wrap our shoes in, I mean our feet, shoes, in burlap, burlap sacks so you know you, you--on farms you always have grain and stuff coming in burlap bags, and they would wrap them a lot so your--you could manage.  But we didn't have you know, insulated--.
Speaker 1: Boots and that.
Speaker 2: --boots and things.  So your feet wouldn't freeze going there, but--and, and we didn't miss any days.  I think we only missed days when my--we got whooping cough and we were out I don't know, for some period of time.  But generally we had 100 percent attendance.  So that to me is a huge commitment on the part of your parents that you're going to go to school.  Most of the kids who lived where we did when I grew up, first through high, through, through grade school, most of the kids didn't go to school, the black kids, they didn't go to school.  Their parents didn't have that commitment and they are--many of them are illiterate or, or dead.  The ones--they, they never learned to read or write.  We did.  And so, so there is something about my parents that was different.  All four of us walked every day.  My brother first, and they got a cousin to go with him because I wasn't old enough.  So they got a older cousin to come and live with us to walk with him.  So the two of them walked for a year, then I joined them the next year because we were like, like stair steps.  And so, so the two of us and then once the three of us, then the cousin stopped walking with us and we had three of us, my sister.  And, and finally the, the, the next sister, four of us.  And then the youngest sister was born many years later.  She was about six years old when I went off to college, so we had moved close to the school.  So we were within half mile of the school by the time my youngest, youngest sister was born.
Story_ID: 28543
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you lived?  I take it you lived in Allens Chapel area, in Parrottsville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah in the end, in the end we lived in Allens Chapel area, but my dad [Mack Leonard Olden] bought, finally bought his farm, so that was a good thing.  He, he also wanted, wanted to own his own property.  So we--he bought a farm with his brother-in-law.  And so we had our own farm.
Speaker 1: So this is in Parrottsville, or--
Speaker 2: That was in Allens Chapel.
Speaker 1: Allens Chapel, okay.
Speaker 2: And when we walked to school, we walked, walked from Parrottsville to the Allens Chapel School, that was the neighborhood school when I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you lived in Allens Chapel.
Speaker 2: We, we lived in Parrottsville and walked to Allens Chapel.
Speaker 1: You lived in Parrot, okay--
Speaker 2: Eventually we moved to Allens Chapel community.
Speaker 1: So you started off in Parrottsville.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then your father bought property in Allens Chapel.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You moved over there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of--so how old were you when you moved to Allens Chapel?
Speaker 2: I guess about, I guess I was in seventh, sixth or seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember, yeah I, I would say that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your early growing up was in Parrottsville.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the same zip code, I mean zip code, postal zone.  In other words the post office is in Parrottsville.  They deliver mail throughout and Allens Chapel is part of that mail zone.
Speaker 1: And you say they about seven miles apart, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so we always ask this question, and considering this is the Blue Ridge Mountains, it must have been very scenic.
Speaker 2: It is very scenic, very, very nice.  Absolutely beautiful.
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well the sound that I liked most and I think I mentioned this to my wife while I was there, is the rain sound on a tin roof.  You know you can buy, you can buy records if you like the water, the waves of the water beating on the ocean, in the ocean.  But I've never heard anybody sell a, a CD, a music of rain.  I like that, and I like the smell of a first rain on the, the, the dust and the foliage.  It's a small that's very refreshing.  And I guess you don't get that kind in the inner city, but you do in rural areas.  And the other sound that I like and we go to a place now--is, is, is insects, and they, you know they start at a given time at night and if you sit out you can hear maybe about nine or ten [o'clock].  They just start singing--all of them, just suddenly they turn on but people don't notice, suddenly they turn off.  So about eleven o'clock, they do it for about two hours.  And, and, and I don't know who starts it, but you hear all these sounds and they do it, and I like that.  And so I like to go out in nature and hear that.  So those are sounds that, sights and sounds that I like.
Speaker 1: Now what about smells?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What about smells?
Speaker 2: Well I said it's the, it's fresh, it's fresh rain dropping on you know foliage, reed grass, dead grass, dust.  And there's a small that's just so--that I like so much.
Speaker 1: So is this, was this a hilly area, mountainous area?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's very hilly, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and can you see it?
Speaker 2: And that's why there was so much bootlegging, it was hilly.  You couldn't--farming was, was not the ideal part of the--I mean there are valleys, and that's good.  But most of the land is elevated, so it wasn't a good place to have farms.  And so--but it was a good place because it's also a woody, lots of foliage to hide stills to make liquor.  So people did.
Speaker 1: So, so you could grow corn I guess and that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they, they made the liquor out of corn, right, for the most part.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And farming was, farming was generalized farming.  It was you know, you grow wheat, tobacco, corn were the major crops.  And you produce milk, cattle, you had cattle and, and things like that.
Speaker 1: So this is like eastern Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Eastern Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Eastern Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you near the border of any other state?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were--I would say we were about, I just did it, I'd say about forty-five minute drive from, from Ashville, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's right in the foot of, right near the Smokey Mountains, Gatlinburg [Tennessee].  That's the region, right on Interstate 40.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a beautiful part of the country.
Speaker 2: It's beautiful, it's beautiful, absolutely spectacular.
Speaker 1: It's strange that the biggest house in America is in Asheville [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Asheville's a beautiful, beautiful part of the country.
Story_ID: 28544
Speaker 1: Tell us about school.  Now, now you started school at--was it Allens Chapel [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Allen's Chapel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--there was one, it was one, one room.  And I guess all the kids from first through eighth grade attended that school.  And you know they had little bit, little, little desks for us to sit at.  But at the side, on each side of the school, there was a bench.  So every class when it was time for your class to, you know go over your lessons, you went up and sit on the bench with that one teacher and one teacher taught all of us.  But there was about 25, 27 of us in the school at any given time.  And so--
Speaker 1: So, so for one class for instance, would there be, for instance how many eighth graders would be in school with you?
Speaker 2: I'd say seven or eight per class.  They weren't big.
Speaker 1: Now is--was, was your teacher memorable?
Speaker 2: Was she memorable?  Well to be honest, no.  But she was obviously very dedicated and committed.  I, I would say she never--course it--maybe grade school teachers don't do that.  She never kind of encouraged us to, to think that we could even go to high school or not to mention college.  She just never, she, she just was--did her job.  I guess her job was to teach us how to read and write.  But she didn't try to do anything that I'm aware of to enlarge our vision, to introduce us to things very different from what we, we were exposed to.
Speaker 1: This is sad in some ways.
Speaker 2: That's sad, that's sad.
Speaker 1: I've heard so many stories of--
Speaker 2: That is sad.
Speaker 1: Teachers that try and raise--
Speaker 2: They ask--her daughter called me to help, to eulogize her within the last, I'd say two years.  And I found, found it hard--but I did.  But I found it hard to really say things that, things that I know the family would like for one to have said about her.  You know I--and so I, you know I'm one of the students that, that she trained that was among her, her--a success story from her perspective and her family's perspective.  So they wanted me to come back and say something, and I did.  But it was hard, and it should have been easy for me.  Now when you get to high school, I had a mentor that I'm sure changed my life.
Speaker 1: I'll get to that, but I just wanted to--
Speaker 2: So but she was not.
Speaker 1: Grade school for a minute.
Speaker 2: No, no, she, she was, she was not.  And, and maybe because of her own limitations, I, I don't know.
Story_ID: 28545
Speaker 1: Did you have, did you have access to a library in grade school?
Speaker 2: A library?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Either, either at school or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I enjoyed reading, so I'd find all kind of books and things that I could read always.  And, and as a consequence, the book that I most was, was most familiar with in those days, was the Bible because it was available in every home.  And so I guess I read it from cover-to-cover more times than once probably because it was there.  And others, but my mother [Mary Augusta Christmas] enjoyed reading too I would say.  And so my mother would have books that I would read.  But there was--we did not have a library.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there, there was some books around and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were limited, very limited, right.
Speaker 1: All right, did your, your parents get newspapers, the black newspapers at all like the [Pittsburgh] Courier, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we took the Pittsburgh Courier and a local newspaper.  My dad [Mack Leonard Olden] always enjoyed reading the newspaper.  He took it every day.  So yes and I still read, I read the newspaper.  Other people read electronic publications.  But I subscribe to, to two newspapers a day.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did you have a favorite book in grade school that you read?
Speaker 2: Probably--I don't re--recall that I had a favorite.  I guess I was always interested in enlarging my vocabulary and, and reading is a way to do that.
Speaker 1: Now what got you in--interested in that?  I mean now you're in--I mean that's the reason why I ask cause you're in Newport, Tennessee and--
Speaker 2: Well all I'm going to, I'm, I'm going in ten days I think to Atlanta [Georgia] to speak for some young NIH [National Institutes of Health] training program, young post-docs [postdoctoral trainees].  And they want me to talk about myself, how I got started and all that.  And I'm going to say that I, I observed early on that we didn't--people who lived where my parents lived [Newport, Tennessee], we were not--we were marginalized.  And, and I felt the only way to ever change that, that somebody had to make it, had to get out and not forget where they came from.  And, and so I knew what would get you out and you know I, you know you can see, you can see people on the other side of the track and they, and what they had.  And so you emulate people on the other side of the track, that's all you know.  And so I recognized that there were people who had a better life than we did, and--but what they had done is they had dedicated their selves to get an education such as they could get.  And I decided that I was going to do that.  And--
Speaker 1: Now these people from the other side of the tracks, are these, these just white people, or are there some black people too over there?
Speaker 2: There were, there were mostly white, but there was some blacks.  There was a black physician in Newport.  In Newport now, now once I started high school, there was a black physician and he would come around to homes to provide medicine.  There were a few school teachers, my, my teacher and few others.  So there were some educators, but they weren't, there were not many.  But you know what there was, but there, there were whites and you could see that they were living much better, and what did they have that we didn't have?  You could see what they had that we didn't have.  And in part that was an education.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did your mother work for white people that had like a fairly well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Were fairly well off.
Speaker 2: Yes, she worked for--she was a domestic and she worked for a physician in Newport, took care of their house.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a chance to go over there with her from time to time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is not an unusual story.  I've heard a similar, you know similar stories of this you know where a doctor, you know a person's mother is working for a doctor and the kids come over and they see what's going on and they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I, I started out when I went to college, I majored in, I was a pre-med student.  And it was later that I decided I didn't want to be a physician, that I really wanted to be in science, or to be a researcher.
Speaker 1: I don't want to accelerate you past high school yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or, or grade school yet, but, but did you get the idea of becoming a doctor for, from you know observing the black doctor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the doctor that your mother worked for.
Speaker 2: Right, I would say the, the, the, the black doctor.  So I would walk to school, once I got to high school, first year.  I would walk past this doctor's house every morning.  And he had a nice, not big, but a nice home compared to where I lived.  He had a swimming pool, I'm told.  And, and he-none of us ever got to swim in it.  But though he had one.  So you, and you think about yourself in that position.  How would you be different?  Would you give back more?  Be more visible in the community.  And the answer to that in my perspective, yes I would be.  And I thought that would have made, that would have made all the difference in the world for us had he done that.  He didn't.  So you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now in term--now in grade school, now you were in grade school from I guess 1942 to what was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I born in '38 [1938] and--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.  Yeah, '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: Yeah, starting school at age six in '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: This is the tail, tail end of World War II.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 28546
Speaker 1: All right, what was the doctor's name?
Speaker 2: Dennis Branch, B-R-A-N-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you could see he was well ahead of everybody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes he was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did they, I mean would you say he was the most well-to-do of the black professionals in town?
Speaker 2: I would say that's probably correct, although there was a building contractor named Roland Dykes, and he was a brick mason and concrete and he could build homes and, and he would--he had people working for him.  He was--his family, they were wealthy as well.
Speaker 1: Roland Dykes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was there a funeral home director?  Cause they usually do well.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no funeral home director in Newport [Tennessee].  They were next town over, Morristown [Tennessee], so that's who handled many of the black burials.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what about in terms of preachers in town.
Speaker 2: There were preachers, yeah, and most of them were not formally trained.  You know they were--and so they didn't, didn't impress me very much.
Speaker 1: Exhorters as they call them.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had read the Bible over and over again.  I mean were--did you have a--I'm tempted to ask you if you had a special role, role in church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I thought about--when I went to college, I was a double major.  I majored in religion and biology and chemistry.  So I thought about going to actually Princeton Theological Seminary and I applied for a Rockefeller Fellowship and they had one special for scientists, people who had been trained in science and had an inclination to go into the ministry.  Not to, to be a preacher but into the ministry as theologians, and I thought about that.  So I applied for a Rockefeller Fellowship.  They interviewed me twice to decide whether--and I don't know what they were looking for.  They were looking for something and they couldn't decide the first time.  So they decided that I was interesting enough case to bring me back.  So the second time--my wife says I know what they saw--but anyway, they decided the second time I wasn't theologian material.  And so they, they--
Speaker 1: A young man who's read the Bible over and over again.
Speaker 2: So they didn't give me a fellowship and so since I was gonna have to go to school on my own through fellowships and I could get a fellowship in science, so I got a grad--a fellowship to go to graduate school in science.  So that's what, what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well we're gonna get to that in a minute.  But, but so now did you ever have any conflict with the ministers in church of being so well read in the Bible?
Speaker 2: No I did not, no.
Speaker 1: Did they appreciate it?  Did they put--make use of you?  Cause I'm just guessing, maybe I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: No, I, I, no I, I was active in the church.  I sang in the choir and I--we--there was--I had a good voice in those days and I, I was a lead soloist in, in a man's chorus.  So I was, I was active, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right but no special role?
Speaker 2: No special role, no.
Speaker 1: All right, well you seem like you would be the type, type of young man to be given like special duties.  They'd put you up there on Mother's Day or something like that.
Speaker 2: No they didn't, they didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Or have you recite or something.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well churches back in those days, and even today in that, in that, in that community, it's rare that a non-ordained person, minister, is allowed to be, to do anything like that.  To give a talk from the pulpit or to play much of a role.  It's, it's pretty conventional.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 28547
Speaker 1: All right so now you're growing up--now what about popular culture growing up?  Did you--so being a doctor or something you were thinking about, but now you, you're going, you're going to--you're ten [years old] in 1948 I guess and that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to college in, I think I went in '56 [1956], so--
Speaker 1: Well we may as well take it--
Speaker 2: So I guess I started high school in '52-ish [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, high school in 1952, and what was the name, name of--so you went to Tanner High School [Newport, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1952.  What, what size of high school was Tanner?
Speaker 2: Small, my graduating class was I believe eleven.  There were more kids in the community, they didn't go to school.  But still--
Speaker 1: So graduating class was eleven.
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: And I take it that the freshman class was bigger and the other classes were bigger and people kind of got weeded out.
Speaker 2: Yeah they got, yeah, yeah, not a lot bigger, but bigger, right, right.
Speaker 1: Cause those were the days when people in a rural area, they found it hard to finish.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they found it hard.  They, they, they worked and, and people didn't see how an education was gonna make much of a difference and so they didn't go to school.  So my class was eleven of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you say in, in high school you got inspired, I mean really found inspirational mentors.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell, tell us who, who, who mentored you in high school.
Speaker 2: Well there was the principal.  He grew up in Knoxville, Tennessee, which is a reasonable--that's where University of Tennessee is for example.  And it's a reasonable metropolitan area.  And he was--he had a master's degree in something.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Rakestraw, R-A-K-E-S-T-R-A-W, and he was the principal.  And he commuted in.  He, he, he drove up on a weekly basis.  So he, he had a room in somebody's home in Newport, but he drove--it's only forty miles.  So he would, but he would go home to Knoxville on the weekends, so he had a, a perspective of the world that people in my community did not have.  So he would encour--he taught English and he would encourage us, all of us, that to--that, that, to go to college.  And he would say to us all the time you can be anything that you want to be and you don't have to be a, a farmer like your dad or your mom or whatever.  And, and some of us believed it, I believed that.  Most didn't, but I did.  And when I graduated from high school, he helped me figure out how to take the entrance exam, apply to college, and get a scholarship.  And he arranged that I found a job through the college I went to in New Jersey in the summer.  So I used the--I started out in Wildwood, New Jersey and ended up in Cape May, New Jersey and, and I--that was a way for me to make money to, to go to school.
Speaker 1: Now I don't wanna jump too far ahead, but now did you have to work in high school?  Now you, you said you shined shoes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, during the, the nine months in school.  Then after I graduated from high school, I knew then I was gonna go to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], I had applied and gotten in, got admitted.  But Knoxville College brought a group of kids to Wildwood, New Jersey to work in the summer in the, you know, tourist industry.  So I came along with that group and I did very well.  I started out working with a building contractor.  He liked me, he was a, a Italian fellow from Louis in Delaware.  And he would let me not only work five days a week, I worked seven days a week.  So when everybody else went home, he trusted me enough that he knew I would work.  So he let me do odd jobs around the, around the construction site on the weekends.  And, and keep my own time and but you know he knew, he, he saw I had good work ethics and he could trust me to do--course he came back and he saw the work I had done.  So I would paint and clean up and do whatever, but I made a lot of money.  It was construction.  And, and I stayed with him for a long time.  And then I had an opportunity to go with--in a restaurant, and I started out cleaning the floors at night after the restaurant closed, but then I worked my way up to first cook after a number of years.  And then I made much more money because--so I, I worked my--
Speaker 1: Is this a, a job that you kept you know throughout college, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did, did you still work when you went to graduate school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't do when you were in grad school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, but, all right let me go back to high school again.  What, what kind of grades did, did you have and what was the coursework like, did you have science courses?
Speaker 2: Well I had really good grades.  But unfortunately the quality of instruction was pretty poor.  I mean it's nobody's fault.  But that's--it, it was compared to national standards.  So when I went to college, I had this, had to work.  So I graduated not number one in my class, my cousin who was in my class graduated number one--
Speaker 1: In high school, right.
Speaker 2: In high school.  But I was two, number two or three--. (simultaneous)
Story_ID: 28548
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this before we get to where you graduated.  Did you have science instructors in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what sciences did you have in high school?
Speaker 2: Well we had biology, chemistry, math, but that, but you know it was more rote memory and not, not really understanding.
Speaker 1: Did you have a laboratory?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Well now that, that explains.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so but you know I learned enough to get in college and pass the test, pass the national exam to get a high enough score to get in college.  So you know.
Speaker 1: But it's tough to understand chemistry.
Speaker 2: It worked.
Speaker 1: Without a laboratory, right?
Speaker 2: It is, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so this was a condition of many schools in the South in those days.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And so, so this was a segregated school, right?
Speaker 2: It was a segregated school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was--with the walls are there and everything, and the desks were there, but no--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the books were handed down, yeah and the--
Speaker 1: Handed down from?
Speaker 2: The white schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they--
Speaker 2: So they, they were probably outdated.  I mean that's why they're handed down, they were in their second--, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they, they--when they were get finished with the books, they would hand them down to the black schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure when they were rotating them, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Now did you--so was your idea in high school to become a doctor?  Was that you were still thinking?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay you're still thinking you're gonna be a doctor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did, did you have any interaction at all with the, with the black doctors in terms of aspirations or--
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Conversation.
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  But it was Mr. Rakestraw--
Speaker 2: Right, that was him, he was the, he was the person.  I mean he would--I mean he taught English and, and, and foreign language, German.  He, he didn't teach French.  And but he would take a few minutes almost every day to berate us, but in a loving, compassionate way.  He--that to be as good as you can be.  I mean he, you know drive, he drove us.  And most people didn't pay attention, they did what they wanted to do, it didn't matter what he said.  But I paid attention.  And I did believe that I could do anything I wanted to do and I didn't have to be a farmer.  And that I could go to college.  And he was right.
Speaker 1: Now what level of math did you get to?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: Well we had algebra, trigonometry, we had, we covered algebra and trig [trigonometry] and that's what most people--we didn't do calculus.  But I guess nowadays you do calculus.  But I took calculus when I got to college.  I'd not had calculus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think most Southern schools in those days didn't have calculus.
Story_ID: 28549
Speaker 1: And how many of the graduates that came out of school [Tanner High School, Newport, Tennessee] when you did, went to college?  Did your cousin go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Number one.
Speaker 2: She did.  So in my class, three, two or three of us, three of us I think did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did your cousin go to Knoxville too?
Speaker 2: No, the, the trend first when people started going to college, they went to junior colleges.  So my cousin went to a junior college and graduated from a junior college.  And she stopped.  She got a job teaching or doing something and she never went back.  The other woman who was in my class, I guess either dropped out, whatever reason.  I don't know whether she flunked out or whatever, she dropped out.  And I would say it was, it was very difficult for me, even at Knoxville College, and Knoxville College is not Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California].  It was very difficult for me to survive my first year.  I, but I was willing, I was determined that I was going to make the grades to, to survive, and I did.  I worked day and night and I would say I could count my social activities on two hands and have fingers left.  I mean I just didn't have time.  And, but I got good grades in my courses and--
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden] have--I was reading about you in the literature here and I know your parents expected you to become a doctor.  But did they have that expectation when they sent you, when you went off to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To become a doctor.
Speaker 2: Well they, you know that's what they knew too.  And yes, and that's what I was you know, had led them to think I was going to do, going to become, yes.  But--
Speaker 1: Now what, was it--in those days was it possible to think of yourself as doing anything else?
Speaker 2: No, no, sorry, no.  The things that you could think of is--cause you know you look for what other people like you do, teachers, physicians, and then as preachers, and that's it.  The preachers weren't college educated as a rule, so it didn't appeal.  So you were left with teaching, and teaching I still think is a noble profession.  But--or medicine.  And so those were the only two professions, but a scientist was not something that I was acquainted with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So why would I ever dream of it?  Right.
Speaker 1: Had you ever heard of any black scientists at that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, everybody knows George Washington Carver and Booker T. [Washington] and a few, and but you know.  But, no those are kind of few and far between.  But no, nobody dealt, focused on those two as scientists.  And, and if--and all the science and even in college, I never saw anybody doing research until my last year in college.  But Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], we didn't have research laboratories, it was teaching laboratories.
Story_ID: 28550
Speaker 1: So you, you had laboratories, but what's the difference?
Speaker 2: At Knoxville College.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's the difference?
Speaker 2: Well in a, a research laboratory, you have a, a scientist researching and seeking answers to unsolved problems.  And that can be exciting and challenging.  But a teaching laboratory is like a cookbook, you take a recipe and you repeat it and it's exciting you know, could be isolating DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] or doing whatever.  It's exciting, but it's not as exciting as going into a laboratory every day doing something new and creative, different and, and seeing it published and seeing people pre--in your presentation being excited about it.  So it's a different kind of feel.
Speaker 1: So no research being done in Knoxville College.
Speaker 2: No, it's a teaching institution.  And there are lots of, and nothing wrong with having teaching institutions.  Teach at some schools--we, we probably have more research institutions than we need.  So maybe more colleges ought to be teaching institutions.  But you will not get--develop a enthusiasm for, my guess, for research unless you get involved in a research environment and so you need to be in a, a research intensive institutions to develop that kind of--it helps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28551
Speaker 1: Now what about the teachers at Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee]?  Were there any special teachers or mentors? Yeah, and again, I, I was fortunate.  When I got into college, I had a teacher in chemistry, and that was the person who stands out to me.  And again, he took an interest in all of us.  He had a kind of a missionary zeal.  He was a, a, a white fellow, German fellow, German back, background.  And he would take time go get us interested in reading.  And I can think of things like Bertrand Russell [British philosopher and mathematician], Norman Vincent Peale [minister and author; progenitor of the theory of "positive thinking"], we read things other than chemistry.  And so he lived on campus.  And, and we would--had a book club.  And so I was part of the book club.  And we never read about, you know organic or inorganic chemistry except on your own.  But we would have book club and we would read these things and discuss them at his, his house.  And so it broadened my, my exposure and so that was very important to me.  And again, he really wanted us to grow up, grow in, in ways other than just academically. Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Mertin, M-E-R-T-I-N, and if I remember, Dr. Mertin, if I could remember his first name.  He's deceased, but--
Speaker 1: I wonder if he's--you know there's a famous Dr. Mertin, the sociologist from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  He's one of the foundational sociologists.  Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: But he was--this, this person did a lot of things for us and particularly for me.  He--that's how I got into science.  And it's also why I became a researcher.  Had to do with him.  And he get to, get to that, I'll tell you the story.  But Dr. Mertin is the person who then was the primary mentor in my life.  And I would say in all my, my career, my mentors except for Rakestraw [principal, Tanner High School], have been, have been white, have been Caucasians.  Mertin was the first, and after that people took a liking to me or whatever.  And helped me do something that was critical.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now you say that when you were--now were you involved in--so well you said your social life was sort of truncated in college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Did it ever become normalized in any way?  Or was it, you know--
Speaker 2: It was after, you know I, I realized as I was graduated, that I was pretty much one-sided.  That I, I was you know, had good grades and knew chemistry and things that you didn't.  But I, I didn't--wasn't very adequate socially.  So but I worked at it.  So I began to read more, much more as Dr. Mertin had taught me to do.  Go to theater.  I'm now--and began to move around in other cities, so I developed--and I was always interested in art.  I took art appreciation in, in high--in college even though I didn't have to.  And so I learned about, you know the, the great artists.  And I developed an interest in art.  When I go in cities, I go to the major museums.  Actually I think I've been to all the major museums around the world.  And so--and I began to read, you know, things, I mean I don't [unclear] was Newsweek, but that you know Newsday, Newsweek, newspapers.  So you can grow, you can have, you can grow personal, your personal, as a person and do things.  And so I recognized that if I was gonna succeed, I needed to, to grow other than in science because when you're in a social set--setting, I mean you, you know I go to a meeting and my professors are there with their spouses and friends or whatever.  You've got to be able to converse and to feel comfortable, and not just about your specialty.  So, so I, I worked at that.  And so absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28552
Speaker 1: So you said an incident occurred when you were a senior where you went to University of Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now this is a white--University of Tennessee is a big university of Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and all that.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So you, you went there and, and visit, visited the research lab.  Now what was the occasion and, and--
Speaker 2: Well Dr. Mertin [Olden's chemistry teacher at Knoxville College] was the, the, the connection there.  He--the university undergraduate program--that was in '55 [1955] and six [1956], was not integrated.  '55 [1955] I guess, was not integrated.  The graduate school integrated in 1954.  So Dr. Mertin realized that it had not integrated and maybe he could, along with a colleague of his, a friend of his named Dr. Arthur Jones, he and Dr. Jones cooked up this plan that two--they would take the universe--they would get two students from Knoxville College to participate in a, a research program at the university in the undergraduate school.  And so--and the idea was if, if two undergraduate students kind of participated in some sort of program at the university, that people would get used to it.  See people in and out, and recognize that nothing happened.  And, and, and so, so they did.  It was, a, Atomic Energy Commission Grant, which was a government grant.  And there was a discrimination clause in it that they couldn't discriminate.  So they didn't want to lose their money I guess.  So they allowed myself and a, a, a black woman to--my colleague in biology major as me, as well; the two of us to go.  So we went and we participated in a research program.  But the--as part of the research, there were seminars, there are things that all students go to.  So we could go to the seminars.  And once we walked into a seminar, it was a large auditorium.  And all the faculty and students saw us and, and, and, and accepted us.  It was, there was no problems.  But you didn't know that in advance.  But the, but the point was it made an impression and a year later when I graduated in nine--in 1956, the year later they actually integrated the undergraduate school at the University of Tennessee.  And I don't know, I've heard 119, some, more than 100 black students enrolled that year in the, in the undergraduate school.  Our, our--so we was, so I didn't get a degree from University of Tennessee because we were not officially enrolled.  But it was that experience though, that taught me that I really wanted to do research and not--didn't want to go to medicine because I really liked research and I also was impressed by the quality of the presentation.  When university faculty came around to give seminars every week, they were it--it fascinated me because it, you could see them thinking on their feet.  And, and challenging the system.  And, and figuring out how to solve this problem versus that problem, and these problems that they were solving were important problems.
Speaker 1: Now did you--I'm trying to get this I guess straight. But I haven't--so were you at the University of Tennessee for a number of weeks, or did you, you just visit, visiting on certain occasions?
Speaker 2: No, no, we were on a weekly basis.  We were matriculating like other students, like taking a class.  And you had a research program, so you worked it out with your advisor and, and we were there, I don't know, three or four days a week for so many hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, so for those classes.
Speaker 2: For those--for that research program.
Speaker 1: I got it, I got it, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Lot of research projects.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I had to successfully complete that research project.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd go there with Dr. Mertin from--or would you go down--
Speaker 2: No, I'd go by myself.
Speaker 1: By yourself, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, whenever you were--you know you had worked out a schedule, right, right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Are there, there any particular teachers at Un--University of Tennessee that stand out that--
Speaker 2: Certainly Dr. Jones, Dr. Jones, yes.  I mean he, he was somebody who felt that he'd like to see the university integrated and he and Dr. Mertin were kind of like-minded people.  They were--they attended a Unitarian church together, and that's how they met I guess.  And so they worked out this scheme and--so they were two, two people who wanted to make a difference.  And they, and I would say they did, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 28553
Speaker 1: So now when you graduated from Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] in '56 [1956], did you graduate with any particular honors? I didn't graduate magna, but I was a honor student, I graduated with honors.  And I had good grades.  I was on the honor roll and they don't have honor rolls anymore.  All, all of my years except my first one, and I think I, I was close the first year.  The first year was hard for me.  But after that I, you know, I caught up.  When you start behind, the only way you catch up--I don't know if you know Benjamin Mays [minister, educator, scholar, social activist; president of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia from 1940 to 1967; mentor to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.].  He's one of my idols and he used to say the only way that a back wheel of a, a wagon or a car can catch up with the front wheel is run faster, right. Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and think of it technologically the back wheels always will be behind unless they do something different.  And so he would say to us if you want to catch up, you have to run faster.  So you have to work harder.  That's what it translates into, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you do immediately after graduating?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I heard you took some time off.  I mean now that's, that's what I read.
Speaker 2: Yeah well I took--during my whole year, whole training program, I, I was off two different, twice to earn money.  I didn't have money.  And so I took off between my undergraduate and graduate one year.  And I worked and saved money, and but then I realized that hey, I can get a scholarship to graduate schools.  Graduate schools in those days in science, if you have grades good enough, you could get a fellowship.  So, and I applied to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] which is where I wanted to go, and I got a fellowship.  So I was only off for one year.  And I had enough money to go to the--well, they gave me enough money to go to the University of Michigan because University of Michigan even in those days was expensive.
Story_ID: 28554
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about how you chose University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], what advice you had and you know--
Speaker 2: Well there were, there were some schools, there were the Big Tens.  There were some schools had a reputation, and I don't know history of it, of accepting and training blacks.  And if almost any black that you would ask, they would refer to you to the Big Ten.  Michigan was one of them and it has a, a long history of that.  And [University of] Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] was another one.  So it was the Big Ten schools.  And, and I was referred, told that Michigan and, and Iowa, and--
Speaker 1: Who referred you?  I mean who?
Speaker 2: I guess it must have been my, my biology professor named McArthur who was at Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee].  He had gotten his degree at Iowa and matter of fact taught two, at least two of the faculty members in--that had Ph.D.s had gotten their degrees in Iowa.  But Iowa seemed a long ways for me and Michigan, I, I, I think had a better program.  And so I wanted to go to the University of Michigan.  And so I applied and got accepted, and got a fellowship, money to go and so--
Speaker 1: Who, who provided the fellowship?  I mean what--
Speaker 2: Well it--money comes from, you know universities, they have training programs.  And so it was a training program that the university, so you applied to the university and you, to get a master's level.  You don't get--you couldn't get a Natural Science Foundation [NSF] Fellowship, NIH [National Institutes of Health] Fellowship, but that's later when you have a, a research program.  But most students go in a training program.  The schools have training program--let's say for genetics and microbiology that, that's funded by the NIH or some foundation.  So--and it's awarded to the school, it's not awarded to the student.  But the school then can select the students that get the money.  And so that's, and so, so I applied for a master's degree in biology/genetics and was accepted and, and got a master's degree from the University of Michigan.
Story_ID: 28555
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Them--now you're in a, an environment where you can do research.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know, full time, that's what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Now how, how was that for you?
Speaker 2: It was fine, it was a good, it was a good experience for me.  And, and I would say the, the only mistake I made, but you know I was doing this on my, on my own.  I didn't--at this point there was nobody advising me anything.  I had essentially moved outside of a, you know my--most of the people I knew at Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] they weren't interested in research, so they couldn't kind of give me advice.  And so I had to kind of pick and choose and make decisions on my own, and so I did.  And so I did not know that I couldn't do what I ultimately wanted to do with a master's degree.  So that was my mistake.  And I talk to people, advise people so they don't make that mistake.  So I, I spent--
Speaker 1: What, well what did you want to do that you couldn't?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to be, run my own laboratory.  I wanted to be in--an independent researcher.  And in order to be an independent researcher and apply for NIH [National Institutes of Health] and NSF [National Science Foundation] grants and you have to have a, a Ph.D. [degree].  You don't have to, you can apply, but you're unlikely to get one, right.  So, so I got a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute.  Don't go that fast.  We're gonna talk about what, what you studied and what you did you know rather than--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay well I studied genetics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, in the zoology department at Ann Arbor, in university.  And, and that was--and so I, I did a research project on genetics.  I worked on the fruit fly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I was wondering what was the level of genetic research--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was looking at the chromo--chromosomal re--that was before DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid], and I was looking at chromosomal relocation and things like that.  And counting chromosomes in, in fruit flies.
Speaker 1: Okay, fruit fly study, all right.  Okay.  So your thesis was--
Speaker 2: You, you, you didn't have to do a thesis for a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to do two, two years of coursework.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the B level or higher.
Story_ID: 28556
Speaker 1: All right, so but you soon figured out that you had to have a Ph.D. [degree] to really do what you wanted to do.
Speaker 2: Right, and that came by working.  So when I got my master's degree [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], I moved--my grandmother actually moved to New York, my--Flora Gore.  Flora moved to New York, that's my mother's [Mary Augusta Christmas] mother.  She moved to New York, I don't know when, but early in my life.  And so she was living in New York City.  So I--we were in and out of New York City in the summer, my--so I mean I was, especially, because I was working in New Jersey, so I--every summer when I would go to New Jersey, I would go into New York City to spend a week with my grandmother before going back.  So I knew New York and I had family support in New York.  And so I could go and stay with her in a room until I could find employment.  So I got a job at Columbia University Medical School Center, as a researcher in--not as a researcher, as a technician in a laboratory in, in a biochemistry laboratory.  And was working with a assistant professor named Dwayne Price.  And Dr. Price liked me as well, so we got along well and I did well in his research program.  So he encouraged me, course I recognized that I needed a doctor degree, to go back to graduate school and get a Ph.D.  He thought I could you know, could succeed.  And so I did.  So I worked one year with him and, and then decided to go back to graduate school.  Now I wanted to stay in genetics, but I didn't--but I liked New York.  So I wanted to be on the east coast, so I didn't want to go back to Michigan to--again.  So turns out that, that the, the major Drosophila [melanogaster; fruit fly] geneticist in the world was at Columbia University, and his name was Dobjonski [ph].  I don't know--a Russian name, don't ask me how to spell it, Dobjonski.  He had students--a guy that I worked with at Michigan was one of his students.  The other student was at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], named Ralph Hillman.  So my brother had now moved to New York City and so we could be close together. So I decided to, to go to, to apply for and meet with Ralph Hillman to see if I could work with him.  So Dr. Hillman at Temple University accepted me as his graduate student for a Ph.D.  And so that's where I went.
Story_ID: 28557
Speaker 1: So Temple University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Working with Dr. [Ralph] Hillman.  Now, now--
Speaker 2: Well in the end I, I worked with Dr. Hillman at the beginning.  But in the end I, I, I changed my mind about working with him and worked with another fellow by the name of Walter Hempfling.  I, I, I decided--Drosophila genetics was coming to an end.  It's, it's come back, but it wasn't a good time to be going into Drosophila genetics.  It was, it was the old, old genetics.  Molecular biology was, this was the beginning of molecular biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went with doctor--what was his name?
Speaker 2: Walter Hempfling H-E-M-P-F-L-I-N-G.  Hempfling was a young assistant professor who had post-doc'd at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], who just--had just come to Temple [University], and he had a really exciting research program in cell and molecular biology.  And so I decided that was the future of biology and that's where I wanted to be.  So I worked with Hempfling.  And I'm still friends with, with Hillman.  I mean I just heard about him--met with somebody from Temple since I've been here, and Hempfling referred--not Hempfling, Hillman directed him to meet with me.  So I know them, I--he and his wife, we are still friends.  But it wasn't what I wanted to do, and I made the right decision to switch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, can you tell us about your dissertation?  What, what was--can you remember the title of it and what you were doing?
Speaker 2: No, I, I--you know it had, it--I was, I was interested in how cells conserve, manufacture energy.  And that was something called ATP [adenosine triphosphate].  You probably heard of that, adenosine triphosphate.  So all your energy is, is--not all of it, but when you move your muscles, when you walk, when you do any mechanical work, the source of energy in biology is ATP.  And, and cells make that and store it until it's needed.  Now it comes from things like glucose and sugar and to some extent from fats and proteins, but sugar is the final end-product.  So the question was how do cells do that and there is something called the electron transport chain that they pass electrons along from one protein to the other.  And as they do that, they make ATPs and--three ATPs per every electron that's passed along that pathway.  And so the question was how did, how did cells do that?  And so I was interested in that.  And so it's, it's bioenergetics, so my thesis was in bioenergetics.  And there was one thing that in particular, that I was interested in.  So I am the person--there was a pigment that nobody knew what it did, and so my job was to figure out--it was called 503 nanometer pigment that was, P503.  And so I'm the person who figured out what P503 was.  Turns out it wasn't, it wasn't one of the proteins that really made ATP.  It was a, a kind of a side product of the, the way that the, the process was engineered.  And so I identified P503 as one of the intermediates in the--what they call oxidative phosphorylation pathway, the pathway that you make ATP.  So my thesis was something P, P, P503 something, I don't remember what it was.  But it got published in a top journal.  So--and because of that, I got my degree.  And, and, and, and for a while I worked in bioenergetics.  So that was a very exciting field at the time.  And I guess it's--could still be, still be.  But I didn't stay there forever.
Story_ID: 28558
Speaker 1: Now, now when you got your Ph.D. [degree], now you're a doctor, but you're a doctor of bi--microbiology I guess, right, or--
Speaker 2: Cell biology.
Speaker 1: Cell, cell biology.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now and I read that your parents [Mary Augusta Christmas and Mack Leonard Olden] were sort of disappointed that you weren't an M.D. [medical doctor].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they, they, well you know you, you have to understand they'd--and still people don't understand what Ph.D.s do.  And, and, and particularly for somebody with a high school education or I mean third grade.  They understand what a physician does.  But they didn't understand what I was going to do.  And it was the P503 nanometer pigment paper that my dad had saved.  But in the end, you know, they appreciated what I did.  But they--I, they, they couldn't understand it and I would say still that's the case.  I mean not still, they are deceased, but to their death they never quite understood.  But I think the first time that they really I think fully appreciated that maybe I had done something reasonably important, was when I was asked to become director of the Environmental Health Institute at the NIH [National Institues of Health].  Ebony Magazine picked up on it and, and had a little blurb about that, that I was the first African American to be appointed, to head an institute in the NIH.  And they saw--and of course in that community, everybody valued and read the Ebony publications.  And Jet [magazine] was, was one of the Ebony publications, so they got that.  So that's when they realized that maybe what I had done was probably more important than what they thought.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and--
Speaker 1: I started to ask you about that, cause that, that create, create any drama at home, or like what--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, it, it, it changed--
Speaker 1: What are you gonna do with that kind of degree?
Speaker 2: It changed a lot because not only my parents, the community, white and blacks didn't quite know what I did.  But it was that that they began that maybe to research and figure out what I was doing.  And so after that, I got a lot of invites to go back home to do things.  I became visible in my own community, among whites and blacks.
Story_ID: 28559
Speaker 1: You were largely in graduate school during a lot of the events of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of the things that happened in, in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah well it, it happened when I was in undergraduate school [Knoxville College].  I mean the demonstrations happened right there in Knoxville [Tennessee].  I was vice--head, I was Vice President of Student Council and we had debates about do we want to boycott, do we want to do this, do we want to do that.  And some of the sit-ins happened in Knoxville.  And so I guess I took the position that if you needed to sit in, fine.  If you didn't have to, why do so?  And, and no one's ever asked me that before, but I'll tell you.  And in Knoxville there were black leaders that were--and the relationship between the black power structure and the white power structure was pretty good in Knoxville.  So they didn't want disruption in Knoxville, and it didn't happen.  So they got together and decided that they were--these things weren't gonna happen in Knoxville without, you know, the Bull Conner type, Alabama type problems.  And it didn't happen.  And there were students in--black students at Knoxville who I felt wanted to have a confrontation.  And I didn't, I took the other position, let's give--let's let people see if they can work it out first before we do that.  And it turned out it got worked out.  I was absolutely right.  I thought it would and, and it did.  So we--
Speaker 1: Do you think it would have worked out without any pressure?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, absolutely not.  So the pressures that were--the things that were going on in other places obviously made a difference.  And it was that kind of pressure that the merchants in, in Knoxville didn't want to happen.  And the black power structure were concerned about the safety of the, the black children.  So they didn't want that to happen either.  So the power structure got together and they negotiated and got a settlement that achieved integration without you know, disruption and civil issues that happened in other places.  So, so you know I, I think took a--the right position.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28560
Speaker 1: Now, now tell us about--now you went on to do post-doctoral studies at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now this is--so you made the climb from Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], now, now you're at Harvard [University].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Doing post-doctoral work.  Now how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well again, you know my thesis advisor was a good guy, but he, his ambitions weren't quite my own.  And so I decided that I wanted--you needed to do a post-doc, first of all.  I realized that really where I wanted to go, I really needed to spend two to four years more just doing research, and that's a post-doc.  And so there was a fellow at Harvard who was doing research that I liked, and it was related to bioenergetics.  He was interested in how membrane transport--what is the mechanism, source of energy for getting things across membranes?  And, and so I figured that'd be a good place for me.  So I applied and, and also applied at this time for my own fellowship, and I got a NIH [National Institutes of Health] Fellowship to go.  So I decided--so he, he first of all accepted me as a post-doc.  He invited me up for an interview and, and I went up and we interviewed.  And he offered me a position.  The NIH Fellowship that he and I jointly applied for.  You know you have to agree on a project, then you write an application.  And so we agreed on a project, we wrote an application and NIH funded it.  And, and I was funded by NIH for three years.  And as a post-doc.  And then I stayed on another year and a half as a, as an instructor in the department.
Speaker 1: Now you taught physiology, is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was this on--
Speaker 2: To medical students.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: First year medical students.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So any stories about Harvard?
Speaker 2: Good, well you know I mean Harvard changed my life.  I mean there is no doubt about that.  I learned how to do research at Harvard, I mean really learned.  And, and you, you, you say is there something--yes, about Harvard that's unique, yes.  They really taught me too that if you're going to do, spend 14, 15, 16 hours a week working on something, you may as well, may as well work on something important.  And, and, and they wanted their work to be at the front, leader.  They wanted others to cite them, not the other way around.  And so there was a huge emphasis on doing really cutting edge, leading the charge in whatever area you wanted to work.  So I learned that and the benefits of that.  There are risks and they clearly knew what they were and communicated those to you.  But the benefits are enormous.  And so I worked on--and I have always done that.  I've worked on really cutting edge science all my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it made the difference.  I have two, I guess 203, 204 publications now, I don't know what the last count is, and, and, and, and in one year at the NIH I published two of the most cited papers for that year, that was 1978.
Story_ID: 28561
Speaker 1: At Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], what were you researching at Harvard?
Speaker 2: Well I started on like I said, membrane transport.  The mechanism of, of how do--what is the mechanism, source of energy, for transporting things across membranes.  And we, we--turns out that the project that I went--started, it, it, it ended up being not a membrane pro--project, it was bacteria.  It was a cell wall proj--project, problem.  We had a--we had isolated some mutants and the mutants had certain kind of characteristics that originally when I started, we thought it was a, a mutant that was defective in transport.  It turns out that the defect was not in the membrane, which is inside the cell wall, but the defect was in the structure of the cell wall.  And so what I ended up doing was define, clearly defining what the--there was enzymatic defect that was due to genetics.  And I ended up defining, describing exactly what that defect was.  And so we got two or three papers, again in top journals, and so it was a cell wall mutant that was--turned out to be a very important mutant.
Speaker 1: Can, can you explain more about it?  Cause it's--we're not really--I mean we really want the science here.
Speaker 2: Well the cell wall is made up of amino acids for one thing, and the one that I worked with was called D-alanine.  Most amino acids are L isomers, and these are left-handed or right-handed.  L isomers are the, you know the twenty or so amino acids that make up your proteins are L form.  But bacteria have amino acid called D, D forms.  And the one that I isolated was a mutant that could not synthesize D-alanine, D-alanine.  So in the cell wall D-ala--two, two residues of alanine are coupled together and they're the D forms.  And that is--provides rigidity and strength to the cell wall.  And, and once you destroy the cell wall, then the bacteria let's say a ba--a rod shaped bacterium will become spherical and burst.  So you need--die, right, and that's what soap does.  When you go in the bathroom and wash your hands, soap, detergents, destroy the cell wall of bacteria.  And, and when you destroy the cell walls, you'll kill the bacteria.  And so these were what they call leaky mutants.  They weren't totally defective, they had some activity.  But the activity was, was low.  So the mutants leaked, they leaked enzymes from inside the cell.  And, and so that's what we were using as an assay was a enzyme that we could measure and we knew how leaky it was, but I could repair the defect.  So I identified the defect, and then all you had to do was add D-alanine to the culture medium, give them D-alanine, 'cause they couldn't make it.  If you gave them D-alanine, you would get a normal rod shaped bacterium that could remain intact and live as long as you provided it with D-alanine.  But you had to provide D-alanine.  So that helped define what the structure of the cell wall of this particular bacterium.  And the bacterium was Escherichia coli [E.coli], which is in your gut.  All of us have it and it's important for our digestion.  And that's the bacterium that we use in fact to determine the level water contamination of human contamination of water that's sampled.  So that was the, the work that I did on that bacterium.
Story_ID: 28562
Speaker 1: But so then what I did is became a instructor [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And then I got a Macy Faculty Fellowship, Josiah Macy Foundation.  And, and my project was to look at protein degradation.  And that's when we really hit the, the, the jackpot.  So we decided that--it was known that cells degrade proteins, but nobody--and we had thought that it required energy.  But we didn't know what type of energy.  And so I worked out and demonstrated that, that not only did you need energy to break down a protein, but you needed a special kind of energy.  It had to be ATP [adenosine triphosphate], it couldn't be other forms of energy.  And it turns out that that was a major, unknown in the way that cells degrade proteins.  The people who were competing with us when I was at Harvard, won the Nobel Prize, [Avram] Hershko [won the 2004 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation], Hershko and--the Nobel Prize was given in protein degradation and showed me how important it was.  And I was at--working with Fred [Alfred] Goldberg.  Fred Goldberg and myself and a few others were working on protein degradation.  My part was to figure out that ATP was required.  Hershko and I forget the other guy's name.  Anyway, they won the Nobel Prize, they are Israelis.
Speaker 2: This is in, in 19--
Speaker 1: That was in, yeah '72 [1972], '72 [1972] I'd say.
Speaker 2: '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Just before I came to NIH [National Institutes of Health].  So it worked.  So we, we--well it turns out that when the Nobel Prize was given and the Nobel Prize lecture was written, one of the, you know there are certain seminal discoveries and, and the ATP linkage was one of them, and that was my paper.  So because Hershko got the Nobel Prize for figuring out how proteins are degraded, and, and that was what Goldberg was interested in.  I was not interested in that per se.  But the source of energy was ATP.  So in the Nobel Prize lecture publication in Science [journal], our paper is cited, and--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So it was important.
Speaker 2: All right, so, so it changed the field.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Made a major contribution to the field.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's absolutely right.  And that's never been refuted.  That's the source--for many, many years everybody knew that was the source of energy.  But what is--what's the source nobody knew.  So we designed a set of experiments to show what the source of energy was.
Story_ID: 28563
Speaker 1: You didn't start doing cancer studies until you went to NIH [National Institutes of Health].
Speaker 2: NIH.
Speaker 1: All right, and that's your next stop.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You said '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about, about the position at NIH and what role you were gonna take?
Speaker 2: Well when--so I had a Macy Faculty Fellowship that was, that provided my salary as a faculty member at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massavhusetts].  And they would have done that for three--I think it was a three years.  And they would have paid me whatever the going rate was at Harvard.  But the going rate at Harvard was very low.  And, and I--at an instructor level, and that's a legitimate faculty position at Harvard even today.  So, the amount of money that I was making, I don't remember it was probably 17 or $18,000 I guess.  Well Harvard set the salary, Macy didn't.  Macy would have paid me twice that much, but Harvard wouldn't allow me to make more than that because I'd have been making more than some of the assistant professors, so they couldn't have that.  So but by then, my wife and I had three children.  And we were--but we, we did live at--we ran a dorm for Radcliffe Harvard, so we had free housing.  But I was ready to, to try some--I was working on bacterial systems.  Bacteria then was also like at that point in '74 [1974], was kind of going out of style.  So we, we went from--genetics was done in Drosophila [melanogaster] which are fruit flies, and then bacteria was the next big model.  And bacteria was--and that's how DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] was discovered all that was worked out.  But by then people were beginning to think of animal cells, human cells, mice and rats and chicken and, and things like that, animal cells.  So not bacteria, bacteria are too simple.  So I had no experience working with animal cells and I realized as I was starting my career in '74 [1974], my own independent career, and I had to get grants, that working with bacterial systems would maybe you know, I'd be in good stead for another four to six years, but eventually you had to know how animal systems.  So I wrote a fellow at, at NIH who was--is a member of National Academy of Sciences [NAS].  He had been offered the position as chairman of the physiology department that I was in at Harvard.  So I knew he was good.  I knew his work and so I felt that I was not losing anything by leaving Harvard to going to work with him.  So he was putting together a group of people, new, brand new group to work on animal cells and tissue.  Just the way, you know much the way you work on--with bacteria.  So I decided to apply to come to work with him essentially as a assistant professor, although NIH called them in those days senior staff fellows.  And so I applied for a senior staff fellow position with him and came down to visit with him.  And he offered me a position.  So I, I guess I applied in '73 [1973] and came in '74 [1974].  So--and that was in NCI [National Cancer Institute] laboratory, molecular, molecular biology I guess it was called.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is called, he's still, he still is there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Now, okay so--
Speaker 2: So I should back up.  The senior staff all--there was a junior staff fellow and a senior staff fellow.  You have to have four to five years of post-doctoral experience to get a, a senior staff fellowship.  And so it's equivalent to an assistant professor in a university like Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] or Harvard.  So I came--but it's untenured.  You, you come in, it's--assistant professors are untenured.  And this position was untenured.  No guarantees.  And I came in in '74 [1974], but I was promoted to tenure in 1977.  So I got tenure as a researcher at NIH-NCI in--three years after I was--arrived.
Speaker 1: So you had enough post-doctoral research experience to qualify as a senior?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Research.
Speaker 2: Right, I had four and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 28564
Speaker 1: All right, so now from what I understand here, you were working on proteins on a--gly--glycoproteins and the role they play in cancer cells?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yeah.  When I, when I first got there, I worked with the person over the lab.  And, and he and I worked on something called membrane proteins, but there was one protein that he had a great interest in, and we worked on that.  And I kind of did what he wanted to do and I won't talk about that.  But we got, we, we got really good publications.  We, we have I think two papers from that work in Cell [journal], Cell is today one of the, was, well then it was one of the best journals in the field.  It is today one of the best journals in the field, not the best journal.  It's called Cell and it's published out of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], MIT is the--publishes the journal.  So I--we got two papers I believe in Cell.  Well but I decided while I was there that--first once you get tenure, you, you have your own, you're independent.  You have your own laboratory.  You have your own money.  You have, you have your own post-docs.  You get a technician.  And so I was going off on my own.  So I decided that I wanted to work on a different project that a fellow [George Emil Palade; Romanian-born cell biologist] at, at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] had won the Nobel Prize [in Physiology and Medicine, 1974] for working out the mechanism by which cells secrete proteins.  And, and, and just to let you know how important that is, all the proteins in your blood, your blood proteins like albumen and when they take samples of your blood to look at things, liver proteins.  When they look at your liver function, that's the way they determine your liver, liver function, whether it's good or bad by what's in your blood.  And most of those things that they bioassay are proteins.  And, and so there are just maybe 10, 12, 14, lots of proteins in your blood.  And they are soluble in the liquid part of the blood.  And so there was a fellow at--or used to be at Yale, full professor named George Palade.  And George Palade won the Nobel Prize for figuring out how cells--and you make a protein in the nucleus.  You secrete it, it leaves the nucleus and goes through the cytoplasm, through the plasma membrane and gets outside the cell, it's outside. So how does that happen?  Well he won the Nobel Prize for that.
Story_ID: 28565
Speaker 1: And when he [George Emil Palade; Romanian-born cell biologist; won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine, 1974] won, when he, he gave his Nobel Prize lecture, he said that cells do this--the, the signal, the zip code that, that determines whether something leaves the cell or stays inside the cell, there are proteins inside the cell, obviously.  But why do some leave, some stay?  He said it's probably--this was just a hypothesis, it's that the, they put a carbohydrate group, which is a sugar group, on proteins that are destined for export.  The, the proteins that stay inside the cell don't have carbohydrates, so, so that's it, it's a zip code thing.  Well it was, it was--and, and it was just based on logic.  Logic is most proteins inside the cell don't have carbohydrate groups on, most everything outside the cell do.  It was logic and he had, he won the Nobel Prize, so he can speculate and say anything he wishes.  So people began to accept that as dogma.  But there was never any real hard evidence that that was right.  And there were some suggestions that it was wrong.  And because the major protein in your blood is one called albumen.  Albumen does not have carbohydrate groups on it, and it's the major protein.  If you say of what percentage, it'll probably make up 20 or a large percentage of all the proteins and in, in your blood, so it's huge.  Well it doesn't have a carbohydrate group on it.  So I said that must mean that Palade is wrong.  And so we set out to determine do you need a carbohydrate group on a protein.  So at the time we had a, a, a chemical that would block, that would prevent cells from putting a carbohydrate group on proteins, and we would feed the cell that.  And say then what happens?  These 20 or 30 proteins that come out of the, outside the cell, are they glycosylated or are they not?  If they're not glycosylated according to Palade, they should stay inside the cell.  Well it turned out that that didn't happen, that they came out, all right.  And, but it was trickier than that.  So--but the, the amount outside the cell was decreased, so that seems to suggest that maybe he was partly right.  Well it turns out he wasn't, he wasn't--it wasn't--had nothing to do with whether you had a, a zip code on it, the carbohydrate zip code.  It turns out that if you took the carbohydrate group off, the protein--it's a, it's a, it's a helical structure, it's folded and, and, and it's very complex structure.  Turns out if you took the carbohydrate group off, you destabilized the protein, and that got back to my protein degradation story that I learned at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Turns out that what happens if you change the conformation, territory of a protein, they become susceptible to protease degrada--protein degradation, to proteases which are the enzymes that degrade proteins.  Now I knew that from working on protein degradation at Harvard.  So we demonstrated that really what happens when you remove carbohydrate groups, the cell can secrete it, a protein, but if, if you look outside the cell, you may see less.  But it has nothing to do with impairment in secretion mechanisms, it has to do with the stabilization of the protein.  So it's degraded inside the cell.  So we had to show that the protein is indeed made, and there is a way you can show it.  And, and there's no change.  But it is degraded faster.  And so once we made that discovery, all we had to do was block protein degradation.  So if you make a--and it's been degraded if you prevent the degradation of it, then what should happen?  The amount outside should be comparable to, to if it had a carbohydrate group on it.  Well that's exactly what happens.  So you, you make the protein, you prevent the cell from putting in a carbohydrate group on it, and then you prevent the cell from degrading that denatured, that protein.  And that protein gets exported just as well.  And so we published that paper in Cell and I guess we published in 1977, and it became the most cited paper within a year.  And it was well received.
Story_ID: 28566
Speaker 1: I remember I went to the Cell Biology Society meeting to present that paper.  And, and my advisor at--my collaborator at--who was my mentor at NIH [National Institutes of Health], convinced me to use a title that was very aggressive.  The title was 'Carbohydrate Groups Not Required for Secretion'.  That is kind of in your face kind of title.  'Carbohydrate Groups are not, not Required for Secretion'.  Well [George] Palade [Romanian-born cell biologist], the Nobel Prize [1974; protein secretion] winner, had said it was.  Well he was one of the grand--he was a, a prominent leader in cell biology.  So I went to this Cell--so I submitted an abstract to give a talk at the Cell Biology meeting, and I had to get up on the podium and make my presentation.  And you knew Palade was going to be in the audience, and he was, to listen, to see if the data supported the conclusions.  And he listened.  He got up at the end and hey, that's the answer.  I mean we--you're--there's no, no doubt.  Now we did this at the time other--everybody was supporting.  People--once somebody like a Nobel Prize winner says something, everybody gets on the bandwagon and they start reporting things that support, are consistent with.  And matter of fact, when we published--sent our paper in, there was another prominent scientist who's still out here, who was saying that carbohydrate groups are, Palade's absolutely right.  But we were looking not only at our protein, which was fibronectin, we were looking at the one he was looking at too.  His was collagen.  And he said collagen cannot be secreted if you don't have a carbohydrate group on it.  We showed absolutely and unequivocally collagen could be secreted.  So that person was wrong.  He was at Washing--University of Washington, Seattle.  He was absolutely wrong.  So we got tremendous visibility and credit for doing that research, and we followed up with another that was also the two most highly cited papers in that year.  But that was--
Speaker 2: So the Nobel Prize winner publicly acknowledged--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  You know the data was hard and fast.  I mean to, to, to, to get the press, a journal, top journal to accept data that goes against the dogma--that was the dogma, had been the dogma for--I think he did it in '65 [1965] when Palade said this.  And this now was in '77 [1977].  So for ten years, twelve years, that was the dogma.  People just accepted it.  But it, it--and there was not a lot of exceptions.  And you--so I picked out the biggest one.  One was just in your face, albumen.  Well how can you explain--well what people said was wait a minute.  Albumen then obviously has carbohydrate groups on it; has a zip code.  But that zip code is stripped off as it comes through the membrane.  And that could be possible.  But we showed, we went back and said okay if you make albumen from Day One inside the cell and follow it from the nucleus all the way, does it ever have carbohydrate groups on it?  And the answer was no, it does not, and it doesn't.  So we showed that that--the exception, there was no, there was never a carbohydrate group on albumen, so you couldn't explain it.
Story_ID: 28567
Speaker 1: And actually someone [Gunter Blobel] subsequently won a Nobel Prize [1999] for figuring out what the--there is a zip code it turns out there.  He was half right.  It wasn't a carbohydrate group on, but there is a zip code that does determine where things get out.  But it's, it's, it's, it's a pep--peptide sequence.  Proteins are made up of amino acids strung together as a chain.  And there's a sequence right at the beginning called the signal sequence.  And it's about 20 amino acids.  Those 20 amino acids determine whether something gets exported or stays inside the cell.  Now if you block the synthesis of that signal sequence, things can't get out.  And that was a fellow at Rockefeller [University, New York] named Gunter Blobel demonstrated that after--and, and I know Gunter very well.  We, we interacted a lot cause he--we were working on the same thing.  But Gunter showed that it was the signal sequence of peptides, not carbohydrate.  So that seals the story.
Story_ID: 28568
Speaker 1: The aspect of the glycoprotein aspect you said was fibronectin.
Speaker 2: Fibronectin, right.
Speaker 1: And this is--now what role does this play--I mean what does it tell us about cancer when it, when it, when it moves?
Speaker 2: Well I collaborate with a fellow for about twenty years, and that was his life and still is.  And when both of us--he was at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] before he came--we both came to the NIH-NCI [National Institutes of Health; National Cancer Institute], joined the same lab at the same time, July of 19--June or July, 1974.  He was int--he brought fibronectin with him.  He, he's always worked on fibronectin.  And--but there--it was important because a fellow at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] named Richard Hynes had shown fibronectin makes up maybe 10 per--I'm sorry, 50 percent of all of the protein that's found in a, a membrane of a cell.  It's huge.  And Richard Hynes at MIT showed that when cells lose--cannot synthesize fibronectin, they have, they become transformed.  In other words, transformed cells is characterized--transformed are cancer cells--cancer cells don't have much--they lose fibronectin in the membrane.  And if you lose 50 percent of one protein, that's huge.  So you can see it.  I mean it was very obvious.  So that was in '72 [1972], '73 [1973], Hynes showed that.  Well my collaborator was, was working on that and, and so we, he and I, we, we were putting a lab together.  So we start collaborating.  So we worked for many, many years on fibronectin.  And so we had post-docs that we shared even when I went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  So we would bring post-docs and they would work on some aspect of fibronectin.  So he and I, I would say along with Hynes and two other people, were the two people that char--characterized that protein, what it does.  It turned out it's a cell adhesion protein.  It makes cells stick, adhere, and you need that.  And cancer cells, that's part of the problem is they don't attach.  They--and that they can break away from tissue, that becomes metastasis.  They, they spread.  They get in the blood stream, the blood vascular system and they travel.  So that is one of the defects in cancer cells.  Hynes showed that if you add, if you purify fibronectin, purify that protein, add it to, to cancer cells, they go back to normal.  Well it turns out he wasn't quite right.  They look normal, but they, they still grow abnormally.  You know they grow, proliferate fast.  But the picture--if you look at them under a microscope, they look normal.  But that's, that was very promising in '73 [1973] because it looked like you could prevent and restore normal cells, cells to normality by fibronectin. Turns out you can't, so that--so, so I would say the two of us--two of us with two or three other labs, kind of characterized fibronectin, but we did discover, Hynes discovered--was part of this as well.  We discovered that there was a sequence, five amino acids turned out you only needed three of them.  We didn't know that at the time.  Turned out there was a sequence of five amino acids that you could prevent metastasis.  So I said it's a cell adhesion protein.  It makes cells sticky.  Well you can block that adhesion by using these five amino acids.  You can purify, make--you can synthesize this little peptide, and then you can take cells, cancer cells, inject them into a mouse, an animal, and you can prevent metastasis.  The cells won't adhere.  So you block what is needed for metastasis.  So we decided that that was one way to cure cancer.  Was to administer this--and we, we thought of this peptide as being a chemotherapy.  This would be the chemotherapy to prevent cells from metastasizing.  And we got a, a, a cooperative agreement with a pharmaceutical company.  And we were able to cure a very aggressive cancer called melanoma, skin cancer.  We could take melanoma cells, inject them into a mouse and we could absolutely cure, prevent those cells from growing in the lungs and you can, you can see melanoma very nicely, you can count them in, in a mouse lung.  And we could prevent that with this peptide.  So we published that paper in Science Magazine [journal], it was a real hit.  We, we followed up with some other studies that show that was right.  Turns out then a drug company we formed a partnership with and they made this peptide for us.  And we were gonna try--the problem with the peptide is three--five amino acids.  It, it doesn't stay in the blood long enough.  So we knew that from Day One.  It stays in the blood stream only eight minutes.  For a chemotherapeutic agent, you need something that stays in the bloodstream for about 48 hours, otherwise you can't afford the chemotherapy.  So we got a drug company to make some chemicals containing this five amino acids that we could inject into animals to prevent metastasis.  And so it would have half life long enough, 48 hours.  Well turns out that when you do that, they never were able to create a molecule that was, was effective enough to completely prevent metastasis.  So we--it never worked to be.  And it took us a few years to figure out it was never going to work.  There were, there were pharmaceutical companies springing up around it.  I mean efforts.  And one of our competitors really went out and formed a company to do it.  And he--but it never worked.  And so but after a few years, we figured out why it was never going to work.  It, it, it would work to some extent.  I mean you could suppress metastasis maybe 40, 50 percent.  But aggressive cancer, 40, 50 percent is not good enough.  You may spare a mouse's life two or three days, but even a human, it, it--and you can't afford it.  So it, it never, it never was the magic bullet that we thought it was.  But it was a good try.  And so again, we got a lot of credit for taking on a very challenging problem and trying to--because adding, treating people with poisons, which is what they do, we do, is, is not a good thing.
Story_ID: 28569
Speaker 1: Chemotherapy is terrible.  I mean just the way it--the side effects.
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess the philosophy behind chemotherapy from what I understand is to weaken all the cells.
Speaker 1: Kill it off, kill everything off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then--
Speaker 1: And bring you back.
Speaker 2: Then bring you back.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And, and, and most chemotherapies, they have a toxicity.  It can be to VI tract, can be to the blood cells, immune system, can be to the kidney, the heart.  These are the major targets.  And so it's--and you can.  The, the most sensitive thing to chemotherapy is, is bone marrow.  But you can give people bone marrow transplantation.  You can destroy the bone marrow, kill the cancer cells, and then you can re--do bone, bone marrow transfusion, oncologist bone marrow trans--take your blood out and give it back to you, bone marrow, marrow.  Or other--some bone marrow that matches.  And so that's what's done.  But that's--none of those are as--the side effects are huge because you know, it's just totally destroying you and, and you can't eat, you can't--so the quality of life.  So you've got to find some other better way of doing it.  So that's why immunotherapy they're trying now.  Every day I hear about it on the news.  And those are things that--so I would say the, the thing that we've gone after is cancer--adding a, a poison to kill cancer cells, all you're doing is, is you're hoping that the, the cancer cells are more susceptible to the poison than the normal cells.  Well that's true to some extent, but it's not 100 percent.  But if you could prevent the spread of cancer, you could have a cure.  And so that's what we went after.  Because you don't die from primary tumors, rare. I mean, if it's deep inside your brain, you can't get to it, yes.  But most tumors are operable.  You can remove it.  And, or you can knock it out with the radiation if it's localized.  But if it's spread throughout the body, you have to use chemotherapy.  That's--or immunotherapy.  And, and so we felt if you could prevent it, that's the way to do it.  And a lot of people have tried that and there have been--there are--people have done--have been very successful at--to some extent.  There are, there are a lot of logic for why you can't prevent cancer from spreading.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28570
Speaker 1: So 1977 you were awarded tenure.  The first African American research scientist to be awarded tenure at NIH [National Institutes of Health], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now what were the, the moves leading to you going over to Howard University Cancer Center [Washington, District of Columbia] in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Well I always wanted to--I, I told you I started out wanting to make a difference and, and go--and I wanted to go back to the--I always wanted to go back to a historical black college [HBCU] and demonstrate that you could have a first rate research program at a black, historical black college.  Because nobody thought you could do that.  And people and faculty at black colleges you know they, they, they made excuses about they discriminate against us, they won't give us the grant money, all kind of things.  Well I didn't believe any of that.  So when I--always wanted to go back.  So when I came to NIH, I knew the dean of Howard University and because he was on the selection committee for the Macy Faculty Fellows.  So that was a committee that decided who got the fellowships.  And every year they still do that, it's now, it's now not the Macy, it's the Robert Wood Johnson took them over after Macy.  So every year the Macy, Macy Fellows got together in New York.  Every year now the Robert Wood Johnson Fellows get together with the Selection Committee, and they have a, they have a week conference.  Well we did that.  Well, so I got to know the gean of Howard Medical School.  So when I came here to the NIH, I called him up and stayed in touch with him.  So I would go over and meet with him and talk with him and we knew each other.  So he was looking--turns out that the Center, Cancer Center was funded by N--National Cancer Institute, and it was--got in trouble cause it had not, didn't have a good, strong basic science program was the problem then.  And he called me up and asked me to come over and talk with him and about the program and I did.  And he, he ended up saying, offering me the position to come to do that.
Story_ID: 28571
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were brought in as director of the Howard University Cancer Center [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Well I was brought in as scientific director, that's number two.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, scientific director, all right.
Speaker 2: So, yeah.  So Dean Mann, Marion Mann [dean of the College of Medicine, Howard University] and then he's still alive, asked me what would he--would it take to get me to come over to be head the--be scientific director, run the science.  The person who was over the program was a surgeon and, and he, he was not interested in research that much.  So they needed somebody who could write the grants and--particularly for basic science.  And he--this fellow was a surgeon, so he didn't know basic science.  So I said to Dr. Mann, well I would come over if you would allow me to hire and fire everybody that has a position in the Cancer Center.  Cause right at that point they had a brand new building, it's seven stories high.  All the new, fancy laboratories and equipment.  And I knew that if they populated that building with people who were not productive, that would be end of the--and furthermore, NIH [National Institutes of Health] had already threatened, said they were gonna take their money.  And I knew they were gonna do that because I could walk over across campus and talk to the program leader.  So they were gonna take--and so Dean Mann though said Ken, I can't let you do that.  And I said well Dean Mann, I cannot come over and make this Cancer Center competitive, this was not a minority cancer center, this was a comprehensive cancer center that had to be competitive in the mainstream.  And I said I can't succeed, so I'll stay where I am.  And he said well fine, so I did.  So one year later, see NCI [National Cancer Institute] had threatened to take it, but they didn't just threaten, they took the grant.  So now they had this brand new building and no money to staff it or do anything.  So Dean Mann came back to me and said well Ken, what do I have to do to get you to do to get you to come over?  I said the same thing I told you a year ago.  He said okay.  So that's exactly what happened.  So then I went and talked to my advisor at NIH [National Institutes of Health] and, and he said I, I'll hold your position just in case it doesn't work out.  So I won't fill your position, and you have--I'll hold it until you come back to tell me you--it's gonna work.
Story_ID: 28572
Speaker 1: So, so I went over and I spent, matter of fact I took my vacation time and, and left NIH [National Institutes of Health] a month early and went over and got all the resumes of everybody who worked in the center [Howard University Cancer Center, Washington, District of Columbia], all the people affiliated with the center.  And went into a room and looked at them, and studied them, talked to people, interviewed them and concluded that about half of them didn't have what it took to be competitive.  And I put an X on those people and, and said now centers in a university, they don't have primary appointments.  So by saying that somebody is not gonna be part of the Cancer Center, that person would still be--you're not taking their livelihood.  They're still a professor in biochemistry, cell biology, anatomy, they're still the faculty--still a faculty member.  You're just saying they cannot come into the Cancer Center.  They cannot use lab space, they cannot use your equipment because they cannot compete for a research grant.  So I selected I think thirty people, and that created some problems, you can imagine for me at Howard, department chairs got ticked off at me and deans.  But yeah, I had a job to do.  So I did it.  Well at--within a few months we rewrote the grant with my standards, with my focus, and we had a, a peer--a site visit, peer review, and we got funded again.  And in writing this grant, Howard had this view that grants were a gift.  And I said grants are contracts; they're not a gift.  The NCI [National Cancer Institute] isn't giving you anything.  They're buying a product.  So let's decide that we--what we can deliver as a product, and let's put in place the safeguards to make sure we can do that.  So we--so and, and the amount of money they wanted to ask was so small.  I said there's no way we can be success--oh well, well, they won't give us that kind of money.  I said bull.  I mean they're buying a product and you can't get this product for the kind of money that you're talking about.  So the, the surgeon who was my boss, immediate boss, disagreed with the dean and everybody else and supported me.  So we went for a much larger grant.  And so we got it.  We got a priority score.  And I knew the priority score was fundable.  So I went and so--but everybody still wanted to pare it down.  They (unclear) gonna give us this kind of money.  So I called up Vince [Vincent] DeVita who was director of National Cancer Institute, and said Vince can I come over and see you?  And I did, he said sure cause he was my boss when I was there.  So I went over to see Vince and I said Vince, let's be honest.  Just between you and I in the room, I don't have a recorder and you don't, so let's just be honest.  I said do you really want a cancer center at Howard or not?  Just say no, and I'll come back to the NI and do my work, and that's just between you and I.  I said if you do want one, I need the amount of money that I asked for.  I can't do it for a third of that money, and I, but I--of course I had some fat in it.  You know I'm not dumb.  But, but I had a number.  So I said Vince, this is the amount of money that we need to make--to deliver what I said.  And that's the amount of money that I need.  He looked at it, he said you got it.  And that's what came through.  And we succeeded.  So to come back three years later, cause they aren't gonna give you a five year grant, but they, you know why should they?  They came back and they looked and they said you know--well I started the presentation out by this is what I promised three years ago.  This, here is the deliverables.  And, and I said as I understand grants, that means I get refunded.  And that is the way grants are.  If I promise you to deliver something, I deliver it and I have an--and this is not a, a research grant.  This is a, a center.  So I should get refunded and, and we're gonna do the same things.  And we got refunded.  So it proved that indeed you can have a first rate program, nationally competitive, at a black institution and nobody gives a blank that it's a black institution.  What they care about is are you doing first rate work.  So I didn't allow anybody to come into the Cancer Center who couldn't do first rate research, publish in first rate journals, and compete at the NIH and NSF [National Science Foundation] or Robert Woods [Johnson Foundation], whoever, American Cancer Society, and bring in grant money.  That was a, that was a, a minimal amount of money you had to have before you could even, a million dollars was the base.  If you didn't have a million dollars in peer reviewed, inde--grant money, you couldn't even submit an application.  That meant that, that--and grants weren't as big as they are today, million dollars was then a lot of money.   But you had to have people who go in and get grants in competition with people at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and we did that.  And we did it the whole time I was there.  So it gave me--I got a lot of visibility for doing that because people said wow, who's this over--what's going on at Howard?  How, how is this happening?  And we had advisory committees and people would say it's Ken Olden over there.  You know he was at Harvard, he was at NIH and he was this.
Story_ID: 28573
Speaker 1: So when they were looking for a director of NIEHS [National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences], I had the experience.  And, and they were looking for somebody who could kind of bring NIEHS back, find its, it had lost its way.  And that was NIEHS's thinking.  And so they wanted somebody who, who had very rigorous standards to come in and restore--bring NIEHS back.  And so when I interviewed, they figured I was that person.  And so I got the job.
Speaker 2: Hold on one second [coughs].  I'm sorry, all right.
Speaker 1: And again, NIH [National Institutes of Health] had never had a non-Caucasian.  Not only African American, there was never a non-Caucasian and the only woman was the wife of one of the inside guys.  So that was it.  So when I showed up, there were seventeen institutes and, and around the conference table and all of them were white males except a Caucasian woman and me.  And so to, to think that, that NIH would do that was not, was not you know, it was--I almost didn't apply because I said what the hell, I'm wasting my time, this is not gonna happen.  And no one would thought it, thought it would happen, in the black community thought it would happen.  But one person called me at the NIH who was my mentor and said look Ken, you know this is a different time.  And, and I'll promise you I will do, make sure the playing field is level.  I, I'm not gonna sub--you know, tilt it towards you or anybody else, but I'll make sure and I'm in a position to do that, that the playing field is level.  If the Search Committee comes back with your name at the top, we'll take a serious look at it.  That's what the Search Committee came back with and that's exactly what happened.
Story_ID: 28574
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is NIH's National Institute for Environmental Health Science [NIEHS].
Speaker 2: Science, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were the National Toxicology Program Director.
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: And also--
Speaker 2: You wore two hats.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were the Chief of Metastasis Section of the [NIEHS Environmental Carcinogenesis Program]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my own research program.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I took some people, you know I had a, I had post-docs.  And I--since I was coming back to that institute, they allowed me to create my own division to, to--that was consistent with my science.
Speaker 1: So you continue your cancer research.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, with a post-doc.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Even though you, you held an administrative post.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, so what, what condition did you find things when you came in?  Or what, what did you have to do?
Speaker 2: Well it was--well it was an example of somebody staying too long.  There were--had only been two directors prior to me, and the one prior to me, he stayed nineteen years.  And he was trained classically.  He was trained as a prevention, cancer prevention person.  Cancer had become molecular biology.  And he didn't appreciate molecular biology and didn't understand it.  And so he was just doing things that he knew how to do, and that's what the institute had evolved to do.  But the, the science had moved past them.  And so the budget had, was you know, they were losing dollars every year.  Their budget didn't keep up with inflation.  And so there were things that, that were obvious, needed to be changed.  They were not communicating.  They didn't have a communication office.  They didn't have a, a tech transfer office.  They were out of--it was just out of--it will happen to any of us if you stay too long.  And he made a life of it.  And so he, he defined the field and started it.  And to that cre--he deserves a lot of credit for doing that.  He did a good job had he stayed ten years, twelve years.  But he stayed nineteen.  So he lost his enthusiasm too, as he would.  Because we were--the institute's in North Carolina.  You had to shuttle to Bethesda [Maryland] every single week and if you didn't shut--shuttle to Bethesda, that's where headquarters is, you had to shuttle to Capitol Hill [Washington, District of Columbia], that's where the Congress is.  And he didn't do either of them, I don't blame him.  He just got tired.  And he didn't want to get on the plane and come out here at night every week and stay in a hotel and all of that, so he lost his enthusiasm, but he also lost his contacts and connection with Congress and his colleagues in Bethesda his boss, and bosses downtown, Secretary of Health and Human Services.  So they--it, it was, it was mostly financial demoralizing to the, to the scientists.  They didn't have money to do things and that was--but they weren't doing the right science.  I mean they just had--so it was, it was, it was pretty easy to come in and, and to get a--put together an advisory committee and identify the right problems, right issues, begin to think big, bring in communication people.  And it turned around.  And, and I didn't want to make the mistake he made, so ten years, twelve years, I decided that I'd had enough and my enthusiasm was waning.  And I didn't want to, to wait until the institute, center was going down.  I wanted to get--leave when they wanted me to stay.  And so I, I, and I, I offered my resignation in, in--after twelve years. They asked me to stay till they found someone.  And that, that was one month short of fourteen, two more years.  So I stayed fourteen years when my--shy of one month.  So that's what, to me that's what you want to do.  You don't want to stay anyplace past your time.
Story_ID: 28575
Speaker 1: I just went with my wife to her fiftieth reunion and one president, I won't say where, he's been there thirty-five years.  He is so out of touch with reality.
Speaker 2: This is a black college president?
Speaker 1: Yeah, black college president.  Thirty five years.  And he said I'm having fun.  I said to my wife, but what about the students?  Is this the best interest of the school?  And it is not.  Nobody has--I don't care how good you are, you go in with a vision, and your vision is pretty much if you--it's finished in ten to twelve years.  So thirty-five years, I can't imagine what I'd do thirty-five years on a job.  Nothing and that's what he's fundamentally doing.  He, you know he's--but someone said well you're a king of a kingdom, have a kingdom, why would you leave?  Well who wants to be king of a kingdom?
Speaker 2: Now that's something that's philosophically you know, it's something we discuss in the black community from time to time.  I mean you, you can look at it from small organizations, church, churches even all the way, all the way through.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: People--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I guess need recognition, they stay too long.
Speaker 1: They stay too long.  I think that is an issue that we should be talking about in our community to be honest.  People do just--and I, I, I read success stories.  People who are very successful.  Ten or twelve years, they're out.  And University of, UV, not UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], Virginia, Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] president just resigned.  Now he had some issues, but he had--they were not of his making.  But the point is he was I think ten or twelve years, he could have stayed; they weren't asking for his resignation.  He'd been there long enough.  But even no matter how good you think you are doing, surely somebody can do a better job.  I always believe that.  So never would I stay that long.  And I wouldn't have stayed at NIEHS [National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences], I went to stay five to seven years.  But I, but what I--what had I to do there, was--took longer to actually accomplish because of where they were.  Had he left at ten years, I'm sure wouldn't have taken so much work.  I was concerned that, and I was right, that they could have rolled back the progress that we made if the person didn't share the same, my vision.  And--but after twelve years, it's not just my vision, it's a lot of other people's vision, and so that is actually what happened.  The person who succeeded me, there was an issue.  It wasn't my vision, it was members of Congress's vision then.  Anything that happened that was different from what I'd done, they wanted to have an explanation for it.  And they asked him to come up here and explain it.  Secretary and the director of NIH [National Institutes of Health] wanted to have an explanation.  So it became other people's vision.  And that's what you want.  You, you want to go in and you have a vision, but you want in the end, you want to in--infuse, instill your vision into everybody.  Everybody gets behind that and so it isn't, isn't--doesn't depend on one person.
Story_ID: 28576
Speaker 1: Well has Howard [University Cancer Center, Washington, District of Columbia] been able to maintain the, the same pace that you established?
Speaker 2: No, I, I--the, the grants, they don't--haven't had the grant since I left I don't believe.  I'm, I know they haven't.  And almost all the, the nationally competitive scientists left with either--once I announced I was leaving, they left either with me or before me or shortly after.  So none of them are there anymore.  Two or three went--are at NIH.  I got them in there.  And others are all over.
Speaker 1: So was it the, the commitment of the administration of the school--this was not too--
Speaker 2: Yeah, commitment.  Right, it just wasn't there, yeah.  I, I, I would not have ever thought of leaving if it had been the kind of environment that was committed to excellence.  I just decided that I was tired of swimming upstream and I was frustrated, and I didn't have to be because I could go a number of other places.  And so I let it be known that I would--was interested in a job someplace else.  And I had lots of offers.  And had settled on another job, actually.  And, and so it--when NIH offered me a job, I thought that was of the two that I--the other one versus NIH, NIH was a better job.  So I called my other person, talked to him.  We sat down and we agreed that if I had an offer to go to become director of the NIH, I should take it, so I did.  And that person and I ended up being friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28577
Speaker 1: So you were at NIH, well now you have--you served a, a--you didn't stay in that same position at NIH, right?  The, the whole time.
Speaker 2: At NIEHS [National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences]?
Speaker 1: Well, well yeah, well you did, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was director till 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I--2003 I decided to step down, but in 2005 when I actually left.  But I just--I stayed at the institute because I was, I was sixty-five [years old] and older at that point.  Sixty-five certainly, and to get a job--the kind of job that I would enjoy, it's hard.  And I didn't look cause I was happy, so why should I leave?  I had a, a good research program.  I had a--they, they decided that I could keep my same salary and I didn't ask for that.  They expanded my laboratory and they gave me more people.  So why leave?  So I was very happy doing--I had the best post-docs I ever had in my life.  And so why--I was enjoying it.  And so I, I took a--the first year that I, after resigning, I stayed in North Carolina because our youngest daughter was just finishing high school and I didn't want to leave till she finished high school.  But after that, I went to Harvard School of Public Health [Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a year because they had offered me a job, I mean a, a visiting professorship before that.  But I decided that I would go afterwards, so I did.  And actually they wanted me to stay, but, but at Harvard you got to come up with 50 percent or more of your salary forever.  I mean that's not--and I figured why, pardon my French, why in the hell should I do that?  When I was at, at a place comparable to Harvard, as good.  And all I had to do was do good research.  I had my salary, my salary is already guaranteed.  In fact, NIH was paying my salary, well yes they weren't--Harvard was reimbursing them for my salary when I was there.  So--but I was happy and so why should I go to Boston [Massachusetts] to take a risk because research is getting, keeping--to run a laboratory, you need about three grants at any given time because they go up and down.  And that's what I was living with at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  I usually had three grants because they don't phase in at the right time.  You don't want to lose people.  So you have to have enough money to maintain your group at all times, and takes about three grants.  So you're writing grants all the time.  You go on vacation, you're writing grants.  You're doing something.  Well at sixty-five [age] I didn't want to do that.  And there was no reason for me to do it.  I had tenure for life, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is when you, you went over to the City University of New York [CUNY].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so they, so they, they called me to see if I was interested.  If I'd come up and talk with them because the former dean of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] they had used as a consultant to help them get the School of Public Health up and going.  And she decided that what they needed was at some point to bring in a founding dean.  And she said I know just the person that you would, that would be perfect for the kind of school you want.  And so she called me and--Maureen Clark, former dean of the University of Michigan School of Public Health, and asked me to, to talk to them.  And she said I know you are not looking for a job and all, but I think you'd enjoy this.  So I said okay Maureen, I'll talk to them.  So she gave the chancellor my phone number and he called me in a few days and we talked.  And we agreed at least it was worth a trip out.  So I did, and so I went up twice and met with him and his staff.  And we, we talked about the kind of school.  And so we agreed that it would be a good fun, for you know, two to three years is what I promised, I stayed four.  But two to three.  And it worked out fine and we got the school accredited, that was a requirement.  It is accredited for five years.  And I recruited most, half the faculty.  They had about thirty, I had to recruit another twenty or so.  And had--they had very little staff.  So I think we hired seventeen staff people.  They had a building on the drawing board, but not up.  So we got the building up and, and they wanted me, that's why I stayed four years, to settle the faculty, the school, into the new building.  So that--and it's in East Harlem, which is a great place for a school of public health.  So it's, it's, it's doing very well.  I hear from them periodically and I'd say the last two weeks, and they're at the final--to search for a dean to replace me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was surprised to find out that they, they just opened the School of Public Health in 2006, you know cause it seems like the City of New York would have been a--
Speaker 2: City of New York did not have until that one opened, a, a school of public health in a public institution.  The only school of public health they had was at Columbia [University, New York].  And you know the tuition at Columbia is $40[000], $50,000 a year.  So that means most of the people can't afford to go get in public health if you live in New York.  So the chancellor is a very visionary person and he, he wanted this school.  He thought it had a--and so it's, it's been a huge success because it was time, it was timely.  Since then they've created another public school, and that's in--Downstate, they both are state universities, but Downstate Medical Center now has a school of public health.  But the emphasis of that one is on master's degrees in public health for physicians.  And the City University one emphasis on public health practice.  DPHs, not the Ph.D.
Story_ID: 28578
Speaker 1: You came back to, to the National Institutes of Health [NIH], Health after, after--
Speaker 2: No, I came back here, came here [Office of Research and Development in the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)].  So the, the head of Office of Research and Development, a fellow named Paul Anastas, again called me in New York and asked me you know, could he convince me to come here.  And I knew Paul because I was a member, I wasn't officially, I was, I was chair, co-chair and life chair of the Scientific Advisory Board for the--what it's called, no, Board of Scientific Counselors, it's called BOSC.  I was vice-chair of BOSC.  And matter of fact I was just promoted to, to be chair because the person had moved out.  So I was going to be chair of BOSC.  And as chair or co-chair, you, you are--we--you attend the SAB meetings, Scientific Advisory Board meetings.  So Paul and I knew each other before, but, but once I actually started attending Scientific Advisory Board meetings of the Agency [EPA], we got to know each other better.  So Paul, so Paul and I talked in New York.  He said I'm coming up, let's chat.  So we did.  And so I, I thought coming here was, was a good thing and I must say I like the mission of, of, of National Center for Environmental Assessment.  It's so important to the American people, and it was a good way for me to kind of finish my career.  And so I decided to do that and I must say I'm very pleased that I did that.  My predecessors had assembled a lot of talented people, and they're still here.  And so I felt that--I looked at it, the job and felt if I do my part, we'll do just fine.  And, and there are skills that I have I think that are helpful.  So I've enjoyed it.  I've been here a year, and you know think we've made good progress.
Story_ID: 28579
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the activities and programs of the, of the National Center for Environmental Assessment [Office of Research and Development in the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)].
Speaker 2: Well we, we, we do basically four things.  And, and I must say we provide leadership on the research that is needed to do hazard assessment, not risk assessment.  In other words, we assess whether a, a chemical or could be physical exposure in the environment, actually poses a risk to humans.  At--under specified conditions, at a different given exposure.  And that doesn't mean though, that, that at the exposure in the real world, that that is an issue because exposure in the real world may not be, may be higher or lower.  And so but under certain kind of experimental conditions--at this dose this chemical can cause, or physical exposure, can cause disease X.  And so our job is to assess is this chemical, does it represent a potential hazard to human health.  Now that's based on when I was in the NTP [National Toxicology Program], we did the--just one part of hazard assessments, and that is we used epidemiology, or animal models, to say that a chemical has the potential to be a carcinogen or a, a developmental toxicant in humans just based on the effects in, in often animals, but also you could look at humans that are exposed, let's say often in industrial settings, or in occupational settings, in their jobs.  If there's something that--some exposure that happens on the job.  Is that like--based on large numbers.  Numbers and, and you calculate and say well, this, the, the odds ratio is too great, that this has to be related.  It, it just says that there is a potential.  We go a little farther here because we actually do a dose response.  We, we, we determine at, at what dose does one--is it--what dose is likely to generate, to lead to this health outcome.  So we do a dose response analysis.
Story_ID: 28580
Speaker 1: Now that information is just two parts of what's needed for risk assessment.  Now the risk assessor will come along and take our data and, and, and put--and compare and, and determine what the real world exposure is.  And, and then they'll, they'll determine is it likely to be a, a, let's say a carcinogen in the environment in which we actually live.  And if that's true, then they'll put in place a, a process, a mechanism, a strategy, to manage that risk, and that's called risk management.  So we do the first two, the dose response and is it, you know, is it respond--does it respond as you change the dose.  And if it's biological, it should.  So that's--so we, we, so we do the research though, that leads to those kind of analysis.  Or we, we, we do the research; we identify the issue.  So that's--we do the research.  Then we actually do the assessments on chemicals that are identified by program officers and other agencies like [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD].  And you've probably heard of some of these, trichloroethylene, dioxin, or PCBs [Polychlorinated biphenyl], and these are industrial products and used in, industry and for different things.  And, and some of these are used in you know, they're, they're food additives or they're whatever.  And all these chemicals we're exposed to in the air, the pollutants in the air, particulates, diesel exhaust.  So these are chemicals that we perform--
Speaker 2: Corn, they spray corn with anthracene.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so it's a lot of these chemicals.  So that's what, so we do, we do that.  Well we also-there are sort of called six criteria of air pollutants.  And, and so lead--we just put out a report on lead.  Lead is one of them.  And so we--every five years by law, have to re-assess, re-evaluate the, the science to determine is--are these still update.  We have to update the science and update the assessment on these six criteria air pollutants.  So we have that responsibility.  There are chemicals also associated with Superfund [federal government's program to clean up the nation's uncontrolled hazardous waste sites] hazardous waste sites.  You've probably heard of Superfund.  And these are mostly chemicals that are related to waste, either brownfields where companies were, you know had a facility and they, you know, polluted the, the, the ground, the soil, the water.
Speaker 2: I know Chicago [Illinois] for instance has a old [U.S. Steel] South Works steel plant grounds.  You know they're still trying to figure out what to do.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  And so, so, so we'll go in and, and we'll do an assessment of, of the site and to determine the level at which remediation might need to be done, or does it need to be done.  So we'll do those, and those are called--they're provisional.  And they're not as rigorous as, as the most rigorous ones that we do are what we called the IRIS assessments.  Those Integrated Risk Information System evaluations.  And those are done very rigorously, and it takes a long time to do them.  And it's done using state-of-the-art science.  And those are the most challenging ones to do.  The, the air po--air criteria air pollutants are, you know, they, they, the industry does not come, as you were just saying earlier, industry is not as, you know they've already been indicted mostly and so you're just updating.  So you don't find the industry challenge to the extent that you might with a newly, new chemical and you're setting a standard that this is what the--and, and those are the IRIS assessments.  So all this information then is fed into risk assessment.  Somebody takes this information and so we start the process.  So if we say that a chemical is a known, is a human carcinogen at the, these doses in either inhalation or oral, depending on what the environmental exposure is, that could set a chain of events that would lead to regulation or whatever.  So the information that we generate is, is extremely important, one way or the other.  Either to suggest that we do nothing, or suggest that we do take some sort of regulatory action.  So it's prob--it's, pro--I think it's probably one of the most important things we do in government because everybody wants a safe and healthy environment.  And, and the way that you do that is you, you take scientific discoveries and make a decision.  Somebody has to do that.  And the people up and down this hallway here on this floor, make, take that science, we analyze it, and decide with peer review, we take scientists from outside to take a look at it and to, to say to us that this is a high quality product, or--and, and the American people can believe in it.  And that's what we do.
Story_ID: 28581
Speaker 1: After you make an assessment, you know who has the teeth to actually I guess change the environmental hazards?
Speaker 2: The U.S. government.  When EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] was created, that's why it was created because the environment in those days, that was 1970, was as you know, in pretty bad shape.  And that was [President] Richard Nixon, right, 1970, I get it right?  And, and you know there were rivers catching on fire.  If you were down South as I was, I mean the air pollution in some major cities like Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Birmingham, Alabama, were just--there were acute deaths.  And so the environment was in very bad shape.  So everybody recognized that it is--we got to do something about the environment.  And you couldn't--it wasn't a matter of you know arguing about, you know, one number one decimal this way or that way.  And so they created the EPA and, and there are laws or statutes that we operate under that give us the authority to, to set regulatory standards.  And they're set all the time and you'll read in newspaper the EPA did this or that and we were just upheld in the court system.  And so we have legal authority to do some things.  And we have to follow the legal advi--or legal authority.  We can't do things that we're not authorized to do.  But we have--the agency has top lawyers so we, we understand what the authorities are, or somebody does.  But that's not our job.  We start the process, though.  It's started based on what we do, largely.
Speaker 1: So your, your scientific assessment provides the evidence I guess for--
Speaker 2: Right, the scientific justification for action.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and you been here just a year and you're trying to get you're, you're working on things that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's a fair statement.  We, well you know there are things we want to do as a group, as a team.  We want to get done.  And we have identified those to some extent.  But we haven't fully identified all of them.  But many of them we have identified.  And we are in the process of vetting those in the, in the agency.  And also we're a government agency, we work at the pleasure of the, the administration.  And so, and Congress, you depend on for funding.  So all of these stakeholders they are, have to weigh in on them.  And so, and, and realize these are gonna impact us for years to come.  Decisions we are making are gonna be here for a while.  And we have to make sure that they're the right decisions.  So we're in the process of, of doing that.  And, and once we call this Phase One, once we pass Phase One, we'll go to Phase Two, or three and at some point in my case, I will say look, the--my vision of what the program need to be, ought to be doing, has been realized.  And, and, and I'll leave it with, with Kacee [Deener; observing the interview] and her team to finish up.  And that's the way it should be.  So I have a vision of things that I believe would be good to do.  And we're trying to put those in place.
Story_ID: 28582
Speaker 1: Now do--is there a, a way for community organizations or environmental organizations like we interviewed a gentleman who was founded the Center for Environmental Justice.  You know and which specifically focus on black, the black community, minority communities of--where there are a lot of dumps, you know, local--
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: It was a fellow at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Bob [Robert] Bullard [also a HistoryMaker]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Bob.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you know so organizations like that, do they, they bring a, a subject to you to--I mean--
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Something to be researched and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.  Many years ago EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], NIH [National Institutes of Health] and Department of--mostly government agencies, participated, we had a, a major national conference here in Crystal City [Virginia], at Crystal City Hotel, where we invited Bob Bullard and 500 and some people, to come in to give us advice on something called environmental justice.  And it was, that was in '94 [1994] I believe.  And President [Bill] Clinton released his Executive Order on Environmental Justice during our conference.  So yeah, so we--and, and so we--so I just said that's historical, but we still have mechanisms to communicate with the, the American people, stakeholders, and different interest groups.  I mean that's very important.  So yes, we, we, we do that all the time.
Story_ID: 28583
Speaker 1: And you were saying earlier that genetics is the gun, but environment's the trigger in terms of cancer, right?
Speaker 2: In terms of I think all diseases, chronic diseases, non-communicable diseases.  Genetics is, is the, is the, the bullet in the gun.  And it's potentially harmful.  But it's only harmful when you pull the trigger.  And so the envior--so basically it's a way of saying gene and environment interact.  And it's the interaction that's really the problem.  And, and that's good from our perspective because it says that the environment plays an important role.  And if we could control the environmental piece, and you can, we could prevent morbidity and mortality from--and premature.  I mean you're going to die from something.  But the point is people are dying at a age from diseases that are preventable.  Take cervical cancer, cervical cancer, nobody should be dying from cervical cancer.  But people do.  So there are--and some cancers we don't know, but some we do.  So we, we know cervical cancer is preventable.
Speaker 1: And that's--would, I mean and--
Speaker 2: Curable, if not preventable, curable.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so either way we don't have cancer, but if you can cure something, that's okay.  Cardiovascular disease, we don't have cures for it mostly, but we, we can prevent it and we can't prevent it, we can--you can live with cardiovascular disease.  I mean I've had high cholesterol for thirty years, and that's cardiovascular disease.
Speaker 1: But you have to manage it.
Speaker 2: Have to manage it, yeah.  And so there--it's that way with diabetes, and people live with diabetes fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28584
Speaker 1: Now we, now we always this question and it's kind of on the--fits in here.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well I think [President Barack] Obama touched on the one that--he gave a commencement address at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And that is acquiring the skills to be a participant in the twenty-first century.  I think too many of our youngsters are, are not acquiring the skills to be participants in the twenty-first century.  I just talked to someone today whose son I think is in Columbia University [New York] studying Russian and something.  But, but foreign languages, and I, I commented that we're in a global economy.  And certain skills are gonna be needed and people who can operate in a international, global environment, are not intimidated, have you know either economic or whatever kind of skills in science and technology.  Not many of our people going in science and technology.  And science and technology is always gonna be the backbone of any economy that's gonna be competitive in the future.  And, and very few of our people are going in science and technology.  Science and technology is the backbone of every advanced, every high income country.  And it's going to be.  And so we need to be going into those disciplines and I am, well you see the number in prison, the number dropping out of high school.  What's gonna happen to those people?  The, the, the labor pool, force, the needs have changed.  We don't need everybody to work anymore.  And the people that are gonna have jobs are people who have skills.  We have more people than we have jobs.  And the, the General Motors and all those, they're not gonna come back.  Those jobs are--the manufacturing industry and you know the furniture and all of the farming industry.  We don't need as many people as we used to; we have modern technology.  So if you want a job, you're gonna have to be skilled.  So I do worry.  I have four children, and I made sure that they first got a college education.  And a good education prior to college.  But more importantly, I advise them to go into things that where there is gonna be a job market.  And not just to take the easy way out and, and think you're gonna survive in this economy that we're gonna be in, you know it may get a little better.  But the truth is with this economy we don't need all the people in the workforce.  And so what is we used to think five percent unemployment was okay.  We're--the numbers are going to be more realistic 10 or 15 percent probably.  And the people who have the skills are gonna get the jobs.  And that's as it should be.  But--and that's what Obama was, you know, bemoaning the fact that you can't just make excuses.  You've got to go out and acquire the skill to be competitive and get the jobs.  And there are gonna be jobs, but they're gonna be highly skilled and so--but our kids are just gonna have to work hard enough to get there.  And take those--and, and, and they can.  Just a matter of making the commitment.  I mean I see people every day and I, you know you wonder what the hell this person gonna do when they're my age?  But even I think back at my own generation.  There were people, and I, I don't--most of them are deceased now, but I see people I grew up with, and they had no life whatsoever because those menial jobs are no longer available.  They are, they, they disappeared.  And they don't have any skills that anybody wants to pay them to do.  So they are you know, well that's okay if you're my age maybe.  But if you're just starting out, you know twenty-five [years old] or so, you--long time to live.  How, how are they gonna manage it?  So I, you know I am worried.  I think that's the main thing that I'm concerned about.  I have grandchildren now, but I hope what I've invested in my kids, they'll invest in them.  But education is the key.  I mean there is no doubt about that.  There--I mean in one generation, I'm an example of it.  In one generation you can move from sheer poverty, we were poor.  And I'll say to the kids, you know everybody romanticize poverty, I don't.  Poverty is real, it's painful.  The consequences of poverty are painful.  To remain in it all your life is even worse.  And it's gonna get worse.  I mean it's not, this is not--everything's being cut.  And, and my family, we were never on welfare.  We should have been, but there was, it was no welfare mostly.  And when it was, we weren't--in Tennessee we weren't gonna get it.  And my dad [Mack Leonard Olden] wasn't gonna ask for it.  To, to--we had pride, but we, we certainly should have had some support, help.  But that's gonna be--there's gonna be less, less of that.  So people are gonna--I don't know how some people are going to make it without skills, without an education.  And I, I, I'm afraid too many of those people are gonna be people of color who are poor and uneducated.
Story_ID: 28585
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I, you know I, I, I've thought of that.  No I think--I mean there, I made mistakes.  But that's okay.  I made mistakes because I didn't know any better and there was no one to tell me.  I now take students, I, I just did a, a interview for Environmental Health Perspective on a student that I took in my laboratory, my last one.  A young African American male from Durham [North Carolina] into my laboratory.  He, he now has an M.D. [degree; Doctor of Medicine].  He just graduated, got his M.D.  And he, he credits me although I don't deserve it totally.  But I did give him a chance.  But I gave him a chance because my wife believed in him, I didn't.  He wanted to work in my laboratory before he got into medical school.  He wanted to become a practicing, wants to become a physician, but a research physician, academic medicine.  So he wanted to work in my laboratory.  He came to me at the NIH [National Institutes of Health], I interviewed him, he didn't impress me.  But he--my wife had been his mentor in undergraduate school.  He impressed her.  She convinced me to--even though I was unimpressed, to trust her that he was a really hard working, bright, good student.  I did, I trusted her, got him assigned, got him a slot in my laboratory.  He did a good job.  He published a paper in a top journal with us.  He did the work, I didn't do it, he did it.  And, and he got himself into medical school and he graduated at the top of his class, he did well.  So they are now in NIEHS [National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences], the Institute then which my lab was in, are very proud of him.  So they're doing a special, you know featuring him in one of the journals.  And they wanted a comment from me.  And I acknowledged that day when I met with him, he didn't seem to have the characteristics that I was looking for.  But my wife convinced me, so you call her.  I'll tell you what I thought of him and, and but it--I'm proud of him, I said.  His success, but wasn't my insight that got him into my laboratory.  My wife's insight that got him in.  And so why don't you call her and get a, because she deserves the credit, I don't.  I just wanted to have peace at home, so I took him pretty much is exactly what happened.  But it turned out, it was a good decision and I said that.  I was wrong, my wife was right, he, he's a success story and I wish I could have seen whatever she saw in him early.  But I did towards the end and fine, but I gave him the chance and he proved me wrong.  So, so what I try to do is make sure that kids have those opportunities.  And, and I've done that in my laboratory experience all the time.  I've taken kids in and they've gone off and done very well.  And so they don't make the mistakes I made out of ignorance.  So two years in one's life is important, wish I had them back, I don't.  But, hey--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28586
Speaker 1: Well once again if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Well it's hard.  I, I, I think I think every, every job that I've ever--well first every, every job that I had, I think I made a difference.  And I think that it was not my assessment.  I think anybody--if you ask the people in the field who know the field, they would say I made a difference.  And that's what matters to me.  No matter where I go, I wanna make a difference.  And in my life when it's all said and done, I want somebody to say Ken Olden lived and he made a difference.  And that's what it's about.  So--and so yeah, I would say that's--and, and it's not, but it starts with one, one day at a time, one job at a time.  And when I leave here, I want whoever is over this organization some--and people who know it, who look back and say well you know, he made a difference.  And you know and that, you know I'm gonna--but the little part that I'm over that we together with the team, made a difference.  And you always need a team.  You, you just got to get the right team in place and but, but the team needs lead, need leadership too.  It needs vision, it needs--somebody has to set the tone and so, and that's what I want.  And you know, at--I, I'm seventy-five [years old] and within a matter of July 22nd my wife reminded me I'm seventy-five this weekend.  And I am, but and, and, and, and I want to be remembered as someone who, who made a difference.  I was recently honored by the National Medical Association.  And that was a very special, very special to me because it was recognition by an African American community in a sense.  And for them to honor a Ph.D., not an M.D., was absolutely unexpected, and they don't do that.  But that was, that was very--it, it meant a lot to me at this point in my life for them to say yeah, right, he didn't go into medicine but he, he has made a difference.  And so I, and my wife went with me.  She appreciated that.  That they actually acknowledged that what I've done with my life as a researcher made a difference.
Story_ID: 28587
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife and tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: Well I, I met my wife in graduate school.  My wife actually went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  She got her Ph.D. in immunology from the University of Michigan.  And so we, we met there.  We got married and so I did--went to, to Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We, we didn't get married when we first met, but you know we got married later.  But that's where we met.  And, and we got married later.  And then the two of us went to, to Boston [Massachusetts].  And so we spent our time in Boston.  And we started our family before Boston, actually.  We have--our oldest daughter is, I don't know, forty-five or [forty] six [years old].  Anyway so we, we, so we have two daughters and two sons.  The boys are twins and they were born in Boston.  The youngest daughter is, is actually adopted. So we, my wife and I decided that--we were at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  We were both working hard and doing things.  Our, our kids had mostly grown up.  Our boys were getting close to going to college.  Our daughter was in college.  But we should give back something more than we were given.  And you can give money but that's not the, the same.  So we decided there were so many black children who go into foster homes, put up for adoption that never get adopted.  And we could provide a good home for a kid, so why not do that?  So we thought about it, you know at our age, I was fifty [years old] and she was, she's three years younger.  So we were older.  So we thought well do we really want to do that?  So we finally decided yeah, let's do that.  So we then decided to adopt.  So we, we, we you know you can go to a private agency or state agency.  We decided we really weren't gonna pay, we wanted to go to a state agency and get a kid that--and so we did.  So we were in Montgomery County [Maryland].  So we went through Montgomery County adoption and got this little--got her as a baby.  We wanted her Day One.  So we were close to that.  And so, so she is now twenty-five [years old] and that's the one that--she's a graduate student at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in epidemiology.  And so they all--so the oldest, oldest one, the daughter went to Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York], she went to Georgetown Day [School, Washington, District of Columbia] here and she went to Vassar.  The boys went to Georgetown Day as well.  One went to Haverford [College, Haverford, Pennsylvania] and the other one went to the University of Maryland, and the last one, she went to Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] and now she's at University of Michigan.  So I'm very proud of them.  They've, they've worked hard.  They've done what we've asked of them.  We spent a lot of time with them.  We, we wanted to--I wanted them to be successful academically and otherwise.  But more important, I wanted them to be good people.  And I would say without doubt all four of them are very compassionate, really good people, I enjoy them.  And I like them.  Not just because I'm their dad, but I like them as people.  So we did a good job.  When we would go to their schools, you know you got to go in for parents' meetings every quarter or something.  And, and often they would start out by talking about how good citizens they are, and that's what I wanted to hear.  I mean the grades are fine, okay, but I wanted to know that they're, they treat other people with respect.  And they are a part of the community and, and we heard that all the time.  That they were compassionate, they treated people with respect and that's what I--so I would say number one to us as parents was that.  And they are good people.  So their academics and you know things they do is icing on the cake from my point of view.  But you know, they all prepared to, to function in this world, and that to me is one of the most important contributions you can make. So we've done that, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28588
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  In fact you almost answered it.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I did answer it because I want to be remembered as someone who took advantage of all the opportunities presented to me.  And made something out of, out of the opportunity.  And, and I would say I can't think of an opportunity that I had that I blew.  In other words, that I ignored or did not take advantage of.  I wish I had more opportunities, I didn't.  But you start where you are and you work with what you've got, what you've been given.  And, and grant you I was given a lot because I grew up in a community, and that's why I go back [Olden's hometown is in Newport, Tennessee].  I'm very attached to my community.  I'm a product, not just my mom [Mary Augusta Christmas] and dad [Mack Leonard Olden], but the community.  People did what they could do.  People were supportive.  It was a good, it was a good environment to grow up in.  It was, you know take the village, well I was reared by a village.  People are interested in what happened to me.  They helped, they did what they could do.  So I, I, I think that's probably the, the, the thing that I appreciate most and I was lucky most in being in a loving family and a community.  So if everybody had that, I think we'd have fewer problems in society, fewer people in prison and doing the crimes that are, have been done.  It, it, it--I learned values, acquired values that I think serve, have served me well throughout my life.  And so I learned that I, I knew that by the time I left home.  The core values that made a difference in my life.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I feel fortunate.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All righty, well thank you.
