Story_ID: 652621
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer; and Matthew Hickey is the inter- is the videographer.  And I'd like--we're going to start just by slating the interview.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], I need to just tell you one thing.  The collection, and I was just telling--?
Speaker 2: Were you able to get it?
Speaker 1: The--?
Speaker 2: The collection of interviews.  Remember we talked about that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The collection now is going to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Of all of our 'Black in America' interviews?  Oh, yours, yours.  That's what I was talking--oh, fantastic--
Speaker 1: No, no, you know, 'cause, no--
Speaker 2: I'll see what we can do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the people there anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay. Try that because you--okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Remember Rob [ph.] tried?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But there's going to be a big announcement.  So they're going to be our permanent repository.  So all--
Speaker 2: Congratulations.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: That's phenomenal.
Speaker 1: So I just wanted to tell you.  So there will be a big celebration--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's fabulous--
Speaker 1: --on November 8th--
Speaker 2: Oh, great, well we'll remember to put that in my book, 'cause you know, I'm totally forgetful.
Speaker 1: So I just wanted to let you know.
Speaker 2: That's awesome.
Speaker 1: Because Rob tried.  Okay, sorry, so I just want you to slate it, so state your name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My my name is Soledad, it's S-O-L-E-D-A-D, O'Brien, it's capital O, apostrophe, capital B-R-I-E-N.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, nineteen, sixty-six [September 19, 1966].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today.  I'm a terrible person to ask that because I've been traveling.  February 21st, so I've really missed most of the first two months of the year.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Two thousand fourteen [2014].
Speaker 2: Two thousand fourteen [2014].
Speaker 1: And--let's see. And our location?
Speaker 2: We are in Manhattan, New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist and the CEO of Starfish Media Group, which is a production company.
Story_ID: 652622
Speaker 1: --Five People magazine-ish questions, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably black beans and rice.  I love black beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black, obviously (gesture) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is summer, spring into summer, when it's warm enough to sit outside but not baking hot.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: You know, I love Miami [Florida], I love Miami, I love--I love anything that's a city but where you can kind of be alone in a city.
Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] used to say, "Remember, most people are idiots."  And it was actually really a great thing to remind you of whenever somebody was telling you what you couldn't do.  I really loved that because she would say, "Remember, most people are idiots." The follow up was, "If you're listening to them, you're probably a bigger idiot."  And I loved it 'cause it kind of made you realize that if, you know, if you were following somebody else's advice or trying, you know, thinking that not doing something because someone had just told you it wasn't doable, that a lot of those people had no idea they didn't know; and so I think it really helped me strike out a lot on my own to do things and not worry so much about feedback and maybe being naive about things, which I think is ultimately probably a good thing.
Story_ID: 652623
Speaker 1: So we'll get started.  I, I loved your book, by the way.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: It's just, it's--it tells--anyway I didn't know--I didn't know about the beginning part of the (unclear), okay.  Okay, so, can we talk about your--we do what are called life oral history interviews, so, can you talk about your family background--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and can you start with your father first?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background?  His name and--
Speaker 2: So my father's name is Edward Ephram O'Brien [Edward O'Brien], and he was born in Toowoomba, Australia, which is sort of the middle of nowhere in Australia.  And he came to this country in the late 1950s.  His parents [Muriel Wightman O'Brien and Thomas O'Brien] had come to Australia from Ireland, so my dad, my dad's roots, his family roots are in Ireland.  He came to this country in 1958.  He was working on his Ph.D. at Johns Hopkins University [Baltimore, Maryland] and the beginning of that year, he met my mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien].
Speaker 1: And did he talk about growing up in Australia?
Speaker 2: Very little.  You know I think both my parents were very much products of kind of the 1930s environment, where you just didn't really share.  I mean I really didn't learn a lot about my parents' history until I was interviewing them for my own memoir and even then I'd have to, like threat to go ask other family members.  The first time I visited Cuba in 1984, was it '84 [1984] or '88 [1988], you know what, 1986 [sic. 1998], that's exactly the same time as the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke.  Pope John Paul II was going to be in Cuba and so that was the first time I got to visit Cuba.  And I said to my mother, "I'd like the addresses of my relatives, 'cause when I'm in Cuba, I'd like to go meet them."  And she said, "No, I don't think so."  She didn't want to give the addresses because my parents were very much not--you know they didn't talk a lot about where they came from.  I mean getting stories of their, their childhoods was really unusual; and when I started to write my memoir ['The Next Big Story: My Journey Through the Land of Possibilities,' Soledad O'Brien with Rose Marie Arce], we really sat down and very specifically talked about their childhoods, and that was very helpful for me.
Story_ID: 652624
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Edward O'Brien]?
Speaker 2: My father is great.  He is great man in that he's a kind person, he's nice, he's funny, he's the kind of guy who loves puns, you know, he thinks things are silly.  He's a professor [at the State University College on Long Island; Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], retired now.  Really smart, but also that kind of person who--well I have a lot of brothers [Tony O'Brien and Orestes O'Brien] and sisters [Maria O'Brien Hylton, Cecilia O'Brien Vega and Estela O'Brien Ogiste], so when we would field baseball teams, you know we played baseball in our front yard growing up in Long Island [New York], my dad would always make sure that he was cheating for one side because if they were getting killed by the other side to make the game good, he would, you know, either play terribly or play really well and, and so, you know he's just that kind of guy, you know, who just always wanted to make sure that everybody was competing, and the playing field was leveled and that everybody was enjoying themselves and people's happiness was really important to him and people's self-esteem was really important to him.  Very humble guy, if you met him, you'd have no sense that he was a very accomplished scientist, certainly, never the kind of person to brag about any of his accomplishments.  And a--and kind of a shy guy, you know, just quiet, was not a big talker at all.
Speaker 1: He was an engineer, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a mechanical engineer.
Speaker 1: Engineer, okay.
Story_ID: 652625
Speaker 1: So, your mother, her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Estela Marquetti O'Brien [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien].
Speaker 1: Talk about her, her background.  I mean she's from Cuba, right?
Speaker 2: My mother is Cuban.  She grew up in Havana, Cuba and came to this country in the early 1950s, late 1940s.  She came from Cuba to a convent school [St. Frances Academy] in Baltimore [Maryland].  The Oblate Sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence] ran a school both in Cuba, Havana and also in Baltimore. And the Oblate Sisters was a group of nuns, black nuns, who were seriously hardcore.  They were absolute activists and so she lived with the nuns because she was out of her own home in Cuba and grew up very much connected to the mother superior of the Oblate Sisters whose name was, oh, I can't believe I can't remember, my sister's [Maria O'Brien Hylton] named after her.  Her name is Maria [ph.], but I can't remember her full name.  Anyway, so my mother, very, very, very devout Catholic, she and my dad [Edward O'Brien] met because they both attended daily Mass, and very strict.  You know had a real sense of their rules and these are the things that you do, incredibly hardworking, I think almost a stereotype of what I think of when I think of an immigrant, somebody who you know will do anything to make it, anything.  And really had high expectations and high standards for her children, but incredibly strict.  She had an evil eye that could stop you from fifty yards away.  She would just look at you and you were like, (laughter).  I don't have that with my children.  I've not developed that.  A very--a great giver of advice, you know, would be absolutely over the top dramatic, if you didn't make your bed, but if something seriously terrible happened, she'd give you the most calm, thoughtful, "Well, here's how I think we think through this problem," I mean really great advice.  And when I think back to my childhood, I think about a lot of things that I think framed me as a person later on came from my mother, you know, sort of these sayings.  She used to say, "Whatever you, whatever--don't ever forget, don't let anybody tell you, you're not black and you're not Latina."  And I'm like, who's the they crazy lady, we live in an all-white neighborhood [Smithtown, New York], like, what are you talking about?  Nobody is having those conversations with me in this neighborhood.  But years later when I was forty years old, I started realizing like, oh, this is what she means.  She would say, you know, "You know most people are idiots, don't listen to what other people have to tell you."  Or, when I was feeling very overwhelmed, I had four kids and I just felt like I'm terrible at my job, I'm terrible with these kids, I am so tired, I can't even see straight.  And I think I should quit my job, I should just stop and not work anymore.  And she'd say, "You know, you can always quit tomorrow, get through the day, you can always quit tomorrow."  You know and kind of the opposite advice that I think, a lot of my friends' moms would have given.  Oh, you know, focus on your children.  She was always like, you know, "Careers like yours are hard to get.  You don't want to quit that."  I was like, oh.  You know she was always surprising me.  So, It's been a sad thing 'cause she's got a lot of dementia now and so it's sort of--it's sort of sad 'cause I, I have friends who I'd love for her to, to know her; and, and they heard the stories but she's not really like that anymore.
Story_ID: 652626
Speaker 1: So your parents, you know you tell the, the story about your father [Edward O'Brien] courting, you know, your mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] didn't want to have--you know, she wasn't paying any attention, because he kept asking her, I think, or was trying to ask her out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know they both attended daily Mass and so my father, as the story goes, used to drive by 'cause he had a car and he'd hit on her, basically, and stop the car and roll down the windows and whenever I tell the story--college students, I have to explain, with no power windows.  That was big deal and lean over and say, you know, "So would you like a ride to Mass, 'cause we're both going to daily Mass, together, same place."  And she'd say, "No thank you."  You don't take a ride from men you don't know well, I mean that was sort of her lesson, "Girls you wouldn't just take a ride."  And every day, he'd asked, you know, "Do you want a ride?"  And every day, she'd say, "No thank you.  You don't take a ride from men you don't know real well."  And then one day she said yes.  And they made a date to go on a date that evening.  But of course, it was Baltimore [Maryland], 1958, which meant that, as she liked to say, interracial dating was frowned upon, and I would say, "Well, what do you mean by frowned upon?"  She'd say, "You know you could get shot."  And she was serious.  Nobody would serve them that night on their first date.  They went to all these restaurants and they were turned away and so my mom took my father back to her apartment and she's a great cook of Cuban food and she made my dad dinner, and she would tell us the story very deliberately with this idea that, "See, girls, the reason I want you to know how to make black beans and rice, and I make all this food, is because obviously, I cooked my way, you know, to get your father."  I always thought it was so funny because it was never about this is what Baltimore was like in the late 1950s, early 1960s or this is what you know the history of discrimination and racism in America, it was just you know, "Girls if you could cook, you can get a man," I think.  So, you know, but even then they never--that was one story my mother would tell.  And it was really more about, if you go to church, you know and if you can cook.  It was never about--you know and he didn't really like to talk a lot about Baltimore in the late 1950s.  I don't think they were traumatized, I just think my parents are very much the type of people who, "That was then, we've moved on."  We don't sort of sit in the past very much.  They're always about moving forward.
Story_ID: 652627
Speaker 1: They had a lot of aspirations, right?
Speaker 2: Certainly for their kids, certainly for their kids.  I think my mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien]--my mom is a very, very devout Catholic and a very big reader of the Catholic Worker--Doris Day [sic. Dorothy Day].  Doris Day, Doris Day?  Yes, Doris Day was this, you know, my mother's very into Quakers, we lived in a neighborhood where we were near the Quaker meeting house and so she was a very religious person and she was a really big believer in the idea of living in the way that Jesus thought people should live.  So they were never materialistic in any way, shape or form, but they had great aspirations for being a good human being.  That, you know, to me was a real lesson that there was this sort of sense that like, here's what good people do, good people do these things.
Speaker 1: They also wanted to pursue the American dream, I think, do you think, or you don't think (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely.  You know, but not the American dream, and I think they pre-dated the American dream of a lot of stuff, and we had a lot of kids so  there, you know, I don't think we just weren't well off, we were perfectly middle class.  But I think the American dream of you move your kids to a safe place, you put them in a good school, they work hard, if they work hard, they can achieve, they can move on to the next thing that they want to do.  So I think that that was their vision of the American dream.  It wasn't about accumulating stuff, it was really about can you have kids who are happy and healthy and have opportunities.  How do you create a life for your kids, have access to a lot of opportunities.  And so they moved us to the North Shore of Long Island [New York] which was close to my dad's [Edward O'Brien] job.  He was one of the founding professors at SUNY, Stony Brook [State University College on Long Island; Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York].  And my mom found work as a teacher in the local high school [Smithtown High School West, Smithtown, New York] in the North Shore of Long Island.  But what that meant was we were going to grow up in a majority white neighborhood, not only majority white, but really there were no other kinds of families.  I think we had one Chinese family, the Lu's [ph.]; we had one Korean family, the Ping's [ph.]; we had another black family, the Onees [ph.], and that was kind of it.  Everybody was Jewish and Italian, pretty much.
Story_ID: 652628
Speaker 1: Your siblings, can you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I have, I have five brothers and sisters.  My oldest sister, Maria [Maria O'Brien Hylton], very strong academically, and I think she really set the tone academically for our family, really great student.  She went on to Harvard undergrad [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale for law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], worked in corporate law for a while and then joined BU as a faculty at the law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts].  My sister Cecilia [Cecilia O'Brien Vega]--oh, Maria, also at the same time of doing that has seven kids, you know all phenomenally successful and lives in--outside of Boston [Massachusetts].  My sister Cecilia, is a lawyer, a corporate attorney, patent lawyer, works for General Electric and my brother Tony [Tony O'Brien], lawyer also.  Cecilia, I should say, went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] for--I'm making that up.  God, I used to--oh, I'm wrong, she went to Stanford, MIT and then Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and went to Harvard Law School with my brother, Tony, who's a lawyer by trade, as well.  He went to Harvard undergrad and he runs his own company now, he's a businessman in Washington, D.C.  My sister, Estela [Estela O'Brien Ogiste], was an undergrad at Harvard when I was there and went on to RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] where she's a studied astrophysics and then got her medical degree at Cornell University medical school [Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York] and then I came next after that and I went to Harvard undergrad and I'm probably the only person in my family who doesn't have another degree after that.  And then my little brother, Orestes [Orestes O'Brien], is an anesthesiologist who lives out in California now.  My sister Estela, I should say, lives in--lives in Harlem [New York, New York].  And my little brother Orestes, lives in the San Diego [California] area and he's an anesthesiologist and he went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] undergrad and Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 652629
Speaker 1: I mean, think about what you just (clears throat) (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Think about all the money we've spent at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We have just given, we should have a library named after us for the money we have spent at Harvard.
Speaker 1: But think about the success.  That would be almost any parents' dream, to have that track record (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what's interesting, my parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien], I will say, as much as they were very strict, they absolutely did not push for you to go to a certain school, because I think, sometimes, people will ask me, "Well you know, I would love for my kids to go to Harvard.  What, you know, what did your parents do?"  And I would say, my parents literally did not care if we went to Harvard, did not care.  They wanted you to go to the best place you can go, where you would be happy and my parents never once gave me any pressure about where I was applying, you had to do your work, you absolutely had to get the best grades that you could possible get, but they did not necessarily care where you went to school.  There were such an interesting--I think sometimes there were really contradiction, you know, very ambitious, but not for the name brand.  And I was like, "You need to be the best that you can possibly be, and if that means you go to the state," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, "then absolutely great."  But I think we were all pretty ambitious and I think we lived in a community where we didn't have a lot of friends, we definitely stuck out in our neighborhood and you know, I think, for my older brothers [Tony O'Brien] and sisters [Maria O'Brien Hylton, Cecilia O'Brien Vega and Estela O'Brien Ogiste], it was a little bit harder.  By the time you know for me and my little brother [Orestes O'Brien], just--our family had been in the community [Smithtown, New York] longer, but even for us sometimes people would remind you very much that you know you really didn't belong here.  And so it gave you a lot of time to study 'cause you certainly weren't gonna go out.  You weren't gonna date anybody.  And so we were already naturally focused on academics anyway, and my parents were thrilled. "No one wants to date you? Great, great, fantastic." (Laughter) They thought that was the greatest thing ever.  You know socially I was devastated but, but they thought it was fantastic.
Story_ID: 652630
Speaker 1: So what was family like, life like?
Speaker 2: You know my parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien]--I'm one of six in seven years.  So we're very close in age, and my mom had six kids in seven years.  And--and I think because of that closeness in age and because the way our parents were very demanding about how we get along, they absolutely tolerated nothing in terms of teasing, making fun of each other, being mean to each other.  I remember being stunned when I'd see friends where you know people in the family would pick on someone, we just never had that, ever.  And I think some of it was--my parents had a real sense of you know, "We don't really fit here, so you guys are actually gonna have to defend each other.  I need all of you to constantly think of defending each other," and my older sisters [Maria O'Brien Hylton, Cecilia O'Brien Vega and Estela O'Brien Ogiste] were fantastic with that.  Someone was picking on me on the bus, my sister, Cecilia who was six foot tall, would come over and lean in that girl's face and scare her, you know, they wouldn't bother us.  So I think my parents did a really good job of sort of making us kind of be a team, and a group which meant, you know, we could field a little baseball team in our front yard and the neighbors would come over and play.  We were very tight, we were very, very close.  I'm still close with my brothers [Tony O'Brien and Orestes O'Brien] and sisters and some of that was just age helped out a lot and then you know we didn't have a ton of friends and probably because my parents made sure we didn't.  They really, you know--it wasn't an era where people had sleep-overs and you know, people just didn't do that.  You kind of came home, you did your work, maybe you had an after school activity, a sport, and then you came home and you ate dinner together, pretty much every single night 'cause that was the 1970s, 1980s.
Speaker 1: So you really were your own internal unit in ma- many ways.
Story_ID: 652631
Speaker 1: You know you talk about not fitting in, can you give some examples of that that made you aware of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know it's always so hard to talk about it, not because it was particularly emotionally difficult, but because you hate to overstate it, you know.  And sometimes you know we just, parents would tell me, "Well, you know my son's never gonna--that's not going to happen. I know you have a crush on my son, but you know we want him to date a different kind of girl.  You better go." Okay, wow.  Or, I remember going out to dinner with a--at a girlfriend's house and her little sister who's probably--I was probably fourteen, and her little sister was about six.  And her little sister said, "Why do I have to sit next to the black girl?"  I was like, what?  You know so you have these moments, I mean, it was a community where I actually thought we fit in really well.  And then you had these moments where it was like, oh, right, right.  We know we're perceived a little differently here.  It wasn't particularly hurtful and so I sometimes loathed to describe it, because sometimes people were like, "Oh that was so sad."  It wasn't that sad.  I had a really nice childhood.  My parents had a nice house in a pretty decent size chunk of land, we had a lot of space and you know we all got along and there was not a lot of drama, you know, they were very regular, so my mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] went to work [Smithtown High School West, Smithtown, New York], my dad [Edward O'Brien] went to work [State University College on Long Island; Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and he came home by five, she came home by 4:30, she made dinner.  It was boring, it was boring.  I wanted to leave Long Island [New York] so badly 'cause it was boring.  There was no drama at all, which I think is a great way to raise kids, you know, just everybody knows what they're going to get all the time.  And, but you know, there were definitely times when it was really clear that you know you're outsiders here, you know, just random things.  I mean in my memoir ['The Next Big Story: My Journey Through the Land of Possibilities,' Soledad O'Brien with Rose Marie Arce] I talk about a guy, we were going to take a picture of ourselves, me and my sister, Estela [Estela O'Brien Ogiste], who's three years older than me.  And so we went to the local photography shop on Main Street in Smithtown [Long Island, New York], the town where we lived, and he said, "You know, forgive me if I'm offending you, but are you black?"  And I was probably eleven, she was fourteen.  And I was like, "Well that's a weird way to put it."  You know, meanwhile she's light years ahead of me and she just started ripping into the guy.  "What do you mean by that, what's that supposed to mean?" And grabbed my hand, we marched out.  And it really wasn't until we left the store that I could completely understand, like why is she so mad, he's being so nice? "Well, forgive me if you don't mind, forgive me for offending you."  It sounds quite lovely, actually.  You know, but she fully understood the message, right.  And Long Island for me was a lot of that, right that whole, "Well you can't be black because black people are this and this and this--," all bad things.  And you kind a like, "Oh, well, not the black people I know."  So I think there were lots of moments like that interspersed with very regular fantastic you know childhood experiences.  It, it definitely made me want to leave Long Island. I knew that when I went to college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I would definitely leave for college and I'd probably would never come back, not in a, a bad way, just that there were these other things to explore; and places where, you know, I wouldn't feel like I didn't belong all the time.
Story_ID: 652632
Speaker 1: Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], te- tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood there?
Speaker 2: You know where I grew up it was quite rural in Long Island [New York].  Yeah, Smithtown [New York] at the time had a lot of cornfields, a lot of farmers.  I did a lot of horseback riding.  I mopped stalls to pay for my riding lessons. It was my first job.  And so anytime I'm riding, I do a lot of riding now, you know I really think of where I grew up, where you people--you ride your horse down the street to go to little general store if you wanted to and you could tie your horse up.  It was just quiet, it was really sort of a safe and nice place, and I think, looking back, that was my parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien] who made it feel that way because I know that the community itself was rather mixed.  You had you know people who lived in sort of the more developed areas who definitely were socioeconomically more poor, and there are people who lived further in the other direction, who lived in massive houses and we would consider mansions, who obviously were socioeconomically much better off, and we were kind of in between, you know.  We had everything we wanted except if you wanted some Jordache jeans, well, my mother was never gonna buy those and not because they were expensive but because girls should not be wearing those things.  But we never wanted for anything.  We had really a very typical middle class existence, but it was rural, it was very--you had to drive everywhere.  You know it's suburban and a lot of you know cornfields and we lived near the beach, you could walk, you know, a quarter mile walk to the beach.  We did that kind of thing a lot.
Speaker 1: And so what about smells and sounds, anything that reminds you, nothing of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never, I guess I don't really think of things in terms of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people have different senses.
Story_ID: 652633
Speaker 1: So the thing tha- what I'm curious about, and the--and you went to--where in, where, what was the name of your elementary school, can you?
Speaker 2: I went to St. James Elementary School, which was in St. James, which is a small part of Smithtown [Long Island, New York].  And then I went to Nesaquake Middle School [St. James, New York], which is now actually used as a juvenile facility [sic.] and when I was there as a middle school student, we used to think it looked like a juvenile facility.  Years later I was doing an interview with a kid who was--had served time and I was like, "Oh, that was my middle school."  And then I went to high school at Smithtown High School East [St. James, New York].  At the time Smithtown had two high schools, East and West.  My mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] was a teacher at High School West [Smithtown High School West, Smithtown, New York], and I was a student with my brothers [Tony O'Brien and Orestes O'Brien] and sisters [Maria O'Brien Hylton, Cecilia O'Brien Vega and Estela O'Brien Ogiste] at East.  And then eventually the population would drop off so significantly that they--they turned it into just one high school, just only Smithtown West became Smithtown High School, and in the last couple of years they opened up again because the population has come back.
Speaker 1: Now, were you compared to your siblings at all because you know you're fourth--you're fifth, right?
Speaker 2: I'm number five.  Yeah, I was compared to my siblings all the time and it was great.  I think people assumed I was smart, I was hard working, I was diligent, I was well behaved, I got the benefit of having a bunch of siblings ahead of me who were fantastic academically, fabulous behaviorally, just involved, wonderful, you know students.  And so I think when teachers got me in their class, they thought, "Oh, I have an O'Brien, we love the O'Briens, they're great students." And we were, we were great students.
Story_ID: 652634
Speaker 1: So what was the young Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien] like, though? What are you? Are you--
Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) internal, are you--?
Speaker 2: You know, I was very social, I loved doing things, I loved to figure out--I loved having a job.  I was always trying to figure out you know how could I have a job and be able to buy the things I want.  My parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien] weren't going to buy me you know things that I liked, you know what kind of job could I have.  Thirteen, I was--at thirteen I was strategizing about how to make money so that I could take riding lessons, which was expensive.  And just because we--my mother would say, "You know we're absolutely not going to pay for that," never stopped me.  I was like, okay, then obviously, I'd have to strategize around what was clearly an obstacle to get to what I really want to do.  I was involved in a lot of things.  You know I had a lot of friends.  I liked to do things.  I was a typical teenager in a lot of ways.  You know, Smithtown [New York] has a big mall [Smith Haven Mall, Lake Grove, New York].  Long Island has a mall culture, although we called a (pronunciation) mall culture.  And--and I was right there.  I was good academically.  I was a good strong student.  I liked to argue with people and take part in debates and I was in leadership a lot in school.  I--I was you know ran student council and I was in elected positions in high school [Smithtown High School East, St. James, New York] and the president of little clubs here and there.  You know so I was sort of an involved student, honors society, I ran track.  I was a really good athlete when it came to running.  I was a pretty good equestrian.  You know I think I was a pretty involved student and pretty happy person.  You know, I've always been a person whose just absolutely glass is always half full, I'm nauseatingly optimistic.  I'm always like, "And what's the fun in this, here we go."  It's fun to see my daughter Cecilia [Cecilia O'Brien], my second daughter is very much like that.  You know, she's never met a stranger.  It's always like, "Hey, hi.  Who are you new person?"  And I was kind of like that.  I love new experiences, I love to try things, I just love to, you know, and my dream was to move to New York City [New York, New York].  I used to love to go to New York City.  I just thought, you know, you would stand on the street corner and just people would just walk by you in rush hour.  Just people would just plow by you.  And I used to go to the area around Macy's [Macy's, Inc.], and there were little stores that you could afford to buy things if you were sixteen, a little babysitting money, a little cash and I just sit there and think like, I'm on 34th Street and I am so happy because I'm in the heart of New York City and this--this is absolutely where I'm going to live when I grow up because there's so much happening.  And the people were really diverse, you know, they were interesting.  They were interesting to look at, what they were doing was interesting, and they all had this purpose and just you know marching off; it was great.
Story_ID: 652635
Speaker 1: --Walk up, clock you upside the head (laughter) and then move on.  But it was never--it never really defined me; I never really felt--and probably 'cause it wasn't enough--there were never enough students of color in any context that had critical mass, you know, that it became a thing, it was just these sort of moments.  You know, I had a huge crush on a guy named Adam Purance [ph.], Adam Purance, and I think he's an investment banker now.  I don't know what he's doing, I did run into him once, huge crush on him.  And he was--his mother was the one who would say, "You need to understand," and she'd say to me these things like, "what is it you do with your hair? It's so interesting. Your hair just, can I touch it? Such an interesting--," you know, that kind of thing, you're like, even though I was fourteen years old, I'm like, this woman is not nice.  She does not like me, and yet I could exist very well with you know being the head of Interact [Interact Club], which was a Rotary [Rotary International] club group.  You know I certainly had friends.  I think I was really good at sort of just not letting--not internalizing these things.  I didn't stew about them at all, I just you know kind of moved on.
Speaker 2: So what is the issue of identity, though?  This is what I--you know a lot of times young people, they're dealing with their own identity?
Speaker 1: My parents were so great about identity.  And I tell you, I think what they did for me was huge.  I'm telling you, my mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] used to say, "You are black and you're Latina," and my dad [Edward O'Brien] too, right.  So it--there was never--I never had a moment of this identity crisis.  We were so not white, it was clear.  My mother had a giant [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis Afro, and when I was in fourth grade [at St. James Elementary School, St. James, New York], you know, my who family had Afros, right, it was the 1970s.  And, you know, so there was no identity crisis of, "I think I'm white," I'm so clearly not, you know in this community [Smithtown, New York].  And my parents had told me who I was.  It was very clear, it was never--there was never an issue.  And so I always feel so sorry when I meet young women, especially, who are especially if they're light skinned black girls and they're just--they just can't wrap their heads around, like, what am I?  I'm like, "You're black.  You are a brown girl with a white parent.  You look black, light skinned black, but you are a black girl."  And because no one has sort of told them to love that, like not only that that was okay, but that was cool, that was awesome and that they could shout it from a rooftop and think it was great, that they didn't really know how to deal with it.  And I lived in a community where it's definitely not cool and you would definitely not want to shout it from a rooftop, and yet my parents, you know, raised children who were like, "This is who we are," in a community where clearly that's who we are.  We just did not blend and so you so didn't blend that in a way it made it easier, you know.  There also was a different time, you know, there was no mixed students group, you know people would say, "Well how come you don't consider yourself, you know, biracial?"  It's like, like it wasn't, I mean technically, I'm biracial, I have a dad who's white, my mom's black, but there was no category of mixed race, I mean, that didn't really exist until the last probably fifteen years where people would say, "No, no, I'm mixed."  You know, I mean they'd fall over and laugh if you said, "Oh, no, no, no, I'm mixed."  You know people do all the time.  So, you know, I never really had an identity crisis.  And I think my parents did a phenomenal job of really walking us through, like, "This is where you come from, this is who you are."  I was so grateful for that later when I started reporting on race and doing stories on people who are just tortured by really not knowing what they were.
Story_ID: 652636
Speaker 1: Are you part, church, is church growing up Catholic, is that pa- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.  Yeah, we went to church.  My parents were--my, my dad's [Edward O'Brien] twin brother is a priest, two of his sisters were nuns and my mother's [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] biggest disappointment was that she sent none of her children into the clergy.  You know I think the way I could have made my mother most proud is if I said, "I'm gonna be a nun."  That would have been a home run.  I would be the favorite child by far.  You know we went to church every Sunday, 7:30 Mass.  My parents were very devout, and when my dad's twin brother was in town, he said church, and he said Mass every morning, every day for us when he was visiting.  Yet, my mother was also very, she was a little bit of a rebel, you know, she's a tough nut, kind of immigrant and so, I remember once at a church, the pastor started--the priest started the Mass by saying, "Listen if you cannot come on time, you know we start the Mass at 7:30, and I'd expect everybody to be here at 7:30," you know, and I was one of six kids, right so getting us out the door to be at Mass by 7:30 was nearly impossible.  And I remember my mother raises her hand, "Excuse me Father, is that a rule? I mean, should we just not come to church if we're not going to be here by 7:30? Father, what should we do?"  And he's like (mumbles) (unclear) and she just put her hand down.  We came in whenever we could make it.  I mean, you know, she was just--I think I got a lot of that from her, you know, that kind of, "Oh, so let me just clarify what you're saying, let's just go back over that one more time.  Is what you're saying this, sir?"  She had that--
Speaker 1: She had spunk.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: She had some spunk.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.
Story_ID: 652637
Speaker 1: So now when you are in high school [Smithtown High School East, St. James, New York], what subjects are you gravitating toward?
Speaker 2: You know I love science.  I, I was good at science and math.  I was a great reader, voracious reader.  I loved English, I liked to write.  We used to have a little family newspaper, run by my sister, Estela [Estela O'Brien Ogiste], and I'd run around and interview dad [Edward O'Brien].  "Dad is putting new shingling on," write a little article (laughter) in the family newspaper with my little brother Orestes [Orestes O'Brien] and my sister Estela, and then we report on what was happening and then hand out copies to everybody.  I was--I just liked school.  I was really curious.  I liked--I liked education.  I was kind of into everything.
Story_ID: 652638
Speaker 1: And so when it comes time to go to school, are you thinking you're gonna go like your other sisters, I mean?
Speaker 2: Sure, I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--I went to Harvard 'cause my sister Maria [Maria O'Brien Hylton] went to Harvard.  I remember when, when I was in sixth grade [at Nesaquake Middle School, St. James, New York], she started Harvard as a freshman, and she used to have me come and visit her and we'd make cookies and the house had a common, like a kitchen, and I used to think, "Oh, I'm gonna go to Harvard."  And I remember when I was applying, only then realizing that Harvard was kind of a big deal, because my sister, I mean, she's smart, but you know, she not brilliant, she's okay.  And I think it really taught me how important a role model is because she just made it very doable.  I mean she wasn't magic, she's a good student, she was academically strong.  I probably had more things that I was involved in [at Smithtown High School East, St. James, New York], I was athletic, I loved being in clubs; so Harvard seemed very doable. And I had--certainly had the grades.
Story_ID: 652639
Speaker 1: So you went in, in 1984, right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: You started in 1984.  So who's, who's in, who's in your class with you? Or around the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So in my class at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know everyone can always pick out the famous people they went to Harvard with, not me, I don't know any famous people, I really don't.  In my class was [HistoryMaker] Suzanne Malveaux and her sister Suzette [Suzette Malveaux], they were in my class.  You have to look it up, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know Sophfronia Scott, she, I remember as a twenty year old, she wrote an article ['Generation X Reconsidered'] about Generation X, I think, which was a big deal on the cover of Time magazine in probably 1988 or '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: So what was the environment then?  Is that when you lived in Cabot House or was it later?
Speaker 2: Cabot House was at Harvard, but my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Your soph--
Speaker 2: When you come into Harvard, you live as a freshman in the yard [Harvard Yard].  So I lived in Straus dorm [Straus Hall] and then I moved to Cabot House.  I was the president of Cabot House after I ran for that spot and won with another guy.  And I loved it.  I really enjoyed Harvard a lot.  I think it was stressful because I think a lot of Harvard is (unclear) really not, you feel like you don't deserve to be there and I think a lot of people feel that way.  I remember walking around a couple of years ago with my husband [Bradley Raymond], who I met at Harvard and, you know, white guy who seems to me to be like the preppy vision of what Harvard should be.  And he's like, "You know whenever I was here I always felt like I really didn't belong here."  I'm like, "What, what?  How is that possible?"  But I think that's a very typical response to Harvard.  You know, but I loved that when there was a speaker, it was the greatest speaker, right.  Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Whales] did our commencement address.  The CEO of Coors Brewing Company [Molson Coors Brewing Company] came to talk about immigration, it was very controversial.  And it was just in a theater, and you could go, I mean it was pretty remarkable.  Harvard just had amazing facilities.  So there are things about it that were great.  But you know going to school was hard.  I had a little job and it was hard to work all the time.  I didn't have any kind of spending money, you had to work.  And you know I liked it a lot, I didn't know what I wanted to do, I was a bio anthro [biological anthropology] major, I was an English major, I wasn't sure what I wanted to do career wise. I finally settled on being pre-med and took a lot of pre-med classes during the summer and while I was at school an English lit [English literature] the same time and I--I liked it a lot.  I really felt very challenged at Harvard, and I also met people very different from me for the first time--
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: --and also people who are a lot like me.
Story_ID: 652640
Speaker 1: Okay, so whi- which--so who was different from you for the first--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was the first time I met foreign students, you know, and the Adams House was just a house where all the international students lived you know and I just you know lived in a very parochial environment in Long Island [New York], so you know, foreign students, to get to know people like that was pretty interesting.  And then you'd meet people who had just very different experiences.  I remember you know meeting people who couldn't afford to go home for break 'cause they didn't have the three hundred dollars to take a bus home.  I never experienced that.  You know my parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien] would begrudgingly give you the money, but they would absolutely put you on a bus home for Thanksgiving.  There were--there are people who could not afford at all to go home, so they lived in the dorm over the holiday.  I'd never experienced that.  And then you met people, you know, was just a very, in a way, I met people like me.  It was actually one of the things that I loved about New Orleans [Louisiana], when I first went.  It was the first time that you're like, "Oh, there's a lot of people like me."  It's really why I'm so connected to that city, you know because brown people are very welcomed.  No one's like, "What are you?"  It's like, "Oh, baby, hey," (laughter) and so, you know.  And so I think--and Harvard was the first time I met any black students, I knew any Latino students and not only did I know them, they were in a group.  They had a black students union [Black Students Association], they had Latino Student's La Raza [Harvard-Radcliffe RAZA] that they were meeting and throwing parties and they had the social group; I mean it was pretty different from where I grew up.
Story_ID: 652641
Speaker 1: And so did you get involved with the different--?
Speaker 2: You know I d- I was an athlete so I played sports, so I didn't--I was involved in the group's tangentially--
Speaker 1: Talk--what sports?
Speaker 2: So I, I played rugby, I played rugby for Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] before I tore my ACL [anterior cruciate ligament], and then I ran a lot, and did a lot of running clubs.  So I played a lot of sports and so I--I would do a lot of events with the black students union [Black Students Association] and the Latino students groups, you know, I was never a member.  I was never a big joiner of things because I always wanted to figure out, what are we joining to do?  Are we meeting, then that's not that interesting.  Are we going to do something?  I tended to do things that were more philanthropic, like they had Phillips Brooks House [Phillips Brooks House Association, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where you could go and volunteer and you could give a book to a kid, or I worked with a neighborhood group in Radcliffe where I lived in my sophomore, junior, senior years, you lived off the yard [Harvard Yard] and so I was the kind of person who you know would work at the local elementary school.  So I was a little bit more of a doer, I took a bunch of girls that I would help mentor them and do activities with them. And so yeah, but of course there was a strong connection among the black students and Latino students.
Speaker 1: So what, what--
Speaker 2: I remember in fact they were starting the mixed students' club one year.
Speaker 1: --they were doing the mixed students'--okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought that was so ridiculous.
Speaker 1: Because this was, you know--
Speaker 2: And we are in nineteen eighty--probably '86 [1986], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just--well you know what was interesting when I, when I was asked to join and I wondered if they were inviting in like Asian students who were mixed or Latino students and--no, it was just for black, white, and I thought that seemed to be a very limited kind of club.
Speaker 1: You know 'cause this is really also the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]--is, Reagan's in office though too, right is, or is he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by '84 [1984], sure.
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984] he's in office, okay. So now the other thing, what are you doing summers?
Speaker 2: I was working.  I'd come home [Smithtown, New York] from school [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I'd get a job, I worked as a nurses' aid, I was pre-med, so I really worked in the area of medicine, I worked in a local pharmacy.  I thought I was doing things that would build my resume for medicine, and if you're a nurses aid, that was actually like skilled labor and you could make decent money as a teenager.  And I would muck stalls and, and, and ride, kind of in the summer.
Story_ID: 652642
Speaker 1: But there was an organic chemistry class that you did (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took an organic chemistry class with my sister, Estela [Estela O'Brien Ogiste], so one sum- but I, you know that was sort of a class, it wasn't--didn't take up your whole summer.  I took an organic chemistry--I took an organic chemistry class with my sister Estela, and we are such different students.  First of all she's brilliant, and I'm good.  But she likes to--on a test day, I'm up early having breakfast.  I got my pencil sharpened, I'm ready to go.  She likes to sleep in 'til the last second and throw some clothes on and run out the door scattered.  I could never take a test like that.  So we were both taking organic chemistry and it was a really tough summer, because we traveled together to this class, and we're opposites in terms of how we think about studying, very opposite.  And I remember she said to me, "Well why are you memorizing all these formulas? You know, like Y equals MX plus B is clearly the formula of a line.  You should be able to deduce that.  There's only the XYX, (unclear) as a variable in space, what else could it be?"  And I was like, "What?"  Literally a--you know she just understood formulas, like she knew what it meant.  She has a--she's a researcher, she has a scientific mind, and I knew at that moment that I was just someone who could take in a lot of information and I could regurgitate it out.  And I could memorize what a water molecule looked like and then (makes sound) on the test and do just fine.  And she really understood it, and it made me doubt being a doctor, 'cause I knew like I'm a good test taker, but I would not be a good doctor, cause I didn't really have passion for the science of it.  I liked the idea of being able to help people, and you'd really rather go to my sister if you needed real medical care than to me.  And so I, I didn't know what to do, and so I--that end of my junior year I left school [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because I trying to figure out, you know, I knew I wasn't going to go to medical school, and I didn't have a clue what I would do.
Story_ID: 652643
Speaker 1: And I started working at a TV station, WBZ-TV in Boston [Massachusetts].  It was an NBC station that's now CBS.  And I--I started as an intern.  We used to do made for TV movies back then with, June Allyson was in our made for TV movie once.  And, and I was an intern for that and I was an intern at a show called 'Centro' which is a Spanish language show, and I loved it.  Every so often I was sent down to the newsroom to run an errand or do something, and I loved that even more because it was completely chaotic and crazy.  And I just thought it was the greatest thing ever.  And I knew, like oh, I could definitely do this, it was certainly exciting.  And then I started working in the newsroom.  I got a job as a production assistant for the medical reporter, her name is Jeanne Blake.  And you know my job was to answer the phones and take a staple thingy and remove it from--staples from the bulletin boards and get people lunch and get coffee and it was--it was just great.  I mean I was--it was so bottom tiered job but I was really good at organizing and executing on things and then they let me go out in the field and do little interviews and I was good at that and, and I would watch the anchors, you know, do interviews and think, their questions are all right, you know at the time the Soviet Union was falling and I thought well, I could ask a better question than that and so it made me think like, oh, I could do that, I can definitely do that.  So I started producing, segment producing, line producing.  I did a show as an associate producer which was the show that led into 'The Today Show'--the local show into 'The Today Show.'  And I remember watching Katie Couric and thinking like, that woman is phenomenal because we did the show before she came on.  And I just loved it, I mean it was really fun, and I was a good apprentice, you know, I really could learn things and I was good at getting people to help me.  I understood the quid pro quo that if I did something you know that they would pay me back by reading my script or critiquing my work or helping me with something.
Speaker 2: And Jeanne, she was very influential?
Speaker 1: She was a great boss.  Jeanne was a phenomenal boss, very tough.  My, my first two bosses Jeanne Blake and Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell] at NBC [NBC News], just had super high standards, you know.  And I think that when you work for people as a complete neophyte who absolutely make you think like the bar is here every day, you absolutely never half-ass it, they just don't allow it.  And I, I think that helped me think in terms of like, this work could be very high quality all the time.  They were both great at that.
Story_ID: 652644
Speaker 1: Now, what is your, what are your parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien] saying that you, I mean, at this point, are you thinking you're not gonna finish school [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; do they, you know, are they--?
Speaker 2: You know, I think my parents really, again, my parents never really weighed in, like they would never sit down and say, "Your father and I are disappointed."  Their thing was, "You have to be doing something, but you certainly aren't gonna come home and sit on the couch," but I thought the same thing.  Like I clearly was not the kind of kid who was just gonna come move home and sit down.  I wanted to figure out a career.  And I think they were really happy that I loved work.  I was able to kind of morph into a job pretty quickly, and in a way I think the biggest challenge was that I was good at it, because every year, I was getting promoted to the next thing.  And so, clearly, I wasn't gonna go back to school right away.  And nobody in TV news cared; I mean, it didn't really matter.
Story_ID: 652645
Speaker 1: So once you got in there as an intern [at WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts], it sort of just took on its own life is what you're saying?
Speaker 2: You know I think in local news, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--
Speaker 2: --in local news you--
Speaker 1: It's intern, it's practicum, you learn as you do, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And I think it--and highly correlated to how hard you're willing to work.  And I love to work, I love to work, I just--I really enjoyed coming in early, staying all day.  I used to work two a.m. to two p.m. and then I'd go home and walk around the Charles River for exercise and go to bed.  I mean I had a terrible schedule.  I didn't really do very much, I just--I really loved being a 100 percent involved in my career.
Speaker 1: So you saw yourself--at this point are you seeing yourself on the air?  Are you enjoying the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I hate (makes sound)--
Speaker 1: --the producing part, are you enjoying--
Speaker 2: I--I love being a producer. I never wanted to really be on the air.  I really love being a producer.  I loved--I love being able to kind of shape a story and eventually I realized when I started working for Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell] at NBC [NBC News] that to shape it the most, you had to be the voice of the story and you had to do the story and you had to have the power of shaping the story.  But I love being a producer, and it really took me a long time to be on air, I mean in San Francisco [California], when I started reporting [at KRON-TV], they told me they would fire me if I didn't--if I wasn't in my pieces, cause if I couldn't--if I wore black every day as I did, and if I didn't do stand ups in my pieces that I would be fired.  But it was like, why am I in this piece, this piece is not about me, I'm the reporter.  But of course, local news you need to be, "I'm on the Bay Bridge [San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge] and the winds are high, don't come out."  But you know, I just--I loved the gig, I always loved the work.  And I think it's what made me very successful, and I think when I started dating my husband [Bradley Raymond], who I knew from college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, he also was working at a very competitive and challenging field and so we worked a lot separately, and we each allowed the other person to really kind of get--dig in deep in their career.  On Saturdays, if he had to be in the office, I would just go into work, and I would look at all my reels and I would work on the stuff that I was doing and really just try to improve and I had all this time.  I remember his colleagues would say, "Oh, you're so lucky you know that your girlfriend and then your wife lets you do this."  He's like, "Lets me? She's doing the same thing at her job."  It really helped me work on my craft.
Speaker 1: So he was secure enough in himself, too--
Speaker 2: He was busy.  He wasn't even secure, the man was working 100 hours a week.
Speaker 1: That is true, you know, that's right?
Speaker 2: He was like, "What's your name again?  Oh, right, you, yeah, maybe Friday we can go out for dinner, but I might fall asleep in the middle of it."  He was an investment banker.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was an analyst, he worked 100 to 120 hours a week.  I never saw him.
Speaker 1: They say that young people don't want to work that hard anymore, I don't know, but--
Speaker 2: They--can I tell you something? I was working, probably not that hard, but I was working pretty hard and I made eleven thousand dollars a year and he was making seventy thousand dollars a year (laughter), which was a ton of money for an investment banker; so I just thought like they had, they had terrible but great jobs.
Story_ID: 652646
Speaker 1: Now what are some of the things that Jeanne [Jeanne Blake] is teaching you, that you're learning. Could you talk about (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was at WBZ-TV [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Right, WBZ.
Speaker 2: Jeanne--you know Jeanne was a great teacher of quality.  Jeanne was phenomenal at getting people to open up and talk to her.  She also had great manners, very tall, she was probably 5'11", 5'10" and so she--she just was never afraid of anybody, never afraid of anybody.  And she was a challenge, she was a tough boss and people were afraid of her in the, in the building and so because I could manager her well, you know, I sort of got a great reputation for being able to navigate between Jeanne and some of the other people.  She didn't want to deal with them and they didn't want to necessary have to go to her and so I would sort of be the go-between and that made everybody happy.  And she knows--she was great to me.  She did so much for me in a career sense of just helping me learn how to be a good reporter and then also helping me find an apartment that I could afford, you know in a safe place by calling up a friend who had a little basement apartment and letting me rent it for an amount of money that I actually had, you know, I think, you know, we had a great friendship and also really when she started as my boss a great quid pro quo; like, you know, if you will do these things, like take my dry cleaning which is such a no, no you know as an intern and a production assistant, but if you do those kinds of things, then I'm going to do things for you, right.  I'm going to pick up the phone and advocate for you and it really sort of taught me that you know, you could stick to rules or you could say, I'm going to kill myself for you and then maybe you can help me back.
Speaker 1: Well in this business you have to have people looking out for you like that, right, at the beginning.
Story_ID: 652647
Speaker 1: So you're there [at WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] until--but then you go into a minority--you go into--
Speaker 2: My first job is a minority training program (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to training program.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first job was, oh, no, so I was first Jeanne's [Jeanne Blake] assistant, production assistant--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and then I became a minority writer trainee and that was a great job because I made nineteen thousand a year, so a huge increase and then you had to skip, you left that program as a writer.  And I remember asking the guy who was the--my boss, I was assigned to him as the minority trainee writer, he was the--he was a producer, and I said, "So what's this job called for white people?"  And he said, "Weekend producer." (Laughter) He actually is--we worked together at NBC, we end up working together at CNN.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Jonathan Wald.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's true though.
Story_ID: 652648
Speaker 1: So when you, when you get hired at the NBC affil- can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So--okay.
Speaker 2: When I get hired in San Francisco [California], you mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah. Well, sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I left--so I went--I was at WBZ [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] first then I went to NBC News to work for Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell] as his researcher and field producer, which I loved that job, and it was a great job, because again, I was really paid as a researcher but working as an associate producer and field producer.  I was in the field all the time and I loved it.  I thought it was just the greatest thing.  I learned a lot about reporting because it was often just me and then Bob would fly in and do the pieces with me and then I was able to get a job as a reporter at KRON-TV in San Francisco, and I was woefully unprepared.  I mean I was a good producer and so I knew how to write and I knew how to turn out material that would be good quality, but I didn't know anything about television, I mean I wasn't--I didn't know anything about being on television.
Speaker 1: Now you go there because Brad's [O'Brien's husband, Bradley Raymond] there, right?
Speaker 2: No, you know I didn't, I mean I--I--he had moved to San Francisco and so I was looking for jobs that were in that area and I started interviewing for jobs and when KRON-TV came up, it was a great job, because it was kind of near where he was; he was in Palo Alto [California], so it was an hour drive and I would be able to you know be close to my boyfriend who had taken a completely geographically, ridiculously, distant place to work and a--and I would be able to, you know, I'd be able to be near my boyfriend and also have a good job in TV, and work as a reporter, it wasn't a full time job, it was a four day a week job and so that was a problem, and I was always trying to figure out, you know, how do you--how do you make more money 'cause I think at that point I was making--I made thirty-five thousand dollars a year, which was by the way, your average reporter salary at KRON-TV at the time was ninety, they paid me thirty-five.
Speaker 1: So did you find that out later, or?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: It was--they had just had a writer's strike. I was one of the first people hired after the strike; and so I was--by being part time they could you know woefully underpay you.
Story_ID: 652649
Speaker 1: And what--you, you said you were rough at that point, what didn't you know? You know, at that, you didn't know how--?
Speaker 2: I didn't know how to do live shots.  In fact, my first week [at KRON-TV, San Francisco, California] they said, "We're going to train you for a couple of weeks.  We know you haven't done a lot of live TV, been a producer, head of network, relatively young age, so we're gonna teach you how to do live shots."  Within three days I was doing live shots by myself with nobody training me, ever.  I mean I was just kind of thrown into it, which is kind of how it works.  I should have been less naive and now I would know that someone was completely lying to you if they said that.  So I had no idea.  I did a live shot, my first live shot was at a bar and people were drinking.  I was covering the San Francisco Giants making it into the playoffs and as I started talking, I'd been interviewing the patrons and put together this piece and just as I started talking, a guy behind me reaches out and gropes my butt, grabs me.  And you know, time stopped and I was like (gesture) (makes sound) and they cut away from my very first live shot and rolled my piece and they came back to me and I kind of got it together.  But it was terrible, I mean I was terrible live and--and you know, I came back into the building, people were like--you know, usually, people are like, "Oh, it wasn't so bad.  I know it felt bad, but it really looked fine."  It was like, "Oh, that was bad."  And my boss brought me and said--what's his name, Alan Hozier [ph.], and he said, "Listen, you might want to think about going to a smaller market, you might want to go to you know a smaller marker, 'cause maybe you're not cut out to be here."  That was sort of my first couple of weeks on TV.  And I called my boss, Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell], crying from the pay phone and he's like, "Whatever you do, do not quit, do not quit, make them fire you, but do not quit."  And I did not quit and I kept working at it and within three months, I was named bureau chief for the East Bay [California], because it's a learnable skill, you know you just keep working at it and every day you know, it's actually very, I think very logically I would sort of break things down.  So we do a live shot at 5:00, a live shot at 5:30, a live shot at 6:00, a live shot at 6:30, makes you have four chances to work on this one thing over and over and over again.  So every day I would kind of go in and work on specific things for these live shots, over and over again.  And so over time if you just really focus and kind of narrow down and work on three things at a time, I kept a list of three things I was working on, all my live shots were three sentences long, you know, so I wouldn't have to worry about forgetting and I just very specifically worked on how to be live.  My--Sara James, who was a reporter correspondent at NBC [NBC News], I used to call her for help.  She'd say, "You know it's like a phone call, you're talking to your mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien], she's not stupid, but she can't see what you're talking about, so you need to explain it in an authoritative way, but she's not a child, you know, but you have to slow it down, make it really clear and explain what you're saying because she's not there, she can't see it."  And that was probably the best advice I got and that really helped me a lot in figuring out how to do live shots.  And you know, again it's a learnable skill if you have opportunities to, to work at it and work at it and work at it, you can figure it out.
Story_ID: 652650
Speaker 1: Did you know--were people like Bel- (audio disturbance)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCCUSION).
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Belva Davis?
Speaker 2: Yes, Belva Davis.
Speaker 1: She's great.
Speaker 2: Because she was--who else was out there [KRON-TV, San Francisco, California] then?
Speaker 1: Pam Moore.  She was not nice to me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Was Belva nice?
Speaker 1: Belva was fabulous.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Belva was phenomenal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Belva took a lot of people under her wing, you know, she was a really big--and people were scared of Belva, you know, like the bosses were scared of Belva.  She had a lot of institutional knowledge and so she could come in and kind of--in every place you needed somebody who was gonna say like, "So, just you know, this is this, this is that, (makes sound)," you know, and I'm so new just even to a work environment you know.  It didn't even dawn on me, the politics.  So Belva was great.  Belva Davis was phenomenal for everybody.  I mean she had a husband [HistoryMaker William Moore] too who was just fabulous like a great guy.  They were a great couple--they are a great couple and they're--and she was just very helpful, you know.  She was just very--that kind of person who was like, "Sit down, let me tell you how it works here."  And not a lot of people would do that. I've worked with Janice Huff in San Francisco [California].  I was looking for a place to do my hair, because San Francisco has micro climates, which is bad for your hair.  And she was phenomenal, you know, she's another one of those like always trying to help somebody out, kind of person.  And not only was new to reporting really, I was new to the West Coast, I really never lived, outside of college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], away from home [Smithtown, New York].  Both of them were really, really great people.
Story_ID: 652651
Speaker 1: When do you think you felt comfortable?  Were you feeling comfortable by the time you left San Francisco [California], the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Comfortable as a reporter?
Speaker 1: As a reporter, on air, I'm talking about on air?
Speaker 2: You know I started doing a show in San Francisco called 'The Know Zone.'  It was done for the Discovery Channel actually. And I did it because it paid you a little extra money.  I was only working four days a week and the way to make some more money was to do the show, and there was a show called 'The Next Step' and they decided to do a spinoff of it and so I--I had the role of sort of being, sort of the newsreader kind of a sciencey mind, like we'd say, "Well, that actually the distance between the sun and Jupiter is." blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, that was my job, and it forced you to cut out of the box of local news, you know, it forced you to--to do a read that was more dramatic at times and to--I did stories about science all the time.  We did stories--different shows about technology, about explosions, you know, it's a science show, and it was very different than doing news.  And so it really stretched me, and I had a great producer name Nancy Juliber, at the time and she'd say, "Oh, stop with the news read, a big read, make it bigger, make it more dramatic, do this way," and then I really started to realize, like oh, you can use your voice and modulate it to tell a story.  You know everything didn't have to be that local news read.  "That's right Biff [ph.], police say that just after six [o'clock] the man was walking home alone when he was struck by a car," blah, blah, blah, great, that's your classic, from the Discovery Channel for a show about science, you had to make it scary at times and interesting and dark or exciting or whatever.  And it stretched me in the craft, really for the first time.  And I sort of understood, like, oh, you can use your voice as a tool in storytelling.  And I think that--after I did that show, I really began to get comfortable that I was good at my job.  I grew a lot as I was leaving KRON-TV [San Francisco, California]; and, and by my second year, I was making what everybody else was making maybe a little bit more and I was considered to be a perfectly solid reporter.
Story_ID: 652652
Speaker 1: And then I went to join MSNBC in 1996 as a, as an anchor for their new network doing a show called the 'The Site.'
Speaker 2: And this, this, is this the beginning of MSNBC or--
Speaker 1: 'The Site' was one of the shows that launched MSNBC in 1996.
Speaker 2: See because this is a new--this is the advent of new cable shows and new shows coming into, on--
Speaker 1: Well, it was news that killed us.  'The Site' was pre-taped.  We did a show--we did six shows a week and repeated on Sunday.  And I remember thinking like, an hour on technology.  What the hell are we gonna talk about, like really? But of course it was the advent of the Internet, and we did a nightly newscast about the psychology and sociology and philosophy of the Internet and also literally things that were happening on the Internet and debates that were going on around the Internet and the business of the Internet and we were able to fill that time.  But yeah, MSNBC was new and CNN was relatively new.  You know they had been in the game a little bit but when Princess Diana [Diana, Princess of Whales] died, it killed our show because all those newscasts went to a rolling live news format.  And a rolling live news format meant that anybody who was doing a taped show disappeared.
Speaker 2: So you're saying that--you're saying because of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aleese [ph.], do you want to come out?  Come out.  Bye, Aleese, thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Have a good weekend.
Speaker 1: Bye, you too.
Speaker 2: So you're saying the amount of time that they devoted then your show dies in the meantime.  Is that it?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah no, our show, you know, we were doing a show that was--that was taped and it was about the Internet, and they're only so many shows you could do around Princess Di on the Internet.  There was just--cable discovered that doing live breaking news coverage was phenomenally successful and the world wanted to watch what was happening in the wake of Princess Di's fatal accident.  And so we were--we were killed. Our show was killed.
Speaker 2: You know I did read--I did read some good reviews of your show that you had.
Speaker 1: Our show was--it's funny, it was critically acclaimed and nobody watched it, nobody watched it.  My family watched it.  It really--you know it's funny I still run into people who say, "I loved that show."  Because it was so new, I mean it was just really cutting edge to the point where you know people didn't necessarily understand what we were trying to do.  But it was a great show when you look back and I kept some of the tapes of it. It was a really good show.  We managed to navigate this line of how do you appeal to people who know a lot about technology and not bore them, but also talk to people who know nothing about technology and make it interesting for them and so that it's not over their head and I think we were able to do that pretty successfully.  David Borman was the executive in charge of that and he would go on to be my boss at CNN.
Speaker 2: You know, this is what--I find that also that there are a lot of people that come in and out of your life, people switch, you know, stations, they end up (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, oh yeah, no, no, no. That's the (unclear), that's why if you're gonna be a jerk to people, it's probably not very wise.
Speaker 2: Right. So, you--that's 1996 that you start with, with the 'The Site'?
Speaker 1: And by 1997, November of 1997, we're cancelled.
Story_ID: 652653
Speaker 1: The other question I have for you, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], are you using the back- the fact that you have a background in the sciences, are you using that and do people mistake your beauty for having no brains, is there any of that?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I got my very first job with Jeanne Blake who was a medical reporter [at WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] because I had a solid background in science, I think that was incredibly helpful and then that led me directly for me working with Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell] because he did a lot of work with Jeanne who was a local reporter who was in an area where there're a lot of teaching hospitals so I often did little shoots for him and then when he needed a producer, field producer, they called me.  So my, my science background helped every step of the way being tapped to do this technology show there was a sense, 'The Know Zone,' I mean, locally, I was someone who knew about technology and I was free, as I was working four days a week.  And then of course that background led me to do 'The Site,' because clearly I was pretty knowledgeable in science and I could deliver it, I think, credibly.  You know I never--I don't think anybody ever thought I was a great beauty, I mean, I don't think, like I was the hot chic on TV.  I think I was perfectly pretty enough to be on TV.  Truly, believe me, I am not--
Speaker 1: I know you, I know you--I read that in your book that you didn't see, that you didn't have that self image, but--
Speaker 2: No, I know--true, but I mean, I don't think it was anybody else's image too.  I don't think anybody thought like that I was the hot girl at the network at all.  I think, you know, I cleaned up well, I was perfectly competent; and good eno- you know, I looked good enough to be like an attractive person on TV, perfectly fine.
Story_ID: 652654
Speaker 1: So then you go from there [MSNBC] to--you do, you do a short stint with WNET [WNET TV, New York, New York], right? I have--
Speaker 2: No, never.  No, I--no, I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Imaging America'?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was my friend, George Rivera who, he's here--they just loaned me out to do a show with him.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: So we just appeared, they borrowed me to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was again--again, it was one of those things, and I think in my childhood I was always the person who wanted to like sign up to do stuff and so when that came calling, one you got paid and two, I could travel around America with a guy who's a real network producer and go do these stories, you know, it was, he was really ahead of his time on that.  He's a--he's a good friend.
Story_ID: 652655
Speaker 1: So how does the next opportunity come then?
Speaker 2: So I was fired (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you sort of find yourself out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was fired.  NBC said that I could stay in San Francisco [California], but of course there was nothing to do, I mean, you know I didn't really work at the--I didn't really work at the NBC station, the affiliate [KRON-TV, San Francisco, California], you know and there was no show for me to do, so I came back to New York [New York].  In 1997 we moved back to New York and my husband [Bradley Raymond] moved, too.  He was an investment banker in San Francisco and I started working at NBC News.  I kind of was stuck there because I had a contract to work off and on the weekends, I anchored at MSNBC.  I did a morning show, Saturday and Sunday morning show called 'Morning Blend' and it was great.  I loved doing morning shows.  I spent a lot of time doing morning shows.  During the week though at NBC News it was weird 'cause I was kind of in this office that, you know, that I'd sort of been dumped in and I hadn't been really hired, I was just that employee that nobody knew what to do with.  So they didn't really want to put you on TV and you know sitting in an office for hours and hours with no real assignment at times, and everybody thinks, "Well you know you're the cable girl so you know so you're not really one of us."  So it was an uncomfortable time you know.  It was really not a lot of fun.  I remember that time being--that time of being just very in between and not feeling like you know, it was--it was just good enough. You know, I was working on these different things.
Story_ID: 652656
Speaker 1: Jodi Applegate [Jodi Applegate-Kay] left 'Weekend Today,' and I was offered her slot anchoring 'Weekend Today.'
Speaker 2: Do you remember the aud- aud- now did you have to audition for it or are they looking (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You filled in--you know you filled in a lot so I would fill in.  I was a news reader already from MSNBC on 'Weekend Today,' it made sense, because I was already in front of a camera made up before my show was on or in--I think it was right before my show ['The Site'] went on. So it was one of those things that I became their new reader probably 75 percent because I was available and 25 percent because I was fairly competent and so they had seen me do it and I would fill in occasionally and so in two thousand--1999--1999, I started anchoring 'Weekend Today.'
Speaker 2: You did that for how long?
Speaker 1: I did it for four years.  I left in 2003.
Speaker 2: But this was a pipeline.  Wasn't this show a pipeline to 'The Today Show'?
Speaker 1: Sure.  I mean, it wasn't only a pipeline, you actually got to fill in on 'The Today Show', and you spent a lot of time doing 'The Today Show' and being around the people at 'The Today Show'.  'Weekend Today' was just a weekend version of 'The Today Show' and my boss, who's my best friend, Kim Bondy, she was the executive producer of our show but also the news producer on 'The Today Show', so there was a lot of overlap between the two shows.  I got to meet, you know, Katie and Matt.  Spent a lot of time working with them.
Speaker 2: Katie Couric and them.
Speaker 1: Katie Couric and Matt Lauer, known to America as Katie and Matt.  And really, I mean they were just phenomenal, they were great.  It was really a team, I mean, you know, obviously our team members were coming down here, but--but it was very much, you know, 'The Today Show' platform was considered this really big platform.  David Bloom was my co-anchor.  Eventually I started with some other people and--and it was a very, you know, it was probably the first time I was on a big show on a big platform with a lot of money and support and I was the co-anchor so, you know, everything was sort of focused and directed on me--with the two of us, me and David Bloom, making this team the greatest thing that it could possibly be and our show was wildly successful.  We had millions and millions of viewers.
Story_ID: 652657
Speaker 1: At what point do you have an agent in the business, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gosh, so, you know my first agent was when I was in San Francisco [California] when I went from making thirty-five thousand the first pay change I got was probably my second year and I brought in an agent and I was making, I think, I bumped up to 110.
Speaker 1: That's a huge--so when you said that I was then finally making--that's a huge leap.
Speaker 2: Crazy, right.  Well, remember I was always getting a little side salary, so I probably went from thirty-five thousand dollars plus another say twenty, working on 'The Know Zone,' so it was fifty-five to a big leap.  Yeah, that was like your average--and you became competitive, you know, you had an agent who shopped you around to the other stations so that you know, now somebody couldn't just say, "We're gonna give you 105," someone would counter and someone would come back and say 110.  So I made a--I remember making a hundred--I just thought I made $110,000, holy cow, that's a lot.
Speaker 1: I mean when you think about it, because how long--at that point, you have not--it's sort of a meteoric prize in a way.  I mean, I'm just saying to go from there to network is not that easy.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was--my steps were always moving in the right direction.  I was probably the youngest producer at NBC.  I was probably the--I mean I--I was twenty-six when I started reporting at KRON [KRON-TV, San Francisco, California], I think.  Yeah, I think I was twenty-three when I was working at NBC.  I was young.  So yeah.  You know it was--it never really felt super--it never felt particularly meteoric because I just thought I'd done every job.  But I definitely kept moving forward.  I was always taking big next steps, the next big step.  It never felt like I had skipped over any jobs.  I was a minority writer trainee, I was a line producer, I was a field producer, I was a segment producer, I went to NBC News, I worked as a researcher, I worked as a writer, I was working as a field producer, I was finally a producer, I got sent out to start reporting, you know every--I did all of these jobs.  I was an overnight reporter, I was the eleven p.m. reporter, I was the person who volunteered.  If something broke at three o'clock in the morning, I told the assignment desk, "You can absolutely call me," so I did a million fire stories.  My theory was by the time you'd done your hundredth fire story, you should pretty good at it.  It got to the point where I could write them in my sleep.  "Just after midnight a five alarm fire broke out, you know, Simi Valley [California]."  You know you just got good at it and so I think that if you were nice and you could sort of--if you were nice and easy to work with people would allow you to learn on the job and so that's what I tried to do.  I tried to sort of be nice to everybody and learn as I go and take advantage of these opportunities.  So it was looking back pretty fast but, but even more than fast, it was just constantly moving forward.  I never felt like I was stuck in a place because I, I did a lot of jobs.
Story_ID: 652658
Speaker 1: But some people do get stuck sometimes, you know along the way 'cause either there're not openings and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and really when you think about it, you know MSNBC was a new network and then when you go to CNN but--
Speaker 2: I was, I was also very willing to jump.  I remember at KRON-TV [San Francisco, California], the reason I went to MSNBC they said to me, "We don't want you to learn to anchor," and I didn't really necessarily want to be an anchor, but Bob Bazell [Robert Bazell] used to say to me, "You should learn that skill, because one day you're gonna be in an anchor chair.  One day, something's going to happen.  A plane will crash and someone will say, 'Put Soledad in the chair,' and you'll have to anchor live coverage of this plane crash.  And it's a different skill.  So you should learn how to anchor."  And so when they told me very clearly that they had enough women who knew how to anchor, they were not looking for that.  I was like, okay, my next opportunity is not here.  And so I think I had great luck and great opportunities, but I also was very ready to go when I felt like I had hit a wall.  And I, I was very strategic, I think, about my career.  For example, I was East Bay [California] bureau chief and so I used to volunteer to do events.  I remember going to hear a famous woman anchor--give a speech, she was terrible, terrible.  And I thought, oh my gosh, like she's so famous, how could she be terrible?  And you know, a different skill.  And so the next week I started--anytime someone needed a speaker for something, I would volunteer.  The ninety-fifth birthday of the City of Richmond [Virginia], I show up in the ugliest green and black ball gown you've ever seen.  And the people didn't even know who I was.  I said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Soledad O'Brien, I'm the host."  They're like, "You're not on the list, sorry."  I said, "No, I'm the host."  And I--I--I was the host and any event that needed a host or needed a speaker, I would volunteer to do it to the point where I actually got pretty good at it.  And I remember one day someone called me and said, "You know, can you do the speech--," and I didn't really want to do it, you know, "I'll do it, but it's gonna cost you five thousand dollars." They're like, "Okay."  I was like, oh, like you could get paid if you could deliver a speech well.  But I very intentionally set out to learn how to do it because I had seen this woman who you know, but I won't repeat her name, terrible, shockingly bad and I thought, one day that's gonna happen to me.  I'm gonna be successful and famous in my job and not know how to do this thing.  And there's going to be someone who looks and says, "Oh my gosh, she's a horrible speaker."  So I have to work on this skill too.
Story_ID: 652659
Speaker 1: Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], what do you mean when you say know how to anchor--what does that mean?
Speaker 2: You know anchoring is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, what skillsets are there?
Speaker 2: Anchoring is very different from reporting.  And I think a mistake a lot of people make is thinking it's the same exact thing.  Reporting is being able to assess on the ground what's happening around you, can you be descriptive, can you--can you manage a crowd, can you manage individual interviews, can you jump around. And anchor is kind of the person who is moving around on the big scale, right, keeping all those reporters' balls in the air and making sure that you're following the story and filling in the gaps and thinking of the reporting that's coming in as a narrative that often needs pieces filled in.  "Okay, well we've heard this from this person.  I think that means we now need to go back to this person and ask these questions."  Well it's really about kind of driving the direction of a story, and you really--it's very hard to be a good anchor if you're not a good reporter, I think.  I think it's--I think it's--I always tell young women who tell me they want to be anchors, it's like it's not a job, it's not really a job, right, you have to really be a great reporter first, to understand how to weave all this stuff together and know what's missing in a narrative, what the audience needs to hear.  There's no one who sets out to be a great anchor, it's weird.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I was talking to someone this week and he said his voice, he was told while he was a good reporter, he would never be a good anchor because he didn't have the right voice.
Speaker 2: And my mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] would say, "Those people are idiots."  I mean that's the stupidest thing I've ever heard, right? I mean--and I went to speech classes, I'm from Long Island [New York].  You know I had to go, (makes sound) and warm up my voice and learn how to enunciate because (pronunciation) "Oh my god, I'm from Long Island."  We speak like this, but you know, I did.  NBC [NBC News] actually sent me to go take lessons on how to speak.  I remember once someone said to me, you know, "You have the best enunciation on television."  I'm like, that's a terrible compliment (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you know you have very good enunciation.
Speaker 2: You're not a good reporter--
Speaker 1: I just thought that's a wrong statement.
Speaker 2: I'm like, "Oh, wow, well gee, thanks, my enunciation is excellent, good to know."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sorry, I have to say that.
Speaker 2: And sometimes these little old ladies would say, you know, "I can really understand what you're saying.  You don't mumble your words, you are very clear."  I'm like, and that's my skill? Okay, I better keep working.
Speaker 1: But no you are, you have clear diction (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Very intentional.
Speaker 1: And a happy voice. (Laughter) Okay. (Unclear) the wrong person saying it, so--
Story_ID: 652660
Speaker 1: Anyway, you get married though in--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995], 1995, I've almost been married twenty years.
Speaker 1: And what's the discussion between you and your husband about what you wanted to do with your career or it was just, he was gonna--
Speaker 2: You know I think we were always very of the same mind.  Brad [Bradley Raymond] was always very ambitious for me.  I mean his happiest day was when Katie Couric got a big pay day.  He was like, "(Makes sound) Katie Couric's getting this money, this means you can get this money, too." (Laughter) I was like, oh my god.  You know, he just was a guy who--he loved, if I loved my job, and Brad has always been the most supportive person, you know because we had finally four children and some point somebody had to be home for them, so if I was going to go out to Thailand to go cover a story, you know he was going to have to be in charge and he never hesitated for a moment.  He always said, "We'll figure it out."  And even if you know, "We'll figure it out," meant we're going to have to bring in a sitter, because he had to travel too, and then I think I always treated his job the same way.  We were very ambitious for each other.  I felt very lucky about that and I always counsel young women about that like, you have to know what your spouse thinks of what you want to become, because I had a--we had a friend, actually it was a friend of Brad's from business school, and I remember she was going for a summer associate position, she wanted to be an investment banker, Lehman Brothers [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.].  And she decided--she applied but decided not to take it, and I said, "Well, why?" She said, "Well, you know, 'cause my husband he just--it's gonna be twelve weeks, and he'd be by himself and he just really doesn't want me to go."  And I remember thinking like, you have no children, what do you need to do make him dinner or something, like, you have no children.  If there's ever a time to go, now's the time.  My husband would be the first person to say, "Oh my god, congratulations, that's amazing.  For twelve weeks, we'll figure it out."  You know, plus I'm gonna throw myself into my work, he'll be over there doing your thing, it'll position you really well to be able to choose to do this, this and this.  And I think we we're both very like-minded about that.  I don't think I could be successful without sort of Brad constantly thinking, you know, here's, here's what you need to do to make the platform you're trying to get to as solid and as well built as possible.  You know, he's and he's always been that kind of friend, I mean, I think he's that kind of person to a lot of people.  He's just a very solid--when I left CNN to start my own company [Starfish Media Group], he was absolutely like, "Well I think this is the greatest thing ever."  I think the only time he really got annoyed was when my work was unhappy, you know when it felt like, "You're killing yourself and you're miserable?  That's not good."
Story_ID: 652661
Speaker 1: What about the subject of children, did they come up in your discussion at the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew I wanted to have kids.  I'm one of six kids, I love kids.  I mean, I'm that kind of person who would stop on the street and see people's kids and be like, "Oh, my god, can I hold your baby?  Oh, my god.  Brad [Bradley Raymond], look, isn't this the cutest baby?"  He'd be like (makes sound), "It's fine, the baby's fine."  He knew if we're gonna get married we're gonna have kids.  He wanted to have two kids.  So we had our first two and I was like, "So this is not a family.  This is so small, two kids?"  So--
Speaker 1: Because you were from a large family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two is nothing.  Two is like nothing.  So we had Sofia [Sofia O'Brien] first and she was a big baby.  She was nine and a half pounds, and then Cecilia [Cecilia O'Brien] came after that, about eighteen months later and then I said, you know, "Listen, I want to have another kid," we had twins [Charles O'Brien and Jackson O'Brien], so that was the end of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a--I mean then it becomes a whole different thing.
Speaker 2: It kind of--it kind of changes your world.
Speaker 1: And two at once, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  By then we had four children under four.  But I remember my mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien], my tough nut immigrant mother used to say, "Oh, well, you know, I had six children in seven years, so, I'm sure you'll figure it out. It's not that hard" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So how are you handling that and working at the same time because--
Speaker 2: You know, it was--it was really hard.  I was pregnant on 'The Today Show' and 'The Today Show' was a show that really celebrated having babies you know, if you were an anchor.  If you were a producer not so much, but if you were an anchor, people loved it, you know.  Oh my god, people--I remember having Sofia and just being so exhausted from answering the doorbell of my apartment to get the gifts that were being sent from just companies and viewers and everybody, you know, 'cause it's celebrated when you're an anchor who's having a baby.  I had Cecilia when I was anchoring on 'The Today Show,' too and I was very intentional, I'd sign a contract, have a baby, have another baby and my contract would come up because I didn't want to negotiate pregnant.  I knew that, you know, you'd be big and uncomfortable and not feel powerful and so--and I knew people would look at you like (makes sound) you know, do we really want that?  And so I would sign a deal, have kids and before I signed my next deal get right back to my fighting weight, went to CNN, got pregnant was having twins and it was hard, I mean, especially at CNN, it was exhausting because my schedule was grueling, I mean, doing 'Weekend Today' was not such a tough schedule when I was pregnant. At CNN, I was anchoring four hours a day.  We were on from six a.m. to ten a.m., and I was sick all the time with twins so--why can't I remember her name?  Maria Shriver, Maria Shriver used to give me advice on how to throw up on air, like you know, just like, "This is what you do if you're pregnant on air," 'cause she had been pregnant on the 'Weekend Today' show, and so she used to tell me this is--you know, "These are the strategies if you need to puke on TV, here's you know, here's what you do.  Make sure your co-anchor covers you, you do this, you do that, get the makeup people to wait outside the door so they can powder--," you know, 'cause all your mascara gets you know stuck under your eyes.  You got to get cleaned up.  It's almost like a little pit crew, kind of fixes you up and sends you back in.  And my co-anchor was a guy named Bill Hemmer, who was phenomenal, said, "Listen, I've never worked with a pregnant woman before."  (Laughter) And I'd look at him and I'd be like, "You have to read," and I'd run out the door and go get sick.  It was hard, it was very grueling, very grueling.
Story_ID: 652662
Speaker 1: Before we go to C- oh, CNN, I want to just ask you about David Bloom because that, you know his--what happened there with his--?
Speaker 2: David Bloom was a great guy.  He used to bring his kids [Nicole Bloom, Christine Bloom and Ava Bloom] to the set a lot and I would say, you know, "So do you want to sit down here and hang out and watch daddy do an interview? Or do you want to come with me and go get ice cream?"  And they were like, "Ice cream."  You know, it's funny to see these girls so much older now.  Great guy, you know really I think a huge loss, because he was a great reporter and loved reporting, he practically vibrate when he went out on a story, he was so excited.  So it was a shock.  I got a call in the middle of the night and the operator said, "Hold for the president of NBC News."  I was in bed, I'm like, oh, what's going on?  They said, "David's dead," I said, "Oh my god, was he shot?"  And he said, "No, no he collapsed," and that I was gonna come in and do the show ['Weekend Today'] the next day with Matt Lauer, and that's what we did.  I just remember thinking, you know, his wife [Melanie Bloom], such a lovely great woman, and I think everybody felt like we sort of have to do a good job for her, you know, that this is an opportunity, hold it together for her and remember her husband well and not fall apart because we had a job to do even if it was one of our own who we were reporting on.
Speaker 1: So at the time they knew that it was from natural causes? They didn't know it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they knew early on.  I mean his crew, and he had already had discussions about not feeling so well and he opted not to leave the theater because they were gonna head through Bagdad [Iraq] and he didn't want to miss that.  So they knew that he hadn't been feeling well so when he collapsed, you know; I don't think people thought that it had, had come from you know some kind of outside force.
Story_ID: 652663
Speaker 1: How does CNN come?
Speaker 2: So after David [David Bloom] died, you know everything was changing.  They brought Lester Holt in, he was a great guy, I knew him a little bit and, but it just felt like it was time to go do something else.  And I was trying to find stuff to do within NBC and you know nothing was really appealing to me.  I was exhausted from doing weekends and you know just felt like what else is out there, and CNN was looking for an anchor for their morning show ['American Morning'].  Paula Zahn had gone on to some other show and so I applied for that job.  It was funny because I remember my interview, they wanted to know if I could do serious stuff, you know, the 'Weekend Today' show had a lot of light stuff in it and so a lot of my interview was you know trying to convince them that I could be serious, you know, that I could be CNN serious.  And then later at CNN when I would be interviewed for other shows they were trying to figure out you know could I be light and (laughter).  It's kind of the definition of TV, you know.  Everyone--people don't seem to realize that people are very nuanced and they can kind of handle a lot different things, especially for women, I think.
Speaker 1: Are you doing CNN from here or in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I never lived in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: You never lived in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: No.  I moved across the street [in New York, New York] from NBC to CNN.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what is the difference in culture at that point because--
Speaker 2: The difference in culture at CNN from a weekend morning show was just the amount of work.  It was like going to college.  You were just constantly reporting on international and domestic breaking news all the time and any big story, CNN was all over it.  I think just the people that you worked with knew everything.  I mean I went to a party once for the morning show I was doing and one of the party games was a picture of all the [U.S.] Supreme Court justices and could you name them.  I was like, so this is the party game?  That was how you had fun and being really smart about things and understanding news was really, really important.  And sometimes I think to the detriment of good TV.  You know I think 'The Today Show,' 'Weekend Today,' certainly was about good TV, was it a great moment, was it great story-telling, was it--you know, was it great staging on something, where CNN was about the news, the news, the news, the news.  Something has happened, we're all over it, and I loved it.  I mean I really felt like I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I felt like I was absolutely learning a ton every single day.
Story_ID: 652664
Speaker 1: And I should mention I end up going back to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when I was at 'Weekend Today' because of that schedule it actually was doable to go to school during the week and then come back and I was pregnant with my daughter, Sofia [Sofia O'Brien], at the time actually and I knew that if I had a baby, I would never go back to school.
Speaker 2: So you went back and got your degree?
Speaker 1: I did.  I finished my last year.
Speaker 2: Your last year.  And you're pregnant and you're working at the same time, okay.  I want to sort of--
Speaker 1: It was not cute.  I was miserable, I was so tired.  I used to think if I had twenty dollars--if I could pay one of these students twenty dollars to go lie in their dorm room bed, I would do it in a second, I was so tired.
Speaker 2: But you did it.  I mean but that's, I'm just saying, that's an awful lot to have.
Speaker 1: There was not choice, right.  If you want to get to the goal, which was, I knew if I had a baby--it's a big difference in saying to your husband, "So I'm going to finish my degree over the next sixteen weeks," than saying, "Can you watch the baby while I go finish my degree for the next sixteen weeks?" Right, I mean just wasn't going to happen.  It wasn't going to happen, I knew I wanted to have a number of kids so once we actually had a child, I was not going to go back.  And so, you know, that was the window.  I felt very lucky, actually.  'Weekend Today' would pay for my degree, you know, finishing it.  I was able to do it.  I worked on a weekend show, so I could actually make the schedule fit, I mean how many people have that kind of opportunity.  I had, I was older than most of my teaching fellows, so when I was covering the Elian Gonzalez story, I would FedEx my papers in, you know, to my teaching fellow from Miami [Florida].  They'd say, "You don't need to, you can just bring it the next time."  "No, it's okay, send it off."  So I was really--I just was happy to be done, I wanted to get done with it.
Speaker 2: That says a lot about you too you know in terms of finishing because, I mean you're making a lot of money, some people (unclear)--
Speaker 1: My husband [Bradley Raymond] used to say, "I'm sleeping with a coed" (laughter).  "Like yeah, an old, tired, pregnant, angry, bitter coed." You know I was really lucky, my best friend, Kim Bondy, who was my executive producer at the time and who was just a tremendous sort of peer mentor for me, she was a big believer in you know, "Listen, you got to finish what you started, finish what you started.  You don't want to be that person who's always saying, well, I went to Harvard, asterisk.  You want to finish what you started."  So I think that if she had said, "Oh don't do that, that's a waste of time and besides I need you, I can't have it, can't spare you," I, I might not have finished.  But she was the--"Listen, finish, put a dot on it (makes sound) wrap it up, move on."
Story_ID: 652665
Speaker 1: At the point that you come on in CNN's history, can you talk about where you are in the history of the network?  You know--
Speaker 2: CNN had been on the air for twenty years by the time I joined and they had big names.  I mean CNN for me was really synonymous with great journalism.  Anderson was there, Wolf was there.
Speaker 1: Wolf Blitzer, Anderson Cooper?
Speaker 2: Sorry, Anderson Cooper was there, Wolf Blitzer was there.  You know they just had a reputation for being terrific journalists, since I was very excited to go to a place that I just wasn't sure I could keep up journalistically with what they were doing cause they really phenomenal journalists.  And also over the last ten years--I was at CNN for ten years, I think we had some really amazing stories to cover, Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] in 2005, 2004, 2005 was the Southeast Asia tsunami, the Japanese tsunami, earthquake, the Haitian earthquake, I mean there's just a zillion, the political coverage.  I think I covered five you know presidential elections.  So CNN was a great opportunity.  Just, if you were willing to work hard, you could be very successful.  And that kind of was always my M.O. [modus operandi] is you know I could just help with the people.  I would just agree to do a, you know, for example, in a case I'd fill in for Anderson's show ['Anderson Cooper 360'] and if you filled in for someone's show, they would take you off your show in the morning ['American Morning'].  I said, "Absolutely not," then I would be admitting that Anderson's show was more important than my show.  Why would I do that, why would I leave my own show.  So I would do Anderson's show, I would go take a nap for three hours and I will do my show.  Because, otherwise, I'm saying that I'm willing to leave my own show to go do somebody else's show.  What does that say about my own show?  No, I will do both shows and you know and, and plus you don't really need as much time preparing because you've spent the whole night doing Anderson's show.  So things like that I think that you could really sort of say you know, I tried to set the tone on what I wanted to do.  I wanted to be involved in the political coverage because CNN does political coverage.  I didn't know that much about it, but I wanted to do it.  And at the same time they were very--I remember in 2006 they had a sign of the midterm elections, and it was Anderson and Wolf, Larry King and Lou Dobbs, CNN's election team.  I went into my boss, Jon Klein [Jonathan Klein], I said, "Seriously, you have four white guys on--do you know how embarrassing that is? I had no dog in the fight.  I'm not saying put me in, what I am saying is working at this company to have that be like America's election team is these four white guys.  Is nobody paying attention to that?"  They added Paula Zahn to the--to the map.  But you know it was so weird.  I mean I think that's one thing CNN really struggled with, like no one was kind of watching that.  And maybe that's everywhere.  That  just--this idea of--how weird is it that I have to tell you, your giant massive signs that are around the country, you've left out women and you have no people of color.  Don't you have a person on your, you know, executive team who's like watching that for you.  And you know, it was, it was kind of typical actually, I think.
Speaker 1: In the early years I mean they had Bernard Shaw that was, you know there was--
Speaker 2: They'd hold onto Bernard Shaw as their black guy forever.  I mean really.  It's always like, Bernard Shaw.
Speaker 1: But it's been a long--I mean he's been gone a long, long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean, and, by the way, the definition of you don't have enough people of color is if you're always going back to that guy, you know.  I said the same thing when I left.  I was like, "If I am CNN's diversity plan (laughter), like that can't be," so you know my leaving shouldn't say anything about what CNN thinks of diversity because diversity is not a person, diversity is a philosophy and a strategy and a--what a company believes.  One person coming or going should not upset the applecart of diversity, if you have one.
Story_ID: 652666
Speaker 1: So tell me what an average day was like there [at CNN], so that's, I'm just trying, because I don't think people have a good enough idea you know?
Speaker 2: I was tired for years.  I was so tired.  I had four children [Sofia O'Brien, Cecilia O'Brien, Charles O'Brien and Jackson O'Brien].  under four, eventually, and especially with the boys when they were born, I'd be up all night with them, maybe get up at one [o'clock] and kind of stay up with them and then hand them of at three to my husband [Bradley Raymond] so I could go into the office.  I loved being in the office because it was so calm and sane compared to what it was like to have twin boys at home.  And you just, you know, you know you put on four hours of television ['American Morning'], a lot of research, hair and makeup, in front of the camera till ten a.m., and then afterwards just a lot of work, we're always working on projects or interviews to be done, post tapes, we called them, things that you would shoot afterwards.  Usually get home at two o'clock in the afternoon, maybe a little bit later and then you know you're exhausted because you did, basically, an overnight job and try to throw yourself in bed at eight o'clock.  I used to read stories to my kids, but I'd fall asleep so I was like, you know, "Once upon a--," oh, I'm so tired, I was so tired.  It was really hard, really hard.  You know, I always sort of felt that if you didn't succeed at it then you kind of screwed a lot of women who were coming behind you who might want to have children, right.  If you were the example of, "Couldn't hack it," "see, told you."  My boss [Jonathan Klein] at the time said to me, when I was pregnant with twins, he said you know, "I don't want you to worry about anything, you never know how you're gonna feel, and if you're gonna want to come back to work." I was like, I said, "So I have four children under four, I am the only person in this building who has to work, me, like I--I can tell you what I will be doing on Monday, I will be reporting for work."  You know, and as much as I tried to make light of that kind of stuff, at the same time is like what boss do you know would ever say that to a man.  "Listen, Jim, listen, Bob, listen, Steve, I know your wife's having a baby and you never know how you're gonna feel about that baby, you might want to quit your job."  You can't even imagine that conversation without laughing.  But that was kind of typical; and it's depressing because it seems to me to be such a, a far time from, you know, stories of my mother's [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] day.
Story_ID: 652667
Speaker 1: I remember once being called at the end of 2004, 2005 to go, to cover the tsunami, and I got a call from a, a young woman actually on the assignment desk.  And her whole strategy was like, "Listen I've been sent to call you to see, we're trying to send someone to Thailand, but I know you're a mom and you're not gonna want to go and so I just have to run it by you and you know, now you got babies."  I was like, "Who more than me wants to get on a plane to Thailand?  Oh, me, send me."  And I went, you know, and I always felt like you had to joke about these things to kind of get them past people, you know.  And then when you got there you better bust your ass and do a good job because everybody was waiting for you to screw up.  The first guy, when I got to Thailand, sat me down, pretty sure I'd end up working with a lot.  He said, "Listen, so I know you're like this little star and all, but you should know that if I feel like you're not doing your job, I'm gonna call back to the network and tell them."  I was so stunned, me not doing my job? The entire history of work had been over doing it.  I was just--I was so upset.  I was so upset, I went back to my room.  In fact I had--I had my luggage.  I hadn't even checked into the hotel yet.  I was sent to go do a documentary, to do an hour long, sort of special for the network on the tsunami.
Speaker 2: Which was major.  That tsunami had everyone--
Speaker 1: Right.  One hundred and fifty thousand people died, and I remember--and I was also trying to do my show ['American Morning'] again, same thing, I was like well, I'm here, the news is here, why would you not do your show?  And by the way because Thailand's twelve hours ahead, I can do my show from six p.m. to ten p.m., right.  So I could shoot all day and then do my show and to have this producer, the first thing he said to me was to explain--"Let me explain to you, little girl--," basically, you know.  "I know you're a star, but you should know that I'm going to call back and tell them if you don't do your job."  I was so surprised, I was so surprised, you know, and I shot all day, I'd come back, six p.m. I'd say. "I'm available to do my show."  I would do my own show with no producer 'cause they didn't send one for the show.  I had been a producer, I know how to produce.  Set up the lights.  I mean because that's sort of how you're successful.  And that's the great thing about CNN was that if you did that you know you really could be successful.  A lot of your success was in your own hands.  I mean I really liked that about CNN, you could--if you were prepared, if you got yourself prepared, if you did a good job reporting, you could be successful, you know, if someone else didn't have to make you, you could do it yourself.  I'm trying to think of another good example.  It was just--It was just you know, covering the Haitian earthquake, Wolf Blitzer, who I love said, "How do you feel as a mother covering this story?"  I was like, "Well, as a reporter, like everybody else who's here reporting on this story, it's a very tough story to report.  I'm holding onto babies who are dying in my arms, so yeah, I think it's tough for everybody."  And my mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] called me and said, "Good for you, good for you.  Don't let them call you a mother while you're working, make sure you tell them you're a reporter."  You know, so if that's terribly dramatic and tough and whatever, no, but you know, I definitely was very cognizant all the time that as a woman and as a minority there were a lot of people watching to see kind of what you would do; and you know if you screwed it up (makes sound), that was it.
Story_ID: 652668
Speaker 1: Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], let's talk about Katrina, Hurricane Katrina.  Because, what was fascinating was Kim's [Kim Bondy], you know that her family was from New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: It's what made CNN's coverage so great.
Speaker 1: Right because you, I mean, really people were so happy to have you there.  I mean they were.
Speaker 2: It was such an interesting story to cover, but I think because Kim was a local, you know she really could help me figure out.  I remember she said, "The weirdest thing is happening.  The water is coming into my sunroom."  She lived in New Orleans.  And I said, "Oh well, you know."  She said, "No, no, no, it doesn't flood from the back, it floods from the street.  It's so weird.  It never floods from the back.  Why would my house be flooding from the back?"  Because of course the levees had failed, so the waters were all coming from the back to her house.  Her mother and father were stuck in their house, nine feet of water.  And so I think I had a very different insight into New Orleans on a couple of fronts.  One, I wasn't afraid to cover black people; two, I wasn't afraid to cover poor people; three, I had someone in my ear who knew the City of New Orleans like the back of her hand, and so I think we were able to bring a very different perspective to the coverage.  I remember standing watching before we went down on the monitors, big giant monitors in the hall way, I was standing next to Lou Dobbs, actually. He walked up and I walked up and we were watching people at the convention center [Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] holding up signs, "We need water."  And he said exactly the opposite of what I was thinking, he said, "How could anyone think this story is about race?"  At the moment I was thinking, "Wow, this story is so clearly about race."  And I think that probably solidified for me what I felt that I could bring to stories just a perspective of you know you could ask questions the right way and sort of frame things and explain things.  No, it was enough to say, "Well people didn't leave, well why?"  What's the culture like that people don't leave?  Who were the people who didn't leave?  How much money did they make, were they able to leave?  You know, I think there was a lot that people didn't know about New Orleans that couldn't just be explained, "Well, there are parts of the city that are poor."  You know there's--there's a reason why the lower 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] always floods, and there's a reason why poor people live in an area that always flood.  So I think we were able to connect this historical fact over time that people would kind of get what was happening and why it was happening.  And that was something I tried to bring to my reporting of documentaries, right?  Like the reason we see wage disparity and income disparity today has a root in history, and if we just report it like a story today with no context, it's not doing a very good job.  So you have to be a little smarter and do some research and that I think became a hallmark for me at CNN.  I tried to be that person who was doing a lot of research.  You know, no one knew a topic better than me.  Sometime even the elected officials who had signed the bill, you know, into law, I knew it better than they knew it because I loved--I love focusing on the content, and really if you dug into the content then no one could--no one could really beat you in an argument.  If you were--you were standing in something like six feet of water, no one could tell you everything's fine, everything's cool.  Clearly it was not, right, like you're obviously completely full of crap.  I am sitting in this story, I am reporting this story.  I know you are lying whether I'm covering it as a reporter or I just done enough research to know, or I've traveled around the country to know the reality on the ground.  So I did.  I felt in a lot of ways, Katrina was a start of a couple of things. One, I think I got a really good reputation for just being that person who's a little bit unafraid to push back on things.  I didn't mind telling stories about race, kind of a third rail, I think often in news, you know.  I don't think it helps your career to be reporting on race and class, you know, and I liked it and I was good at it, and I really--the fact that it happened in the city that I felt very personally comfortable with.  I love New Orleans.  I ended up--I've a million friends there now.  I never really been before Katrina.  I joined the board of the New Orleans Jazz Orchestra, I go all the time.  I bring my kids all the time.  I mean it became a very important city for me.  You know just, I think I sort of felt like, oh, this is where I should have been born.  I'd fit in here.  You know so I think--I think Katrina was a start for me in being a very serious journalist, of being a person who wanted to have heft and gravitas in my work and I didn't really care what the cost of that was, and I think there was a cost to it at times.  I don't think there's a huge plus in being the race reporter--I think it's a huge negative, actually.
Story_ID: 652669
Speaker 1: Why do you say that, why do you talk about it in terms of cost?  How did that cost you feel actualize in your, you know, in your own situation because people are, I mean, especially minority people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I mean, but I mean for your bosses.
Speaker 1: For your bosses, right.
Speaker 2: I think for audiences--
Speaker 1: The audiences were, it was like, "Go Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], go Soledad."
Speaker 2: I think for audiences, it really felt that you were committed to their stories and I felt a certain responsibility for that.  But I think for your bosses, they feel like, "Listen, well you know, we know her agenda.  We know what she's trying to do."  When I had my interview to talk about doing 'Starting Point' ['Starting Point with Soledad O'Brien'; 'Starting Point'] which is a show, the last show I did at CNN, my boss said, "So you understand this is not a show just for black people, right?  You know this is a show for all Americans."  I was like (unclear).  It was the most Middle American show there is.  He meant like, "I think you have a black agenda or you have a minority agenda," and they were very specific about how many people of color could be on the show.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes ma'am, absolutely.  So you know,  I think there is a cost to your career, right, because there's a sense of you know, it's the same reason why when it's election season and you have Latinos--they're hauled out to talk about immigration debate in the election but not anything else, right.  So it's you know, so great you're on TV, but you know you're gonna be this (gesture).  And so as long as you're okay with being this (gesture) that is what you're gonna do.  You'll be, "Okay, time to cover immigration, let's bring out all the Latinos now to talk about immigration," and very frustrating.  I mean I felt like I had done in my career a lot of things well when we started 'Starting Point.'  I really became a pretty good political interviewer and reporter and again mostly because I think being an outsider to the process was actually very helpful.  You really learn how to ask kind of pragmatic questions and read reports and really try to understand, you know, I'm not--I'm not in the belt way, so I don't really worry about the beltway very much.  I think when I was covering 'Black in America' and 'Latino in America' I covered it as an outsider and an insider you know kind of knowing important issues and stories, but also being a reporter first and wanting to understand and report on those stories. We had a lot of arguments over 'Black in America,' a lot of arguments.
Story_ID: 652670
Speaker 1: Can we talk about that then so--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --because 'Black in America' comes after you are, you know due to lagging ratings, right?  'Black in America'--
Speaker 2: Can I tell you that show, if they had those ratings today--
Speaker 1: They'd be happy.
Speaker 2: We had two hundred and ten some thousand in the demo.  I should show you those numbers for that show.  That show has twice the numbers that they have.
Speaker 1: So what happened, was it that--something though was happening in journalism though too, right, because wasn't it also that CNN was in the middle and then you have right wing Fox [Fox News]--
Speaker 2: I don't remember it happening like that.
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: I don't remember it like that.  I don't it remember it like that.  I know that my boss [Jonathan Klein]--I mean it must be that way because what he--they ended up hiring a woman from Fox to come in and do the show in 2007, so he--he just said he didn't like our anchor team and that Miles [Miles O'Brien] and I would be taken off the show and by then I had already done a couple of docs [documentaries] for CNN and I really liked it.  I remember going into his office and he had one of those buttons that you could close the door, and so he closed the door.  We were supposed to have lunch I was like, "Hey, so I'm ready for lunch."  He closed the door and said, "Sit down, I'm taking you off the morning show ['American Morning']."  And I said, "So are we having lunch or not?  That means no lunch?"  And I think he was so flustered that I was fine with it, that we went out to lunch and I sort of negotiated my deal.  We were fine--I was fine with it because someone had tipped me off that it was gonna happened.  And so I sat up that night with my husband [Raymond Bradley] kind of walking through like, "So if this happens, what should I do?"  And we kind of mapped out.  He's like, "I think it's great, here's what you should ask for (makes sound)."  They were so surprised that I was not surprised.  I literally was like, "So did you call me here just for this or are we really having lunch?"  He was like, "Oh, let's go have lunch."  He said, "Are you gonna cry?"  I said, "Why, should I cry?"  "No you shouldn't cry, no, no, let's go to lunch."  So crazy.  I remember so clearly, 'cause I remember thinking like, oh, the door is closing behind me, meaning that it was a magic button.  So we went out to lunch and I had already come up with my new title and I had already said, "Here's what I'd like to do," and I knew the pay structure at CNN.  If you're just a correspondent, you can only--your salary is capped and so I wasn't gonna be just a correspondent, I said, "No, I need to be an anchor, and I need to do this, and I need to that."  And so by the end of lunch--and I think 70 percent of it was that I was just like, "Yeah, I'm cool, here we go.  Here's what I want to do," and so--and, and I wanted to do it.  I really enjoyed the documentaries, so I started working in docs.
Story_ID: 652671
Speaker 1: 'Black in America'--
Speaker 2: So how did that come about, because--?
Speaker 1: The president of CNN at the time, a guy name Jim Walton, and Jon Klein [Jonathan Klein]--I'm sorry, the president of CNN Worldwide and then the president of CNN Domestic, a guy named Jon Klein, were trying to figure out what do you do for the fortieth anniversary of the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And so they asked me would I be interested in hosting this big series, just be tons of hours on the assassination and then kind of like about black people today, and called 'Black in America.'  And so I was intrigued, I wanted to do it, and I said yes, and so it was kind of up to us to shape how it would go, but it was a very--it was not a great experience.  It was very stressful.  There almost no black people who worked on it, and it was very--very contentious, you know, because a lot of people were like, "Listen the story of 'Black in America' is prison, black men in prison, statistics clearly show this is an issue.  The story of Black America is a failure, the story of Black America is unwed mothers to poverty--," and then it's kind of like, I remember one of the producers said to me, and we've interviewed Michael Eric Dyson and he's talked a lot about the statistics and just how dire the situation is for black people, especially black men, and I think we need to do this and this and this.  And I was like, and who is the funniest, happiest guy you know?  It's Michael Eric Dyson, right.  Michael Eric Dyson is not a bummer.  If you've ever gone out, you know, hung out with Michael Eric Dyson, you'd laugh your butt off the whole time, right?  So I said, so clearly we're not--that's not the story, it's more nuanced than that and if you do a story about, you know, the statistics, show doom.  And you're going to call it 'Black in America,' like what?  And I remember calling Kim [Kim Bondy], I would send her all the scripts, which was a big no, no.  Not to send scripts out you know, and she would go through the scripts and say, "You know I think what you want to do is show the story of a guy, you know--," she said, "listen, I think that the issue of the prison thing is people are successful often connected to people who are struggling, right, so--so it's hard to be very successful because you've always got one arm or one leg being pulled down."  So I think that's a more nuanced story.  You know how do we tell these stories of success and struggle and we were trying to be very balanced about it like literally to the point of story count, but you know you are terrified sometimes by some of the producers.  I remember saying to somebody, "So like, are we getting a really diverse group of people?" "What do you mean?"  "I'm getting like dark skinned black people and light skinned black people.  I mean who--I haven't done all the shoots, who are we interviewing?"  And she said, "Oh, it's just everybody like So and So, everybody like Butch Warren."  Butch Warren is who you and I would consider to be a relatively light skinned brother.  I mean, oh, my god.  We're--everybody looks like Butch Warren?  Do you now understand that there's a subliminal message sent, like this is part of the story and you don't even understand that this is a dynamic in the story.  It felt very stressful all the time because it was such a big project and I just felt, you know, sometimes that I was arguing with producers all the time.
Story_ID: 652672
Speaker 1: I remember one producer we had a--we did a story on a, for our second 'Black in America' ['Black in America 2'] on Dr. Steve Perry, and Capital Preparatory Magnet School [Hartford, Connecticut], a girl name Gloria Smenefee [sic. Gloria Menesee] and the producer had written a line in the script "Gloria Smenefee's mother is a crack addict and her father is an alcoholic."  Those things are true, Gloria Smenefee's mother actually missed out a lot on her childhood 'cause she was a crack addict, she gone to prison, her father is a raging idiot, alcoholic.  And I was like, right, but that's not the story of Gloria Smenefee, and we argued back and forth.  And I was like, you can't define this girl who's seventeen years old by that dysfunction of her family and I'm not--and they'd say, "Well, you know, oh, so you're trying to hide her situa-" I'm like, "I am completely not trying to hide what her story is, but that's not the definition of this girl--" and furthermore if Gloria Smenefee were a twelve year old white boy in New Jersey, we would say "Billy Smith is twelve years old, he loves baseball, you know he wants to be Derek Jeter when he grows up.  He just started a paper route, because he's saving money to buy a glove (makes sound).  His mom's a lawyer in town and his dad has run the family medical practice for fifteen years."  That's how we would tell the story of this kid, but when it comes to poor people and people of color, they always say, "Lives in the ghetto, surrounded by drugs, clawed her way out of the--out of, out of the hood," and those things are true, but there's no context.  And so we had a very nasty argument, I mean, I felt like I was fighting a lot during these 'Black in America' documentaries.  I just, you know, we just had a lot of arguments and I got to the point where I was like, "I will not track anything," because I was worried that people would lay in track if I put my voice down, and I didn't like the script, that's how bad it was.  I literally thought, if I put my voice to something that I do not believe, they might go ahead and use it, so I--and I went to my boss, Jon Klein [Jonathan Klein], I said--he said, "Record nothing that you would not believe, that you do not believe to be true."  So we really--it was so stressful.  It was such a big project and it was just very, very tough.  You know and I think I--I think you pay for that, you know, I think you become that person.  I think for a lot of people, they don't give a crap what you call glorious.  They do not care and they don't even get, "Why are you complaining about all this race stuff?  Jesus, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], god, let it go.  What does it matter?"  I'm like, "It kind of does matter, right?"  And because, not just to Gloria's, who's some little teenage girl, but to people who are watching her story, there's something very disheartening about everything being framed around poverty and crack and drugs and dysfunction, and those things are true, but they need to be in a context.  This girl's story was about going off to college.  It wasn't about her mom being a crack addict.  So I don't think you should hide it, and no more--I remember we had another big fight, they wanted to do a story on these six black doctors.  I'm like, well what's the story, right? We would never do this for white people.  We would never just do six successful white people, but we're doing this PR [public relations] thing and it's not good journalism, it's not good journalism.  Tell me the arc of the story, if it's gonna be a documentary, we should hold ourselves to a very high bar, it's got to be quality, right, 'cause what's gonna happen is, it's not gonna do well and then everyone will be like, "See, black stories don't matter (makes sound)--," I know. So it always felt like it was just very stressful and--but I was really glad to go through it, because when we were done, I felt like I was proud of the work that we had done and I could speak very knowledgeably about it.  You know a lot of times producer driven pieces and the anchor just reads the script and there's a couple of stand-ups and maybe does an interview here and there, but I had literally like killed myself in the whole thing.  I was in most of that doc, I was in, you know, 90 percent of that doc and so I felt very clear on what we were trying to say to the point of mistakes were my mistakes and successes were my successes.  You know we fought for a lot in that particular doc and--and what no one understood, right, was of course, I would be holding the bag, right.  I mean people thought that I had written, edited, shot, you know, done the audio for this doc which was good and bad, I mean for me, it was great, because I felt very responsible, right, it was like, no matter whose fault it is, I learned very early on, like it's my fault.  Whatever happens, so at the end of the day, if it's not right, I just need to say it's not right.  And that's a good lesson to learn, you know, to just know like everything is my responsibility.  But it was very stressful, it was very stressful.
Story_ID: 652673
Speaker 1: When I left CNN we negotiated that I own the distribution rights [at Starfish Media Group] on the docs [documentaries] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right.
Speaker 1: --which was a very unusual kind of deal to have--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --but you know, I thought it was important.  I'd done thirty docs by the time I left CNN.
Speaker 2: Thirty, wow that is--
Speaker 1: So we have a pretty good library.
Speaker 2: So what were you learning, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], as you did them because it starts with the 'Black in America' and I was particularly struck--you know we--you know the thing is, is that those issues raise other issues.
Speaker 1: Always.
Speaker 2: So internally you're fighting with, you know, you're saying with a community that really doesn't understand the black community.
Speaker 1: And you know, worse than that, has no interest in understanding the black community.  I mean that was what was most disheartening, doesn't give a flying fuck, they really did not; they did not care, honestly.  And that, I think, was really disappointing.  And then I think what happens is if you were that reporter then you're in a field where nobody cares, right, you're the, the--you're in a field where nobody cares and that was very, you know, that was kind of a bummer.  The series was so successful, more than 13 million people watch it that they decided to keep it going, and we're shooting the seventh now.  But you know it was very stressful in the building to be doing that, outside of the building I felt like, you know, people would come up to me and say, "I am 'Black in America' you need to tell my story."  Even my mother [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] said, "Oh, so no Afro Cubans in your little documentary? Hm."  I mean it just felt like a lot of pressure.  Even with, ultimately though I felt that the journalism was good, and that was kind of as long as the journalism was good, then I was very proud of it.  If someone had said, "You know your statistic about this was wrong, or you missed the boat on this," you know, that I would be willing to engage in a conversation, "Oh my gosh, we messed up."  But to me the most important thing was, was the quality of the journalism good?  And I think it was--it was really good.  And I think the team really ended up coming together and doing a great job, but it was, it was very unpleasant at times--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --it was really hard.
Story_ID: 652674
Speaker 1: Now, how about--who, did you have a diverse team; did you have to add diversity to your team, or did you have a diverse--?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a particularly diverse team we had a less diverse team when we did 'Latino in America.'  We had a handful of black people, I mean, CNN didn't have that many black people who are in executive positions.  So the executive producer was a black guy who worked out of Atlanta [Georgia], and there were a couple of other people, but we did not have, you know, it was not a super diverse team and 'Latino in America' had no diversity.  I remember the first meeting for 'Latino in America' we're sitting around the table and everyone's is saying, you know, "Latino is them and this, you know we think that they do this and you know we're gonna want to find out this about them."  So I'm the anchor of this doc [documentary], and, "You should know, right, them is the me.  So I need everybody to kind of change their mindset," you know and it was--it was the producer, that guy who was assigned to be the producer came in the first meeting, sat down and told everybody what the stories would be.  "We're going to go to Soledad prison [Correctional Training Facility, Soledad, California] and do--," I'm like, "We're not doing a story of me."  I mean, but it was so typical, right, someone just comes in and has decided like, "I've decided the story of 'Latino in America,'" this white guy, by the way, is this, and I've already reached out and started booking the story and not only--like, what?  I'm like so when I left the morning show ['American Morning'], you know, doing docs when you have another job sometimes you just pop in, you read what you're told to read, you're kind of do this and you do that, you prep for your interviews, but you know, somebody else is kind of running it because you have another job.  But when your docs are your only job, right, so I was like, I--this is not how it's gonna go, right, this is my unit, these are my stories, you're not just gonna come in and tell us what the stories are.  I mean it was mirrored all the time in the news, you know, it just--it got very frustrating.  Anytime you do these stories, like people would say, "Well we think the story is this."  Would you like to reach out to any Asian people, you know, who are the focus of the story and ask them their opinion?  We don't really have any in the newsroom.  Shall we ask some you know Latinos, we have one Spanish speaking producer, one, here in New York City [New York, New York], kind of a city full of Spanish speakers.  So I think our numbers on diversity were very bad, and I think that--yeah I think it actually on air we're improving a little bit.  They were worse if you looked at leadership were terrible, really bad.  And so I think that trickles down.  I think that that's, you know, always a challenge.
Story_ID: 652675
Speaker 1: So when you--which of your series were you most proud of? And you know, because--
Speaker 2: That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'Black in America' built on itself?
Speaker 2: You know I really--I don't know, it's kind of like asking which of your children do you like the best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved 'Gay in America' ['Gay in America: Gary and Tony Have a Baby'] I love 'Gay in America.'  It's a great story and it captured a great doc [documentary].  'Muslim in America' was phenomenal and I think 'Black in America' we had a great opportunity to keep telling good stories and we sort of worked out a formula after a while of how we wanted to do them, it became a little bit easier and then I found my voice a little bit, so I was really proud of most of them.  I mean there's great--you know the thing about a doc is you could spend so much time on it that you really you know if you're not proud of it then why are you bothering to do it.
Story_ID: 652676
Speaker 1: So CNN continued to invest in, in resources into it; or were they--was there tension about the resources?
Speaker 2: No, they were--they--it did well. It did well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So advertising--as long as things were bringing--
Speaker 2: What was really interesting is that advertisers loved it and I think it was a--it was a show that was so critically acclaimed that people knew sort of the quality of the work that they were gonna get.  You know there was never anything that was sort of slapped together about 'Black in America.'  It was just high quality, so, so advertisers absolutely loved it.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  And the one that you did with Michael Eric Dyson and his brother [Everett Dyson], was that--
Speaker 2: That was the first 'Black in America.'
Speaker 1: That was the first 'Black in America.'  But had that, had that come up, that subject of him because you knew him already?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't know that he had a brother in prison.
Speaker 1: So how did that come up?
Speaker 2: Our producer was chatting with him and he said he had a brother in prison.  But I didn't know.  It was news to me.
Speaker 1: I see, I see, because he's such a public figure and I think, you know, I mean that showed it in both families, but the black community is complicated too.
Speaker 2: You know, my theory on this is every community is complicated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every community is complicated and you just do a disservice when you sort of paint with this broad brush of urban poverty, ghetto.   You know, everybody's complicated.  You just--I think sometimes we let other people tell their stories more and we let them be the range of complication.  And we don't say that Britney Spears shaving her head off you know is a standing for all white people doing crazy things.  We say, "Oh, poor woman, wow, she's going through a tough time," you know, but I think that for black people you know when there's a story, of Richard Sherman is a great example, right, it becomes this, "Well, what has he done to black people" Right? His outburst, right, you know, getting the Seahawks [Seattle Seahawks] to the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XLVII].  I think that that's--there's a true double standard.  And part of that is heavily correlated to the lack of diversity within the stories that are done about black people.  There's a study, we talk about this on the tour, 2011 Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Guess the percentage of stories about African American men that are about crime.  Take a guess.
Speaker 1: I would--it's very high.  I mean the percentage--
Speaker 2: Give me a number.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The percentage of all stories that were reported (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, in Pittsburgh, 2011.
Speaker 1: Including whether--or not whether?
Speaker 2: The percentage of stories about African American men--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that are about crime.  About African Americans that are about crime.
Speaker 1: Oh, the percent--okay. Wow, really high. I mean, well, maybe 85 percent.
Speaker 2: Eighty-six, 86 percent.  And guess the percentage of stories in that same market of the five thousand stories that were done on TV and news print.  Percentage of stories about African American men that did not involve sports and did not involve crime.  Of five thousand stories.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Four percent.  Right, so framed around facts and figures you start understanding the depth of an emotional issue can actually be made to be more hefty when you connect research to it, right so that was always the goal.  You take a narrative but under that narrative is statistics and studies and research to, to look at the direction, you know, America's going.  That was kind of our, our formula.
Story_ID: 652677
Speaker 1: And so, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], you, you--I mean after, okay so, you go through the presidential campaign you know and this is a time when America's--you know with the successful, I mean there's the, the campaign coverage--and actually, now see that's interesting, during the campaign coverage you--there're more black faces that come into CNN on the coverage.
Speaker 2: The number one story in the news during the first year, when President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected was the arrest of Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], black professor at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], number two was the Obama administration, number three was the death of Michael Jackson.
Speaker 1: I see (pause).  So why, why then (pause)--what do you think will change things then is what I guess I'm asking because if the, if management, 'cause you're saying management is, is uncomfortable or making decisions or dismissive? Let's put it that way.
Speaker 2: You know I think--I think it takes a really long time, right.  I remember someone said to me, "I think the problem is that you're very militant."  And I said, "If I am your militant black person, you do not know very many black people." And if I am a militant black person, because of the way I do interviews, I'm aggressive in interviews.  Like, you know, and so I think that it takes time.  I think it takes time, I think--I don't think it's something that's going to be solved short term, right because I think it's--in a lot of ways it's a zero sum game, and people have to have--decide what audience they want and I think that--I think NBC's done really interesting things with their audience what they're investing in.  But I think it takes time, I think CNN has brought in a who new team and they're going in very different direction, their people on air are much more diverse, so I think it--I think it absolutely takes time.
Speaker 1: You think they're much more diverse?
Speaker 2: Tons of Latinos have been hired as reporters.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, I see, okay, okay, that is true on that side.  Sorry I was coming from like a big view, okay, I see.
Speaker 2: So I think it will change.  I just don't think that it's--it's a zero sum game.  Only one person who's in charge and they have one person underneath them who's the executive, you know, and then after that, you know, five jobs.  There's not--there's not an unlimited amount of jobs so somebody coming in bumps out somebody else.  I think people are very protective of their fiefdoms, and I don't think people necessarily you know believe the story of diversity that they talk about.  And I don't mean specifically in the places I worked at, I mean across the board.  I think that it's one thing to talk about how much you believe it and then another thing to actually make hires that support that.  I see that all the time.  But I think over time what you're seeing already is that the--the field has changed, the platforms have changed, right, so people--if you want to reach millennials, we'll meet at our morning show.  I was doing videos that would go viral.  Four million people would watch this video.  The next day they didn't come back and watch the show, they knew that it would find them.  If I did another interview that they liked, someone would post it.  I mean we got a lot of buzz, we got great reviews for our show, but you know the market place has completely changed.  It was one of the reasons I decided to start my company, because I thought you could go multiplatform, right.  I can do 'Black in America' docs [documentaries] at a high level and distribute them this way.  I can do all those other projects that I want to do, I can skip all this other stuff I don't want to do, and I can kind of remove myself from this idea of you know that I have to get permission to do things.  I can just assemble a team [at Starfish Media Group] that wants to do it, and I think we've been really successful.
Speaker 1: So, did you work on a distribution deal as part of, of your deal? Oh.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: That's smart. That's very smart.
Story_ID: 652678
Speaker 1: Where are you right now? And, I mean, with what--what do you want, Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], of the present and the future to be?
Speaker 2: I am CEO of a production company [Starfish Media Group] and for me that meant a lot of freedom, time wise.  I left a really grueling schedule and started sort of picking the partners who wanted to do the things that I wanted to do.  Who wanted to support the projects that I want to do.  So with the new team in at CNN, we got a doc [documentary] deal with them and we'll deliver a 'Black in America,' our seventh this year, and some other projects.  I started doing pieces for Al Jazeera [Al Jazeera America] as well and they've got a great sense of the kinds of new stories they want to do on a daily basis.  We did a deal with National Geographic.  We're gonna do a show from space, live from space, because the International Space Station goes around the globe in every ninety minutes, and so we'll be able to do this global event.  I'm just picking projects that I want to do.  We just finished a 'Black in America' tour and bringing a lot of the issues that we did in the documentary series to colleges and performing art centers.  And I think that when you kind of can focus on the issues that you care about and deliver those things to different audiences you know in different platforms, it's really interesting and the nation's more diverse, I mean in a way.  I think sometimes the networks are lagging behind where the world is.  America's on its way to becoming majority, minority, which means certainly a host of things have to be solved.  We're going to be in you know big problems 16 years, the majority of the workforce is going to be of color.  So you better have a (background noise) (pause)--so, so for the future for me is to see can we create a production company that's successful, that can support a large number of people, just doing the projects we want to do.  And I think as technology changes and as platforms shift a lot, I think the answer is yes, I think the answer is yes.
Story_ID: 652679
Speaker 1: You know, you were so identified with the minority voice, is that your intent in the future? The voices of--alternate voices, let me put it that way, not mi- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know I think our production company [Starfish Media Group], our mission is to tell untold stories.  So when we were working on our doc [documentary] about two gay men having a baby ['Gay in America: Gary and Tony Have a Baby'], you know, we just gained a huge audience among gay people, who are like, oh, suddenly someone is telling a story and it's not the stereotypical story about gay marriage.  It's actually kind of a nuanced story about a couple and how they're trying to navigate something that they think they want, and some of the obstacles and some of the opportunities in that.  So I think what we've tried to do is to be a voice of that.  You know we try to be a voice of just stories that fly under the radar, and I think some of those stories are minority stories certainly.  But a lot of those stories are just different perspectives, you know.  What I find when I go talk to kids at school, you know, is that they--like the white kids also have very different stories that just don't get told you know that there's this myth of this monolithic culture.  And everybody wants to be reflected in a story and have nuance and meaning to them.  So I think that's an audience we're able to serve cause it's--it's the majority audience, and I don't mean majority because it's minority, I mean majority because most people feel that they have a great story to tell, and they're not really hearing that story.  That's why they're on YouTube, that's why you know, they're on Instagram, that's why they're on Twitter, you know, they're reporting their own story from their own perspective; and I think we can tell those stories, I think they're interesting to audiences.
Story_ID: 652680
Speaker 1: So you know it's interesting 'cause you're still so young, you know, when you thin- I know you, I know you're a mother of four, you're a responsible member of society and all of that (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, it's funny though, I don't feel young, I feel, I'm almost fifty, so I feel older-ish.  I don't feel like I--I mean I remember turning twenty-six, and I was so happy. You know 'cause when you're twenty-six, no one hits on you anymore, right.  In the work place, they just leave you alone, you just can do your work.  You're not a young PA [production assistant].  So, I'm on my way to fifty.  I'm happy about that.  I love it because I think it allows you to speak your mind, use your voice, I'm financially solvent, I can do whatever I want.  I feel like I can be a role model for these young women that I see at school who say, "Oh, you know I knew I wanted to be a journalist when I saw 'Black in America.'"  I'm like, "Great.  You're now here, don't quit because they're be a million times along the way that your gonna want to quit, a million times."  And like my mom [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien] told me, right, "You can always quit tomorrow, stick it out, you know these jobs are hard to get."  And I think it's true and I think that it's a real responsibility and a real opportunity to be able to be a voice of something.  For me it's not always, you know, people of color, I think it's just people who feel like no one's really telling my side, and I'd like it told with a little nuance.  You know I want people to understand who I am.  I had so many people call me and said, "Will you do my interview?" You know 'cause they know if I do their interview, it's gonna have, it'll be tough, but at least they'll have their side heard and they'll have some kind of complexity to it.  So, I don't feel--I don't feel young certainly, thank god.  I like being older, but I definitely feel like I have a track record and there're certain things I want to do and other things I don't want to do, I have four kids.  I want to spend a lot of time with them, and I'd like to be able to think that I've fought some battles that the next group of young women or people of color coming through can sort of point to what I've done and say, "Look, this is successful, this is doable.  You know there's black in Canada ['Being Black in Canada'], there's black in (unclear) (laughter)."  I was like, "Great, great, fantastic."
Story_ID: 652681
Speaker 1: What was the lowest period of your career and what was the highest point?
Speaker 2: You know I think probably the lowest for me is anytime you're taken off a show.  I was taken off the morning show ['American Morning'] in 2007 and it was tough.  I remember I was on vacation the week I found out and Miles [Miles O'Brien] was doing the show, he was my co-anchor and he was doing it.  Great, phenomenal guy, great co-anchor, great friend, and I felt so badly, like I couldn't be there co-hosting with him because it just sucks to have to be on TV when everybody's reading the paper, that you've just been taken off the show and yet you now have to keep doing the show.  So I think that that's--you know that's tough.  You know, but at the same time, it's in the scheme of stuff that you cover, right, like it's not so bad.  My life is never in danger, I, you know zip around in a town car if I need to and fly around the country to get to the stuff if I have to do, so I never felt like, oh, my god, my life has ended.  It just felt like, okay, what now?  And I've always have been incredibly good at figuring out the what now.  I'm really great at--and I think it's been a real reason for my success.  I'm just very flexible.  You know I believe in, like okay, this didn't work out, now we do this, and we do it at a high level.  And you know, I think when I decided that I really knew before my most recent show ended, I knew that I was going to do a production company [Starfish Media Group].   I was working on this production company for years before I left CNN, and I couldn't really figure out exactly how to do it, but I just knew that I wanted to do the thing--I was just sick of fighting with people about like what they wanted to do and what I wanted.  My thing is to do what I wanted to do and you know hope we could fund it and make some money.  And so kind of the timing was right, but by then, again, it didn't even feel dramatic.  It felt like great--when can I get off this schedule so I can start launching the next thing that I want to do.  And I liked it, I liked the show I did, I like the team I worked with, I liked the opportunities, I felt very grateful.  You know people don't have to give you opportunities and they did.  I always got some great opportunities and I--you know I tried to execute on them so that people would say, we made a right decision, whew, we send her, that was a good call.  And I think 99 times out of a 100, you know it really worked out.  So I'm not a big--I don't live with regret very much.  I feel like I have a lot to do and I don't hold onto things.  I'm one of those people if you were to say, "Oh, I love your shoes," I'd be like, "Oh, here take 'em," you know, like, like, I just don't--I don't hold onto things, so I think being out of the show the first time was really hard because I was an anchor and now I wasn't.  I didn't know what that--but I immediately turned to another gig ['Black in America'], but I ended up being the thing that I think made my career.  You know I think doing--having the heft of documentaries is what really made me a great journalist.  And so when I talk to young people, I tell them right this thing like, "Oh, woe is me," was thank you.  The guy who fired me, Jon Klein [Jonathan Klein], is a friend.  I wrote about him in my book ['Latino in America,' Soledad O'Brien with Rose Marie Arce].  I was like, "You fired me, hired me back to do documentaries, changed the path of my career--," and that has put me in a position where I can run the multimillion dollar production company that's been incredibly successful in the nine months we've been in existence.  And, and so I think I always try to tell people don't you know don't look at it like this (gesture), you have to really think (gesture) kind of where you're going.
Story_ID: 652682
Speaker 1: So what do you think the state of media is?  And I say this because not only have you, you know, been at the top ends of you know the media, as an anchor, but you've had a very national and international platform and in the meantime, the media has changed so dramatically (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what's interesting there's a great story in--Pointer [The Pointer] put out a story today that said, "News organizations fight over video of Justin Bieber peeing out of a window."  I saw that on Twitter.  You know and I always thought like I don't want to be that reporter who's like, "No I need the video of Justin Bieber peeing for my piece tonight."  Like, that's sad.  So I think that said--that on one hand lays out the state of media today but on the other hand, media has changed.  Media has completely changed.  There is phenomenal media.  I'm a correspondent for HBO [Home Box Office] 'Real Sports' ['Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel'].  It is possibly the best show in television.  And I don't say that just 'cause I work there, I think Bryant Gumbel is phenomenal.  The man is so smart it's--I mean when we do the wraps for the show, all the producers sit around like, "All right, he might ask you this, he might ask you that, he might ask you this--," look I got it, I know, I reported the story, I know.  He's phenomenal.  He's a phenomenal journalist.  To be able to work on a show where every day that guy comes in a--you know the bar is this high.  So I think there's some great media.  Netflix is doing some incredibly interesting work, right with no platform that existed ten years ago.  PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], great.  CNN is taking this whole new strategy of doing docs [documentaries].  It'll be interesting to see what the impact of that is.  HLN [Headline News] just announced that they were going to do a social media platform.  They're going to move away from daily news and daily headlines and do shows around social media.  Sounds intriguing.  I don't know if that's going to work or not.  I think there's just so many interesting things happening and when I talk to young people, I'm like you have so many more opportunities than I had when I started twenty-seven years ago, so many more.  There're more places to work, there're more opportunities, you can publish yourself, you can shoot your own stuff, you can go cover a story by throwing your stuff in a backpack and going, we couldn't do that.  None of that when I was starting.  So I think the opportunities are amazing and if you look at one little narrow thing like yes a celebrity driven culture for some news stories, I think you'd be heartily disappointed, but I'll tell you the stories that I'm working on are about social issues of America, you know, whether they're for real sports, Al Jazeera [Al Jazeera America], documentary for CNN on PTSD [post traumatic stress disorder] and warriors coming back from Iraq, doing a doc on stop and frisk for our next 'Black in America' like stuff I get to do?  Seriously hard core.  So I think that there's a lot of opportunity in media.
Story_ID: 652683
Speaker 1: So, I'm asking this, you have three, three or four ethnic strands running through your body, but I'm going to ask (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) More.  My mother's [Estela Marquetti y Medieta O'Brien] side has Italian too.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay. I knew you had--okay. So you have all of this, you are, are a melting pot. And you know your strands, but--I want to ask this from the African American perspective, though, and that is what hopes and concerns do you have about the African American community?
Speaker 2: I think my hopes and concerns are sort of the same thing, right.  I think that education is the next front in civil rights.  It is the whole ball game, because every single thing that we've ever covered runs through that, right.  Your economic ability runs through education, prison runs through education, opportunity runs through education, every single thing runs through this thing that is education that is really a struggle at times, especially for African Americans.  So my hopes are very much racked up with my concerns, which is we have to figure it out, and I think there are a lot of people invested in figuring it out.  As I told you I'm a glass, glass half full kind of gal, always have been.  I'm always amazed any disaster I've covered you know the people are like, "We're here to help."  They drive in with stuff in their car, they open up their homes to thirty-five you know distant relatives to come and stay with them.  They get out their little boats and they put people in their boats and roll them to safety, complete strangers.  I've seen that, every disaster, every disaster.  So I am an incredibly optimistic person. Because I've seen it, people do stuff they don't have to do.  They always do, they always do.  And people are resilient.  I mean Katrina's [Hurricane Katrina] a story, ten years later of tremendous resiliency.  Is it perfect, no, it's much better, long way to go, I think for some communities, but it's much better.  So I'm not a gloom and doom kind of person.  I think people are working very hard to try to figure it out.  And if I get to be part of telling a story about some of those people, some of the successes in some ways that they're failing, well that's my role.
Story_ID: 652684
Speaker 1: So the girls I have in my foundation [Starfish Foundation; PowHERful Foundation], we send twenty-five girls to college now.  Twenty-five girls, we started right after Hurricane Katrina kind of ad hoc, one girl here and there, and then by the time we got to six girls that we were sending to college, we needed an executive director, so I hired an executive director.  Now we have twenty-five girls that we send to college.  And these girls, most of them in poverty, white girls, Latinos, black girls, for no reason at all, applied to college, for no reason at all, don't give up, for no reason at all, they--their mothers have abandoned them in some cases, they have absolutely no money, they have no way that they're ever going to college.  And when I get them, they're applying, they've gotten accepted and they say, "If I just had $6,127.48, I could go."  So we're like, "Okay, then we could pay for you."  These girls are the most ambitious, hopeful for no reason, right?   They've not really seen a ton of opportunity.  So I think if that exists there, and I don't think these girls are an anomaly.  I think there's a zillion girls like that, and I think there's a zillion boys like that, actually.  I think we just figure out how to get resources and match them up and help them get across the finish line.  So, I'm--I am optimistic.  Know a girl who slept on the couches of relatives, her mother abandoned the family and then graduated from high school because she--she would kind of stay with people, a couple of months at a time, she graduated in the top 10 percent of her class and is about to graduate from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] where I sent her.  Now, I'm going to get my degree from Spelman, my honorary degree when she gets her degree.  That's pretty freaking amazing, and guess what, I don't think she's the rare exception.  I think there's a lot of young people like that.  They just need to kind of get a little helping hand.
Speaker 2: Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien], don't you think that the fact that you're investing in them and you are who you are makes difference (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure, absolutely, but let me tell you this, when I need--each of our girls gets two mentors and when I call up someone who I usually don't know, they are a friend of a friend, most recent young woman I took as a mentor for one of our girls is a woman who was a graduate of Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts].  I was looking for a woman who is a lesbian because this girl we're trying to match her with is also a lesbian and she really is--she has a great academic advisor, but I want her to have kind of a personal advisor.  So I called this woman, she does not know me, she's a friend of a friend, and she came and sat in my office and said, "I will do it."  People are so willing to help.  It's not me.  I'm not mentoring twenty-five girls.  I'm you know pulling some strings to get twenty-five girls mentored, but it's not me.  Every single thing I ask people to do--I had Iyanla Vanzant come and speak to--we do a thing called PowHERful, which is a day long summit, where we bring couple of hundred girls in New York City [New York, New York] to come and to learn some of the things that our twenty-five do.  Our twenty-five are kind of our little petri dish and then we expand from that.  Iyanla Vanzant, she's like, "Sure, what day?"  I said and you know, "Iyanla, I love you, I cannot pay you." "I got you, no problem, Soledad.  I remember when you had me on your show."  Iyanla Vanzant came and spoke to 200, 150 girls.  I mean the people always say yes.  And I don't think it's because I'm asking, I think it's because they understand the need, and if someone's going to pull together a bunch of girls who want to make themselves better that they're willing to give up their time.  I really--I really think ten other people could have asked Iyanla, and she would have said the exact same thing, you know, cause that's what she does, right.  And people call me and I go, 'cause that's what I do.  So I, I don't feel hopeless, you know.  I think you feel hopeless when people stop doing that.  I think you could only feel hopeful.
Story_ID: 652685
Speaker 1: I wanna ask, what do want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: You know, I think early on in my career, I wanted my legacy to be that I was a great journalist and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and now, I think of it as much smaller.  I want my children [Sofia O'Brien, Cecilia O'Brien, Charles O'Brien and Jackson O'Brien] to think that I was a good person.  I want them to say, "You know at the end of the day, my mom made some mistakes, but you know she was one of those people who was always trying to make stuff better for people you know." You know, I think that if you can get to that, I don't think it's a macro.  I really honestly do not care.  I learned things about awards when I started winning them.  Usually they came you know six to nine months to a year after you had done the thing, right, so it's kind of weird cause you done it, it didn't really feel very present day.  And then I just--I don't know I thought it would be such a big deal.  I was just like, "Oh, thank you, that's nice."  But the work itself was much more important, like I really liked the work.  And there were some things that I had done that won no awards that I thought were phenomenal.  And I didn't like them less because other things had won awards.  So you know, it's never about that, it's always about the people, the ten people who are closest to me, you know, what did they think.  That was a person that I could rely on, you know, that was a person who spent some time and tried to make a difference in twenty-five girls' lives every year [at the Starfish Foundation; PowHERful Foundation].  And you know she did pretty well.
Story_ID: 652686
Speaker 1: What do you want if, if your husband [Bradley Raymond] and your children [Sofia O'Brien, Cecilia O'Brien, Charles O'Brien and Jackson O'Brien] were looking at this later, what would they, what do you want them to know?
Speaker 2: You know I think my mom did such a good job, I mean, as I told you earlier, she was always about being a good person, and it's funny when I was growing up, I remember going to visit 'The Today Show.'  I think my parents [Estela Marquetti y Mendieta O'Brien and Edward O'Brien] had come to visit 'The Today Show.'  I probably had just started working at NBC [NBC News].  And people would say, "Oh my god, your parents must be so impressed."  I'm like my parents are so not impressed by that.  They literally, they were kind of like, "I'm so glad you have a job and you're not living on our couch.  That's good."  And I think that--I think it was a great way to be raised.  You know, it wasn't about, "Oh, you're a lawyer, oh, you're a doctor."  It was always, "Well what kind of person are you?  Are you a generous person, are you giving back to people?  Are you the kind of person that is getting stuff done for other people?"  I think that generally--that would have impressed the hell out of my parents.  They did not care what you made, they couldn't tell the types of cars apart from other kinds of cars, so what you drove didn't matter to them.  They did not care what kind of house you had, you know.  They were like, "What are you doing for other people?"  And so I think that that's--you know I would like my kids to say, you know my mom worked really hard.  Soledad [HistoryMaker Soledad O'Brien] was trying to tell stories about other people and some of that was to try to help these girls that she's trying to get through school [at the Starfish Foundation; PowHERful Foundation].  And she spent a lot of time trying to be of service to people.  I think that, that would be a good thing for them to take away.
