Story_ID: 363534
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer and Larry Crowe is observing.  Would state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Rogsbert F. Phillips [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips], R-O-G-S-B-E-R-T, F, P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.
Speaker 1: What does the F stand for?
Speaker 2: Frenzel.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: F-R-E-N-Z-E-L.
Speaker 1: Tell me your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: Seven, twelve, forty-eight [July 12, 1948] in Newnan, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: General surgeon, breast specialist.
Speaker 1: And where is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The location is Lithonia, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 10/13/2006 [October 13, 2006].
Story_ID: 363535
Speaker 1: Before we get started I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish type questions. Okay. And they just require short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Seafood.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Background noise) Rome [Italy].
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase.  I really have two favorite phrases, one is from Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], when you learn you teach, when you get you give back, and then other is one by Dr. Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays] who basically said that each and every one of us are here for a purpose, and if we don't find that purpose the world would be less better off for us not having found that purpose.
Story_ID: 363536
Speaker 1: Now we're going to talk about your family, and we're going to start with your mother's side of the family, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name and spell it for me (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Olivia, O-L-I-V-I-A, Louise Bohannon Mitchell [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her whole name.
Speaker 2: O-L-I-V-I-A, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, Bohannon, B-O-H-A-N-N-O-N, Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born, do you know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't tell you her date of birth, her birthdate is February 5, I think it's 1927, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Newnan, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Newnan, where is Newnan in relation to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It's about forty miles outside of Atlanta, south of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you trace any further back in your family tree on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My mother's side, the person that I, is my grandfather [Henry Bohannon].  I don't think, I remember very vaguely, my great-great-grandmother, but very vaguely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember when my grandfather died.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have interaction with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother [Ludine Bohannon] or just your grandmother--or grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, I had a lot of interaction with because she lived with us for a long time after my grandfather passed.
Speaker 1: Did she tell you any stories about her growing up or about her life at all?
Speaker 2: I'm sure she did, let me think.  I think the only one thing that I remember, and it's not my grandmother telling me, it's my mom telling me about my grandmother.  My grandmother had seventeen kids (laughter).  And my mom, you know every year she was pregnant.  And so that's the one thing that I remember, my mom telling me that when, you know, they lived on a farm, and they, anytime as a kid growing up, they got store bought bread, like white bread.  She knew that my grandmother had had another kid because she would end up cooking like biscuits, you know.  So that's the only thing.  But my grandmother really wasn't a big talker, she was a doer.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what were some of the things that she did?
Speaker 2: Oh, she loved cooking.  I mean I can remember her sweet potato pies and everyday was you know my mom and grandmother up breakfast, lunch, dinner, she loved cooking.
Speaker 1: So your mother gave you more information about when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, my mother, I mean, you could imagine, seventeen kids, I mean it's four or five kids are at home at the same time and the other kids, you know, they would move out as they grow older, they would move out, and so a lot of not knowing you know four or five kids who knew each other and then if you're an older group, you didn't know a whole lot about the middle group and if you were the middle group, you didn't know a whole lot about the younger groups, yeah.
Speaker 1: Which was your mom in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's in the middle group.
Speaker 1: Middle group.  Okay. And what type of housing did they live in?
Speaker 2: Lived on a farm.  And you know they worked the farm, you know, picked cotton, you know.
Speaker 1: She give you any stories about picking cotton?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay. Were there any other stories that she shared with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Living on a farm they, you know, raised everything that they used, you know, and one thing my mom doesn't like chicken.  And so the older kids, when my grandparents would take off you know go downtown, one thing they would do is kill a chicken and cook, you know, and they would, my mom didn't eat chicken, so it was like, you know, don't tell, you know, grandpa, you know their dad, that that is what they did, so it was like a secret.  And she would tell me how they would wring the chicken's neck (laughter), but--
Speaker 1: Is that the reason why she wouldn't chicken because they had to kill it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, she never really, you know she never really said why she did not like chicken, but, you know, she never really, you know, didn't eat chicken.
Story_ID: 363537
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your dad?
Speaker 2: I know, not a whole lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me his name?
Speaker 2: Zack, Z-A-C-K, Phillips [Zack Phillips], P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.  I know a lot less about my father's side of the family.  My dad was a self-taught man.  Not much formal education, but always worked for himself.  He was in the construction business and had his own company.  I remember my grandmother on his side and grandfather very well.  My grandmother lived to be like 106 and did mostly domestic work.  My grandfather was a farmer.  Again, not a lot, talker.  You know we spent every summer as a youngster growing up, we spent a couple of weeks on the farm.  And the thing that I remember, I mean, just really didn't talk (laughter).  And one thing, I mean he would do all the cooking.  It was like once we had a meal, I mean, no matter what it was lunch, breakfast, or dinner, we'd have the same thing (laughter) until it ran out.  That's the only thing I remember about him.  I mean, he just really, I mean, you couldn't really connect with him you know.  He made sure that you know we ate, you know, took our baths, get to bed on time, you know, just the basic stuff.  He wasn't really much of a talker.
Speaker 1: They lived in Newnan [Georgia] as well?
Speaker 2: He lived outside of Newnan in Griffin, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother, do you remember her also?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember her very well and she, like I say, she was a domestic worker and we would go to the farm and stay and she worked in the city, so she would take off on late Sunday, and we wouldn't see her until, you know, the following Friday, you know.  So he worked the farm and she you know come to Atlanta [Georgia] and do a lot of domestic work.
Speaker 1: Did they owned the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: They did and I can remember and my mom's [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] family owned their land.  And you know I can't remember what happened to it, but I can remember my mom's family, they sold the farm.  And I'm sure my dad's family did the same because we no longer owned the land.
Speaker 1: Was there any talk of any of your family members being in slavery?
Speaker 2: No, no not really.  The relationships between African Americans and white Americans, really didn't talk about a lot of the bad times.  And my memory of that is more recent with you know my generation.  My dad, well as I said, was a self-taught man and had a viable business and some of the struggles that he had in trying to get contracts and some of the frustrations that he felt, we as a, you know, watching my dad, felt that, but in spite of that you know, he managed to have a very successful business.
Speaker 1: What grade of school did he go to, or did he go to school?
Speaker 2: Back then you know I don't think he went past you know fifth grade.  I mean when I say he was self-taught, he was.  My mother's family really believed in education and my dad's family did not you know.  And so most of my dad's family and his generation did not have any kind of formal education.  Whereas my mom's family you know they did.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what grade did your mother go to in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mom went to the eleventh grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then she got married.
Story_ID: 363538
Speaker 1: Does your mother [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell], did she give you or tell you a story about how she met your dad [Zack Phillips]?
Speaker 2: No, but I do know she ran off and got married (laughter).  I mean like they eloped, I mean it's like and it was kept kind of a secret for a while.  Her dad [Henry Bohannon] really didn't like my dad, you know, so they kept it a secret.
Speaker 1: For how long.
Speaker 2: Until my mom got pregnant with my sister [Hendra Phillips Meadows] you know.  And I can't remember that exact story, but a friend in a conversation told my, my grandfather that my mom had married my dad.
Speaker 1: And he was upset about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 363539
Speaker 1: You have a very unusual name.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us the story about Rogsbert [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips]?
Speaker 2: It's, it's really you know a name that was given to me from, my aunt named me and it's, I guess you would call a family name now, I mean we have a niece named after me.  I don't know how they came up with it you know.  I don't think it was a great-great-grandmother's name you know, at least that's the story that was told to me, but I think my aunt just kind of picked it out of the blue.
Speaker 1: Oh really.  Okay. And your middle name?
Speaker 2: Frenzel.
Speaker 1: And? Same thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, same thing.
Speaker 1: So what is your nickname?
Speaker 2: Everyone calls me Zel, Z-E-L.
Speaker 1: Zel.
Story_ID: 363540
Speaker 1: Of your mother [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] and father [Zack Phillips], whose personality do you have?
Speaker 2: My mom.
Speaker 1: Tell me why.
Speaker 2: I connected more growing up with my mom.  My mom is more a dominant figure in all of our lives, my sisters [Hendra Phillips Meadows and Evelyn Phillips Meadows] and my brother [Zack Phillips, Jr.], and kind of, and again, my mom is also a quiet person, not a lot, not a talker but a doer.  And was the typical mom that you know made sure that we got the things that we needed not everything that we wanted.  And made sure that we were, you know, went to church, clothing, everything, I mean got up, breakfast, when we got home there was always food on the table.  She, you know when people you admire, you lead, you teach by doing or your mentors you watch 'em as their day-to-day activities and how they relate to people in their lives and their values.  I have always admired my mom, she, a very hard working woman who has a quietness about her but a strong you know woman who has a lot of determination, very compassionate, you know.  If you needed her in any way she's always willing to help, not a selfish person.  So a lot of the qualities that you know I see in my mom I want to be like her you know.  My dad, I think the, my dad, it was difficult for him to show his love.  And the things that I remember, my dad passed about a year ago, a little, last year he passed.  The thing that I remember about my dad more than anything else is his determination to succeed in life and he did, you know.  For someone with no education, who had a lot of imagination and a lot of drive to succeed and, and he did it.  So I just kind of admire him.  I can, the thing that I admire both about my parents is that they always extended themselves to anyone that needed them, you know, so they, compassion that they have for the next person or the willingness to give unconditionally, and I think, that's what I admire in both of 'em.
Story_ID: 363541
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your siblings.  How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers, I meant two sisters and a brother.  And my brother and I were very close growing up.  He died about eight years ago and that is a void in my life.  He and I were you know running partners growing up.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names and how they were born?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Hendra [Hendra Phillips Meadows], H-E-N-D-R-A, she was named after my [maternal] grandfather, Henry Bohannon, Evelyn [Evelyn Phillips Meadows], E-V-E-L-Y-N, was named by my dad's sister and then I was born and my brother Zack [Zack Phillips, Jr.] was named after my dad [Zack Phillips].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where you grew up in Newnan [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: I grew up in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Oh, you grew up in Atlanta (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born in Newnan, Georgia, but my parents moved here, I was less than six months old when they moved here, so I grew up in Atlanta
Speaker 1: Where did, where in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: In my early childhood was Southwest, Atlanta and then from about twelve on, well maybe no, I guess eight on, it was in Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia].  And then we moved to the Edgewood [Atlanta, Georgia], Kirkwood [Atlanta, Georgia] area.
Story_ID: 363542
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest, oh, gee whiz.  Earliest, I can remember I was probably six or seven years old, and I can remember activities in school and homework and my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] helping me with my homework you know.  And I remember looking up, we had words that we had to look up the meaning, and I can remember my mom working with me and looking up in the dictionary what this word meant and what that word meant and using it in a sentence.
Speaker 1: Okay so school and, school work is your first memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 363543
Speaker 1: What activities were going on in your household with your brothers [sic. brother, Zack Phillips, Jr.] and sisters [Hendra Phillips Meadows and Evelyn Phillips Meadows]?  You know, what did you as children like to do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As children we had a great imagination.  I mean you know we'd sit at the table and you know all of us you know we, watching T.V. and we'd all say we were movie stars and Lois Lane and Dick, I mean just different things.  We would sit at the table and as we eat you know, we'd just have our conversation you know, I can remember that.
Speaker 1: Did your family always eat dinner together?
Speaker 2: Growing up early on, yeah, the four of us always had breakfast and dinner together.  And you know as families grow and everyone, go their separate ways and their interests I mean, you know, dinnertime maybe you'll get one person at dinner but early on yeah, we would sit at the dinner table.
Speaker 1: So you said you watched television and Lois Lane so y'all watched 'Superman' ['Adventures of Superman'].  What were some of your favorite television programs?
Speaker 2: Lucille Ball ['I Love Lucy'], 'The Red Skelton Show,' you know, well let me think, I think, you know, yeah, Lucille Ball was always one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: Was your mother [Olivia Bohannon Mitchel] a good cook?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mom was a good cook, but she would tell you we're all finicky eaters, I mean, we'd mess over food.
Speaker 1: Did y'all eat chicken (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, we did.  Yes.
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your house?
Speaker 2: We always had festive holidays.  The family unit has always been important, so.  As early as I can remember we all tried to spend you know the holidays together.  And you know my mom and my grandmom [Ludine Bohannon] you know cook, we're always together at holidays.
Speaker 1: Was there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My favorite--I don't think I have ever spent a Christmas outside of the family.  So I've always, you know, that's a big holiday for us.
Speaker 1: Christmas was the biggest holiday?
Speaker 2: Christmas was the biggest holiday.  I spent some Thanksgiving away but most of the holidays we were together, and even today I mean, Easter, Mother's Day, we're always together.  My mom, still, you know prepares meals, even for Mother's Day.  My mom prepares the meal.
Speaker 1: Are there any, besides her preparing the meals, are there any other traditions that y'all carry out, say on Christmas?
Speaker 2: Usually Christmas Eve, we all like to get together.  We used to growing up, you know, like to exchange gifts, now we get together and we'll give the you know, the grandkids their gifts but we always, New Year's Eve we're all, not New Year's Eve, Christmas Eve we're always together.  Our day during Christmas Eve and Christmas, you know, normally people are at my house, you know Christmas Eve now, that's the only dinner I cook all year (laughter).  And we go to another sister's house for breakfast and another sister's house for dinner.  So that you know holiday we're together twenty-four, seven.
Story_ID: 363544
Speaker 1: Going back to your childhood, do you remember the first neighborhood that you moved in in Southwest [Atlanta, Georgia].  Do you remember any of your friends or what was the makeup of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  Our neighborhood was predominantly African American.  And we owned the home that we lived in and it was a duplex, and I could remember the family that rented from us and to this day, I can't remember their names, but they have paths, our paths have crossed.  It was four of us and it was seven of them.  So we had a very active you know childhood.  And I can remember the house, it was on a big hill, and we loved you know skating down the hill and riding our bikes and you know and the woods was not developed as it is now.  And so we spent a lot of time you know playing through the woods, climbing trees, you know, jumping over creeks, I mean, the typical kind of a, you know, adventurous life for you know youngsters these days.
Speaker 1: So you had, your sisters [Hendra Phillips Meadows and Evelyn Phillips Meadows] and yourself liked to climb trees and play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my sisters, it was more my brother [Zack Phillips, Jr.] and I, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: My sisters as a youngster, very early, early, I, you know most of my day was spent with my brother, not with my sisters, and I was tomboy, you know. I mean and very adventurous and loved you know the wild life you know, going out and camping and just exploring you know.
Speaker 1: Can you think of any sounds or smells or sights that you remember as a child.  What would bring back a memory, what type of smell or sound?
Speaker 2: That's tough, let me think.  I don't know if its sound, I think sometimes music back in the day would trigger a little, you know, going down memory lane.  I don't know if there's a smell.  I don't think, you know.
Story_ID: 363545
Speaker 1: So you went to elementary school in Southwest, Atlanta [Georgia], which school did you go to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Herndon Elementary School [A.F. Herndon Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] for a short period of time, and then we moved to the Summerhill [Atlanta, Georgia] area and I want to E. P. John- E. P. Johnson Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia], and that's the elementary school I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Now the Summerhill community is an old community. Do you know about the community at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's an old community. Yes, it's an old community and you know they have an annual celebration and over the last, oh I guess, five or six years we have been you know remodeling homes and it's the area around by the stadium.
Speaker 1: You know any history about Summerhill, anything else about it?
Speaker 2: Growing up it was really interesting because it used to be a fence and you know and it was the predominantly black community on this side and the white community on that side.  And you know sometimes these youngsters, you know how you know we can be blind you know, race, you know, some of the kids would you know come over, white kids would come over, but I don't think we've ever went over to their side, you know to play, but yeah, I can remember you know that fence went all the way down through the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Wow. And so at, in your elementary school your teachers, were they black or white?
Speaker 2: My teachers were African- are black, they were black.  And you know I loved school.  When I think about where I am today, you know.  I think my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] has a lot to do with, but also my teachers, you know, because I was one of these students that loved to please my teachers, I mean I loved to.  If they give you a chapter to read then I'll read two chapters.  They, I mean I was always doing special projects, you know what I mean, any subject, I mean I can remember.  You know I'd just go home and I'd do my homework and then I'd do extras you know and I was just one of these students that always wanted to please my teachers.
Story_ID: 363546
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about elementary school and how you like to read and do extra assignments. Was there a teacher who influenced you in your elementary years?
Speaker 2: One of the teachers that was with me the longest was Mrs. Hughes [ph.]. And she always emphasized, you know, doing the best you can you know, and excellency in whatever you do, you know. And so I think you know I remember you know, her often.
Speaker 1: And you said that you also liked to read. What did you read, what types of books did you like to read?
Speaker 2: Growing up I was into a lot of mystery. I mean, I can't remember any one, you know, author, but I go to the library and just go to the mystery section and just read mysteries, you know. It's really interesting now because I'm not interested in mysteries, you know. But that was the one thing as a youngster, growing up.
Speaker 1: So were you a mischievous child?
Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think I was always, anything new you know, I was always I like. For some reason, I was a kid that, I had a lot of adult friends, you know, people lived in the neighborhood, you know, kids' parents, you know, and I think I had more, just looking back on it, I had more adult friends than most kids have, yeah. I always liked listening to people you know. But no, I don't think I was mischievous you know. I mean, I just liked to have fun. Like I said my, most of the kids that I ran around with, you know, we were all just good decent kids, you know, we were into sports, you know. I need to cough. (Cough) But no, I don't think I was mischievous at all. I just always enjoyed myself as a kid, you know. All the things that kids did, you know, play hide and seek, you know. Like I said I was a tomboy so, and I played marbles you know, tops, spinning tops, jumping ropes, you name it. Like I said, you know, I love climbing trees, so I was a tomboy, you know. I was really good at sports, you know, baseball, horseshoes, you name it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Those were the things you enjoyed doing. So since you were such a good kid, was there room for discipline? Who was the disciplinarian in your household (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be honest with you, or if you even talk to my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell], I don't think there was a need to discipline us. I mean, we knew, we knew how far we could go, and you could holler at me and I'd, you know, get straight. You know, I mean, I can remember very few times that my parents had to discipline us, and that's all four of us. We just tried to do the right thing, and knew how far we could get, what we could get away with, you know. Yeah I would come in, you know, your parents say, come straight home, you know, sometimes you didn't, you know, but you knew what time she was gonna get home and you had best be there. But I tried to do, you know, what was expected of me as a kid. You know, my mom, we had rules and regulations that we had to follow, but I don't think, you know, they had to discipline any, any of us, you know. We were pretty good kids. That's boring, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, that means that your parents did a very well, very good job.
Story_ID: 363547
Speaker 1: Family outings, did you have family outings?
Speaker 2: As I said, my mo- my dad's [Zack Phillips] family--my dad's parents lived, we grew up in Atlanta [Georgia], and so I can remember many, many, you know, weekends, you know, we would just take off and drive to you know, Newnan, Georgia, you know, spend a couple of hours and you know drive back. Family outings, like going to Disney World [Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida], no we really didn't do a lot of that, we really didn't. I don't know if it was because we didn't have the money, but we were, you know, we took very few family vacations growing up. My mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] was really, you know, a workaholic you know, and so was my dad. So there was very few family, you know, planned family vacations.
Speaker 1: Your mother worked outside the home?
Speaker 2: Worked outside the home.
Speaker 1: What did she do?
Speaker 2: She worked in a factory and later as a seamstress.
Speaker 1: Did she make your clothes?
Speaker 2: Yes. She made all three of us, you know, three girls, we'd dress alike, yeah, (laughter) yep.
Speaker 1: What about going to the movies or even just, because of it being segregated South?
Speaker 2: It's been segregated South, and I can remember, you know, going to the movies, but not a whole lot. Most of the family activities was within the home. My dad had a little singing group. He wanted us to have a little singing group, you know. And so we would, he would come home and the four of us, you know, would get up and perform, did mostly gospel singing you know.
Speaker 1: Were you good?
Speaker 2: No (laughter). I'm sure--my brother [Zack Phillips, Jr.] and my sisters [Hendra Phillips Meadows and Evelyn Phillips Meadows], you know, they're good. I mean, I can't carry a tune, but I like singing, you know. But my dad was really good and he tried to make us The Little Four Phillips like The Jackson 5, you know, would have made, he would have been proud if we really pursued music, but no. It was just, you know, something that we did, you know, and we enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Did any, did you play an instrument or anyone in the home play the piano maybe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I played the flute and was--really enjoyed it. Played up until, I stopped playing when I went to med school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York]. The first year in med school I would still play it and I haven't played it since my first year in medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Since you didn't go to the movies very much, I know that during the holidays they had the Pink Pig [Macy's Pink Pig] or, down at Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I never really rode the Pink Pig, you know, never. But most of our entertainment was really within the home you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Home. Okay.
Story_ID: 363548
Speaker 1: After your elementary years, you go to high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and you have already moved to the Kirkwood [Atlanta, Georgia], Edgewood [Atlanta, Georgia] area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Let's see. (Cough) The Kirkwood area, it was a typical African American neighborhood. Upper middle class you know families you know. Nothing, you know, out of the ordinary. It's amazing when we look at the transition of communities now and I think ethnicity, you know, drives neighborhoods in the South more so than anywhere else.
Story_ID: 363549
Speaker 1: So now you're in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and--actually when is the first time you think about being a doctor?
Speaker 2: Gee. To be honest with you, growing up I didn't like hospitals. I mean, I'd get sick literally. And wouldn't, didn't want to go in hospitals. I can remember when certain people in my family got sick, I did not want to go to the hospital. When I went to college that's when I started thinking about it and I was in a pre-med program and kind of, you know, stuck with the program. It was only near the end of the, my training or my education at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] that I started, I got really into research.
Speaker 1: So what, what were you thinking about being when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: You know as a kid growing up, and this is really, really strange because I really and truly didn't think about what you were going to be. Only thing I knew, that it was a given that I was going to college, you know. I mean, some people say, "Are you going to college?" Well, it was just a given that I was going to go to college. And so--and what I was going to do, I guess, you know, I loved math and science, I always loved math and science, so I knew it was gonna, I was going to be in some field.
Story_ID: 363550
Speaker 1: And when I went to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], it was a good time and a difficult time, because University of Georgia was like a small town. And although people say it's a typical college town, there is, you know, segregated, you know, and at that time they had one bus system and it was their system on campus. And it mirrored a lot of the problems that we were having in society, you know. When we got on the bus, you know, if you were African American, you got on the bus, if there was one seat, if you sat in that seat, and somebody was sitting there, they got up, or if you were sitting there by yourself in the seat, and everybody got on the bus, that was the only seat there, no one sat with you. And so the problems of society was, you know, like it was over-emphasized because you were in a fishbowl and you were faced with it day in and day out. Although my college, the majority of my college, not college, my high school was at a predominantly white high school, you went home to your own little safe environment, you know what I mean. And so a lot of the problems that you dealt with, you went home to a common environment you know. At the University of Georgia, you know, coming in as a freshman, for instance, I lived in a dorm with kids that went to high school with me. But those kids in high school, were, "Hi," and all this kind of stuff, but at the University of Georgia, it was like, they didn't know me, you know what I mean. It's just interesting, you know.
Speaker 2: Well how was it that, you, Kirkwood [Atlanta, Georgia] area was a predominantly a black neighborhood, and that school was predominately white (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was going through a transition.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was going through a transition during that--my graduating class was the last predominantly white class that graduated from Murphy High [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 363551
Speaker 1: So in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] you said you were involved in sports?
Speaker 2: In high school I was in the band.
Speaker 1: Oh, in the band.
Speaker 2: Yes. I really, when I say I was involved in sports, I really was involved in, not organized sports, all right, I mean I played tennis. I played tennis in high school, but I was on a tennis team in high school, played basketball, but I'm not on the basketball team. All right. So I played very little organized sports.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you always loved sports?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In high school the teachers were predominantly white.
Speaker 2: In high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any black teachers or African American teachers?
Speaker 2: There were no teachers, there's no black teachers, they were predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Well, was there a white teacher that influenced you in any way?
Speaker 2: The people that come in your life, yes, and there were several, you know. When you--my philosophy in life is that everything is not all bad and everything is not all good. And the good things you embrace and the bad things you deal with it and try not to embellish and try not, you know, you deal with it and get on with your life. And there were several, you know, teachers that supported me and encouraged me, realize my potential.
Speaker 1: Are there any that come to your mind?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my English teacher, Mrs. Foley [Jane Foley]. I mean all of them, Mrs. Foley, Mrs. Hogan [ph.], Mrs. Petty [ph.], she was also my English teacher, Miss Kackier [ph.], she was my English teacher, Mr. Hommand [ph.], he was my math teacher. And so those are people that--and they're just neat you know decent human beings and you knew it. And it was not that I was a black, you know kid in their class, I was a student, and they treated me as a student, you know. And I enjoyed their class. And Mrs. Foley is a teacher that, after I--college, medical school, and she kept in touch with me. I mean I visited her about, oh, seven or eight years ago in one of the homes that she was living in, you know. And when I opened my practice, you know, had a reception, you know, Miss Foley brings my high school album to the, my reception, my open house, you know what I mean. So we kept in touch. I've gone to high school reunion, Mrs. Petty, you know, kept in touch with her. So, yeah, I mean, high school was not all bad, you know.
Speaker 1: What about the students, particularly the white students?
Speaker 2: The students like I say, you know, they're always in a closed environment, and people get to know you and they accept you, you know. And so I had friends, you know, white students who were, throughout high school we were friends, and I think, if I meet them today, we would be friends. But there are, you know, in school, just like society, the black kids stay with the black kids and the same thing, you know, the white kids more or less migrated and did their thing, you know. And that's the way it is today, predominantly. I think if you look at a lot of the integrated schools, you know, the black kids, you know, do their things and you know Hispanic kids do their thing and white kids do theirs, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any memories about the prom (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The prom, we just had fun. I mean, I remember, you know, the prom, I think, every prom I went to, I went with the same guy, you know, Grady Davis [ph.], you know, we dated throughout high school. And you know we had fun you know.
Speaker 1: Where was the prom?
Speaker 2: The prom, I think our prom was at our school, you know. We didn't have it at the fancy hotels, you know, it was at school.
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] make your prom dress?
Speaker 2: No, we bought, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what year are we in now? We're in about--
Speaker 2: I graduated high school in '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 363552
Speaker 1: So right before you graduate, while you're in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], a lot of tragedy happens, the climate is, Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Civil Rights Movement, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]. Bobby Kennedy passed, died when I was in college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Do you remember when King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: When King was assassinated I was in college. When the president was assassinated I was in high school, and I was in my social studies class, in Mrs. Hogan's [ph.] class when it was announced over the intercom that John Kennedy had passed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kennedy had passed. What happened, do you remember that time, what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I, I remembered crying and, and wanting to know why, why did it happen. And just an awful feeling in my stomach, you know.
Speaker 1: What about in your home, your parents [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell and Zack Phillips], what were their thoughts?
Speaker 2: I really can't remember talking about it with my parents. It was a quietness for several, several days, you know. I don't think anyone understood why because in our mind and in my mind there was so much good things that was happening for you know African American people because of you know Kennedy and we knew, I knew, you know, that he was going to be our president for a while. He had just started, you know, changing things, and so there was just a sadness, you know. And the same thing when, you know, Martin Luther King passed then Jack, no Bobby Kennedy, just a sadness, and I think a feeling of loss to the human race, because these were people who were true leaders who was trying to change the world and had the ability to change the world. And I think in the death of each one of them where we were moving forward, we took two or three steps backwards. And so it was just a sadness, you know.
Story_ID: 363553
Speaker 1: In high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], okay you were getting ready to graduate, but you're the third child?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your sisters have gone on before you and they went to college also?
Speaker 2: My sister went to college, my older sister [Hendra Phillips Meadows] went to college and my second sister [Evelyn Phillips Meadows] went to junior college. And you know we talk about people who you admire, my oldest sister, I admire, you know she, I mean she's just a smart lady, you know, and I admire her a lot. She's more than smart, she's brilliant, you know, and she has the ability to get outside of herself and be very, very creative, and I admire her a lot.
Speaker 1: So she graduated from college and went on to do what?
Speaker 2: She's an educator and an accomplished educator.
Speaker 1: Did you didn't think about becoming an educator?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I love kids and I love teaching. A lot of the activities that I did, you know, in college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], the volunteer work involved, you know kids. I love kids. So yeah. I think when you said what do you, as a kid, did you imagine yourself doing, if you think about the people that, when I said I had a lot of adults in my life, they were all teachers, you know. I can remember as a youngster, you know, the teacher would come back to school a week or two early, (laughter) I would go back too and help them decorate the classroom, all this kind of stuff. So maybe you know I would have been an educator had I not pursued the medical career. But yeah my sister's a big fan of mine. No, I'm a big fan of my sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your sisters, okay.
Story_ID: 363554
Speaker 1: After graduation [from J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], how did you decide what college? Was there someone that directed you, how did you decide what school you were going to go to for your undergrad?
Speaker 2: You know I only applied to one school, that was the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and I was, I think I was smart, not because of you know smart meaning, smart as a decision, because I wanted to go to a state school. My sister [Hendra Phillips Meadows] had gone to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] and it's expensive, you know, going to private colleges, you know, and I decided you know, I was just going to go to a state school. So the University of Georgia offered me money and I--it was easy to decide, you know that's where I'm going. And I'm glad I did, I mean, it was not a very easy transition and it was experience for me, but it's an experience that transformed me and had a major, major impact on my life and my maturity and drive. That's an experience that was good for me.
Speaker 1: So you weren't, well I guess you were a little hesitant because I guess your sister went to an HBU [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, it was safe and comfortable and familiar.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And going to UGA [University of Georgia]--
Speaker 2: You know going to UGA I was kind of really, really naive. I mean that summer, right before we had all the freshmens, you know, we had to go to an orientation session that lasts for a few days, maybe three or four days, and you know, in my classes over three or four thousand students, right. And sprinkled through that four thousand is a couple of blacks. So when you go there, you know, they have a couple of thousand students there and you got me, and it's just me, I mean you know. And so the loneliness, and I don't think people realize that when you're in an environment, and during that time, it was you know people still very much segregated, you know and it's a very lonely time.
Story_ID: 363555
Speaker 1: And I can remember two young ladies from Florida, and my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] had to work and she couldn't stay with me, so she leaves me there, and I'm there by myself, but I remember, and I can't remember their names, but we remained friends throughout college. They were from Florida and they kind of embraced me, and we just had this you know--
Speaker 2: They were African Americans?
Speaker 1: No. I was the only African American there (laughter).
Speaker 2: So since 1962, I know [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault was like the first student that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Charlayne Hunter-Gault and Hamilton Holmes.
Speaker 2: Right. Now, that was back in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '62 [1962]. And we're now in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], and we're still the same, just about?
Speaker 1: It's still the same, just about, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay. And they embraced you and you remained friends throughout college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean it's, yeah throughout. Yeah, we would see them, they were in different programs. You know the university [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] is huge, you know, so you don't, you know, and they stayed in different dorms but you know we would see each other on campus and have you know, we're both going to lunch, we'll have lunch and talk, but that was really an eye-opening when, you know, that experience. And in the whole, there were, when I graduated from college, you know I just said, there was over four thousand kids in our class, we had four blacks to graduate (laughter), right. You know that's the impact of that situation, you know. And the one thing when I say you know that I matured as a person, when, kids can be very, very shallow at times, and when you grow up in a society, you know, as a kid you migrate to people that look like you, that think like you and as a teenager, you know, all of the kids that I called my friends, they were mere image of me, you know, I mean, you know. We thought alike and everything, you know. And so here you go to college and you look around and you're the only African American person there. And so what happens your first day in college, when my parents [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell and Zack Phillips], you know, everybody's going to open day of school, you know, my parents took me to school with all my stuff you take into your room and you got a white roommate, all right. You had a white roommate for a hot two or three seconds, because when she finds out you're black, it's no way she wants, and so all, everybody knows you're in the dorm and everybody knows that this white person says I am not going to room with this black girl, you know. And so when they get--and this is when we have dorm mothers and so somehow they get her another room, and so she comes to me and embarrassed you know, because this person is saying that I am not gonna you know have a roommate that's black. That's you know and so, she comes to me embarrassed and she don't know how to deal with it and she gonna have to tell me. So you think about you know how you would feel in a foreign country and everybody's rejecting you, all right. And so it was you know it was, you know (gesture).
Story_ID: 363556
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the dorm mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, and she handled it, you know, very well in trying to explain it, but you knew that you had been rejected because of your race, no other reason, you know. And that night was, you know, kind of a sad night for me. And the next morning when they came in they had gotten the solution. The solution was to move me into another dorm with a black roommate, all right, in which they did. Now, that didn't solve the problem because, you know, as I said, as we grow up as kids we migrate to people who are like you, all right, in every aspect, in what you do, your interest and all, and so you're a mirror image of each other. Well this young lady, the only thing we had in common was that she was African American. She, in my earlier life, she would have been a person that I would not have gotten to know, but because we were forced together, and she didn't like me because here it was, she thought she was going to have a room by herself and then all at once she has a roommate, so there was some friction there, you know. But that experience and we're, you know, she's one of the best of best friends, you know. Not only that experience and it was not just every person that I started, you know that came into my path from that day on there were people totally different from me, you know, the background and interest, and it turned out you know through the four years, five girls, all of us completely different, in every aspect of our lives, all right, and we became the best of best friends. So through that experience we started, I learned to accept people for who they are, not you know, trying to associate with people who are what I want, you know, or like me, you know. So you start maturing, you know, and that was important to me you know. And when I look back on my experience, that's one, the value of a person, you learn the value of a person, you learn not to prejudge people, you learn not to reject people because of what you think they are, okay. And so, yeah, it turned out to be the best situation for me. And like I said we are friends today, you know. And that was a very, very valuable experience for me. Now did I have to go through all this rejection to learn it, no, I didn't have to, but you know, that's the way it unfold for me. Another thing as far as the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], in all the experience in my education with people who set standards for you know the African Americans, who prejudge us and not support us, when I look at a lot of the African Americans that I met, the University of Georgia or that I met in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] who, white American thought they really and truly did not perform up to their standards and they rejected them or people who I think had the intellectual ability to succeed but for some reason they could not succeed, the environment can embrace you and help you or it can hinder you. A lot of the people who did not graduate from the University of Georgia or cannot, you know, maintain an A or B average in high school, it wasn't because they did not have the ability to do it intellectually, it's just that that environment made it very difficult. We had to deal with other you know social issues, you know, that made it very, very difficult for us to succeed. You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so I have always questioned myself if I had kids, what kind of environment would I send them off to school, would I send them to a predominantly white environment or would I send them to a predominant African American environment, and that's still a big question. As I look at my grandniece and nephews growing up in the environment that they're in and saying you know what problems do they have to deal with during the day, does a human being have to deal with constantly, you know, people telling you that you shouldn't be here or you know you're less than someone else simply because of your race. And people have to realize that that can be very, very devastating to people. And I think you know that some of us survive it, all right, and other people don't. And again, I look at some of the brightest of the brightest people, you know, African American people that was in school with me and they just seem not to be able to, you know, compete at a level that I was. And it wasn't that, you know, again they didn't have that intellectual ability, it's just dealing with all the other problems that came along with being in that environment made it very difficult for them to succeed.
Story_ID: 363557
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the things that happened that might have been a struggle as far as the teachers? Did you ever, was there ever a time where you felt that you maybe didn't get the grade you should have because of your color?
Speaker 2: I think we are in a system that if you make an A, I mean, you get an A you know. In math, you know, you solve the problem they can't argue with it, you know. It gets to be a problem in creative classes like, you know, interpretating [sic. interpreting] English and you know. I can say and I don't, I think when I tell you I really and truly live with the premises or the belief that people will ultimately do the right thing and that's because most of the time in my life people have done the right thing by me. You understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think if you, there have been very, very few times in my life that I think that once given an opportunity that I have, the doors have been remained closed because of my race, but you have to be given the opportunity, and there have been many times that I have not been given the opportunities. And I think there are many times we don't get an opportunity because people know your history and they know that whatever you do you're gonna do well. So when a person gives you one opportunity and you do it well, it has to open up avenues for you to do other things. And so in order to keep you down, they don't give you an opportunity at all. And I firmly believe that there is many instances that certain people don't get an opportunity because of the fear that they will do well, and if they do well they are, you are obligated to open other doors for them, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Right. Can you think of an instance where you didn't get that opportunity?
Speaker 2: I, I think there are many instances. When you are in a, you have to look at the field that I'm in, I'm a double minority, I'm a woman and I'm, you know, African American. And there are many times in my professional life that I think that you're never given an opportunity, because we have a good old boy system, you know. And that good old boy system transcends all. If you have someone that is in your corner and positioning you, you know, you will go, you know, farther. And I think, you know, and I guess people say, well you know, you're doing pretty good you know, and I am, you know. So I cannot, you know, and I won't you know point out instances, but I know that there are many times that you know I would have liked to have been given a chance to do you know something. And I think it's because you don't have that, the support of people who will let you get in that position. You have to have, I mean, everything doesn't happen. You can be as good as you know and you can be the best, but certain things have to happen you know. And I think in my life there has been a lot of things that have happened to help me get me to where I am, and I am grateful for it, all right. Analogies to sports, you know. If you never get an opportunity to show people what you can do, you know. There's a lot of has been because they've never gotten the chance to do it, you know. And I think that's the way it is in life. If you get an opportunity, you make the best of that opportunity. And that's what I've done in my life, you know. Once given an opportunity, I'm going to give you the best of me, all right. But you have in many instances the power to give me the opportunity or not. And that's where you know problems come up. You know you look at corporate structures, you know what I mean, you look at any society, you know, and the people who are in control they have that power to pick and choose. And I am in position you know that I have the power to pick and choose to give a person that opportunity you know. And again once given that opportunity, it's up to me to make the best of it. And that's when you have control over your destiny.
Story_ID: 363558
Speaker 1: At UGA [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] what were some of the things that you did besides just going to school? Was there any social life, I know, fraternities and sororities (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we tried. The sororities, we did not have any African American sororities or fraternities, but we had interest group. And the one, there was two, AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. And the interest group I was in was the AKA. I played in the concert band the four years I was there. And you know there were always, this is a college town, you know what I mean. And so you had different activities you know.
Speaker 1: What about the politics, I mean, the Vietnam War was going on?
Speaker 2: You know I like to tell people that you know I'm kind of apolitical you know. The Vietnam War in a way brought black and white people together you know, because society started saying this is an unfair war, okay, and we want out. And I think that you know was the overall tone. And there were protests, and you know I participated in the protest. But you know I'm not an active political person you know, I mean I'm just not. So things that, when I get out and march or protest that means that it's something that's personal to me and I feel that I need to make a statement. And yeah, we, I marched.
Speaker 1: For the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Against the war (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Against the war.
Speaker 1: The war.
Story_ID: 363559
Speaker 1: Okay is there anything else you want to tell me about your times, any other stories about UGA [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: You know we had panty raids and all that, I mean, it was just, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Panty raids?
Speaker 2: You know college, you know football games, you know. It was a good time, it was a good time. And when I finished the University of Georgia, I decided I needed a break. I, four years of college, and I'm looking back, I'm trying to decide, you know. I mean, I got a college degree in chemistry and what I decided to do is go to Connecticut and do a summer program working with inner city youths. And that was a good experience because it opened other doors for me. And for a short period of time I diverted my interest away from being a, becoming a physician. And I never, after my junior year, I think, I just started thinking you know, I really didn't plan on anything to be honest with you, I just you know kind of wanted to finish college and see what else you know I could do. And my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] had moved to Connecticut at that time and so home was Connecticut. And so that's why I went to Connecticut and enrolled in a summer program, a counselor for inner city youth and worked with them all summer. And through that had an opportunity to work with the local university there, Bridgeport University [University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut]. Started tutoring foreign students in English and then an opportunity to open up for me to tutor students in math and science, and I don't know how the opportunity presented itself, that someone from the university came to me and said you know, "Why don't you enroll in the master's [degree] program?" And that's what I did. I enrolled in the master's program you know and got a stipend and started working on my master's in physical chemistry, in fact, doing a lot of research at that time, and started tutoring and working with a young man who thought being a doctor was the greatest thing on earth, you know, and he said, "You gotta apply to medical schools." And he applied to just about every medical and dental school in the country and he got into dental school. And after a year of working on my master's and doing research, I really and truly enjoyed research, my interest in science kind of rekindled, and decided, maybe I should consider medical school. And decided to apply to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and looked at Ph.D. programs, but at that time they were really letting go a lot of Ph.D., you were over trained. So I decided no, I didn't want to do the Ph.D. program, but I started looking for a job and walked in American Cyanamid [American Cyanamid Company] one Wednesday and I said, "I want to fill out an application," and filled out an application. And the guy, as I was leaving, you know the person in charge, I guess, his secretary, gave him my application. And I'm leaving he called me back in and he interviewed me right there on the spot, and he says, "Well what do you want for a salary?" (Laughter) This was like in '72 [1972], I said, "Ten thousand [dollars]," he said, "Fine." Yeah, shortly after I started working they increased my salary. But you know I guess he thought I was crazy you know, but I started working for American Cyanamid doing special projects, and I really enjoyed the research.
Speaker 1: American Cy-?
Speaker 2: American Cyanamid.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: It's C-Y-N-A-M-I-D [sic.], I think.
Story_ID: 363560
Speaker 1: So you had already gotten your master's [degree] by this time?
Speaker 2: I had gotten my master's [at University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut], I did my thesis and then gotten my master's and looking, I started looking for a job. I applied to medical school and my job came through, all right. And shortly after I started working I get an interview for medical school. Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] said, "No I'm not going to look at you," because I didn't take the MCATs, okay. And I wanted to be admitted without MCATs. And my advisor who had finished from Cornell, he had written them this letter and explaining why they should exempt me on taking the MCATs. And they said, "If she takes the MCATs, or we're not going to consider." Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] looked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did they want to, why did you not want to take the MCAT?
Speaker 2: Because I decided to apply to medical school. I didn't have time, you know. I had to do the MCATs the following year and apply the next year, okay. So I applied. My advisor, "Yeah, let's do it." I said, "Okay, we'll do it," so I did. We applied to Cornell and Columbia. Columbia looked at my application and they called me and sent me this letter and said you know, "We want to interview you." And so I said, "Okay." But this is after I started working [at American Cyanamid Company]. So I interviewed Columbia and the person that interviewed me, you know, it was the best interviewed that I've ever done. I mean hands down we clicked on all cylinders, I mean and when I left, and we spent you know several hours, it was half a day we were just sitting and talking and he said, "You know you'll make an excellent physician." And he says, "I'm going to write you a fantastic recommendation all right." A few days later I get this package, congratulations from Columbia saying you know we're admitting you for our next class.
Story_ID: 363561
Speaker 1: Then it became major, major problem for me you know. Because when I applied to medical school, it was an option, it was an option of two you know. And I had seriously started thinking about it you know whether or not I wanted to do it and then I had gone to my boss, my supervisor at American Cyanamid [American Cyanamid Company] and I had told him that I wanted to do some traveling, I wanted to go overseas to work. And they were saying, "Yeah, we'll support you." American Cyanamid, we had three lady docs as scientists, and I was the only one with a master's [degree] and the boss' wife and another young lady. And so I really, and this company is really like family, I mean, it was just a nice environment. And being a researcher, you know, they give you projects, you do it on your own time, you know. If you finish the project you out of there, you know what I mean. And so I really, really enjoyed it. And so it was a big question you know, do I go to medical school or you know. And this time I'm making good money too and then they telling me you know, whatever you want to do you know, we'll do it. And so it was a company that I saw myself growing old in, okay. So I decided I'm not going to medical school, you know. And so my boss came to me and he says, "What?" I said, "I'm not going." He said, "Before you decide," this is in Greenwich, Connecticut, all right, "before you decide just go down to New York [New York] and talk to them," and so I said, "Okay." So on a Friday I took off, go down to New York and I drive. And although I've gone to New York and you know when you go in just for entertainment, drive down to New York, you don't see all of New York City, right. So Columbia University [New York, New York] is up 169th Street, you know. And you drive down and you try to figure out, now where am I going to park, I mean, I can't see myself living down here, what's going on here. So I go in and talk to the people, and we talk and I say to them, you know I really appreciate the invitation to join your class but I can't come, and they want to know why and it's I don't have any money. Well they had given me some money, but they said, "Okay, you know, go over and talk to the financial people," so they give me more money, you know what I'm saying. Okay so I go back to work and here it is my excuse for not coming you know. So I go back to work Monday and my supervisor said, "Okay Zel [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips] what you going to do?" "I am not going to medical school, I'll be here." He said, "You sure?"  "Nope I'm not going to medical school." All my colleagues, "You sure you're not going?" "Nope, I'm not going," you know. So I was sitting down Tuesday night writing the Columbia University a letter looking at the Knick [New York Knicks] game, writing a letter, typing, you know, you typing. Typing a letter to Columbia saying, you know I appreciate the opportunity, but I'm not coming to Columbia. And I couldn't write that letter, I just could not. So instead I wrote a letter resigning my position. So that's how I ended up in medical school because it was an opportunity that I could not walk away from. I mean and so that's how I ended up in medical school, and that was you know one of the pivoting decisions in my life. And you know I went to medical school and I enjoyed medical school. It gave me an opportunity to further you know grow and mature as a person. But more importantly it really opened up a world where I think, to be able to every, day in and day out, to impact one's life. It's overwhelming, you know, and I don't take for granted being a physician on any level. And my experience in medical school and subsequently meeting patients and interacting with patients. Every patient that I see it confirms to me that I'm doing what I'm supposed to be doing. I thoroughly enjoy my life, I enjoy being a physician. And I just can't think of doing anything else, I really can't.
Story_ID: 363562
Speaker 1: How was the experience at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] different from UGA [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: We had a unique group of students. I mean, number one it's smaller, and we were very, very close knit students across the board, you know. Not only the black students, the white students, you know, we were just a close knit family and I think we were put in a situation you know where your all dealing with the same thing. I mean, you know, its medical school, although I say enjoy it, I mean, it's no picnic, right. You know I tell people when you go to medical school you pay somebody, you know, thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars to tell you what you best do with every minute of the time that you're there. Because the people that go to medical school they have the ability to get out. I mean it's no dummies in medical school, okay, but it's the grind, you know, it's the amount of work, it's really, you just have to fall in line and do what everybody else--in Columbia you know, you were, and I don't know what system they are on now, but I assume that they are on the same. We were on a more or less like a pass-fail honor system, which means that if the class average is 90, 95 [percent] and you get an 85, that's fail, you know what I mean. So you're--everybody, you know, like I said, we're all trying to get the same goal and we're all going through the same thing, it's almost like book camp, all right. So you get that, you kind of connect with one another on a different level. And we had a really close knit class and I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 363563
Speaker 1: So the experience at Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] was just so very different because now everyone had to come together, is that correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Any other experiences or, would you like to say about your experience at Columbia?
Speaker 2: As I say, you know, medical school is tough, you know. But overall experience for me was gratifying and rewarding, and I wouldn't you know exchange it for any experience. There were times that you know I questioned you know if I knew what I was doing. I mean, you know, I don't have a history of you know doctors in the family and sometimes it gets overwhelming, and it did, you know, when we have to pick and choose which career you're going into and you start questioning yourself. Do I really know what I'm doing and, (background noise) that happened.
Story_ID: 363564
Speaker 1: It's now 1977 and you have decided what specialty you would like to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's 1997, 1977.
Speaker 1: It's 1977, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977], and what happens when you go to medical school, near the end of your, before your, beginning your jun- your senior year you decide what you want to go into and you match with the hospital. Well, I went through this anxiety period you know, I initially I was interested in surgery, the dean supported me, thought it was terrific, and then I got cold feet, all right. Do I know what I'm doing?  No. And ultimately what I decided to do is you know to come back home, you know, because when I was seriously interested in surgery all of my programs, I was going to stay in New York [New York]. And so the anxiety was twofold, one, I really and truly wanted to come back home, and once I made that decision to come back home, trying to decide, you know, what specialty to go into was major for me. And realizing at that time there was not a lot of women in surgery, and so I really did not know if I wanted to pursue a career that I was going to be another minority, all right. So I ultimately decided to do is come back home and do a rotating internship, do six months of surgery, six months of medicine, and that's basically what I did, and enjoyed my rotation here. But at the end of the six months I still didn't know what I wanted to do. And when I was doing my surgical rotation, everybody thought I was a surgical resident, and so anyway I was more confused. And so I decided I was going to go back to New York to see what's out there for me. And this was like the end of May and I ran into Priscilla Strong [ph.] who is the first woman to finish from Emory University's [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] program. She was a year ahead of me and she says, "What are you doing, Zel [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips]?" I say, "I don't know." And she says, "Why don't you stay here." So it was that conversation that made me stay here in Atlanta [Georgia]. So I go over and talk with the person who makes up our schedule and give us a contract. Remember I don't have a contract you know, so I go over and said you know, "I don't know what I'm gonna do but I'd like to do year in surgery," you know. Remember I did six months medicine, six months surgery. And so he looked at me and said, "Do you know what you want to do?" I said, "No, I just want to spend another year here and I'd like to do it in the surgery department. I think I want to do emergency medicine," and he said, "Fine you know, you've had a good reputation here and we have no problems." And so they gave me a year contract. The first rotation was thoracic surgery and I wasn't a doing a lot of thoracic surgery as far as you know operating, I was more or less a scut dog, meaning doing all the scut work, make sure everybody is ready for surgery, but it was on that rotation that I committed to surgery. I did not want to commit to surgery because you know when we were in it, I was going through all these interviews and different hospitals, everything they kept saying to me, "Why you want to be in, why you want to do surgery?" And I had this padded answer and then they'd come back, "You know, we had a woman in surgery, you know, and they dropped out." It was always bad, there was bad talk about women and surgery. And I felt, I did that I did not want to be a part of that legacy, you know, go to a program and then drop out. And so that was one of the reasons why I had a hard time committing. But once I committed to surgery, you know, it was a total commitment. And so about, oh three weeks into my thoracic rotation, I went back to the head of residency program and I said to him, "I know what I want to do, and I want to apply for a surgical residency position here. The fact that I had done, not a straight internship in surgery, will that impact on my getting a position?" And you have to remember at this particular time, we had the pyramid system in surgery. The pyramid system is that every ro- every hospital who has a surgical residency program, they would take, for instance, Emory would take twenty-four residents, but only eight would finish the program, so that's the pyramid system that you know you get cut, and if you're cut you know. So I wanted to compete with people who came in you know during the straight surgical rotation and wanted my name in the pool. And once you get to your third year, you, not unless you really screw up, you can't finish the program. And so it was like, you know, to me I'm saying, "Zel, okay, you know, you think you got a good chance," and I felt that I had done a good job in my first year, and I had a lot of you know supporters, and so I said, yeah, I'm a do it. And so that's a door that opened for me, when I was selected, one of the eight to finish the program all right. And so that was when my commitment being a surgeon you know took place, my second year as a resident in the Emory program. And I can say that you know, I'm proud of being a graduate from that program.
Story_ID: 363565
Speaker 1: And so you graduated in?
Speaker 2: Finished the program [general surgery residency at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] in '82 [1982] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-two [1982]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were the second woman?
Speaker 2: I was the second woman to finish that program and the first African American woman to finish.
Speaker 1: Okay. And it appears that you had a lot more support at Emory than any of the other schools, is that, is that true?
Speaker 2: You know when you get smaller, you know, like from a university to a medical school, you get smaller and you get to know people, you know, on a more personal level. And so yeah I had a lot of people to support me.
Speaker 1: Do you think that they could look at the potential and see that you were very good at what you were trying to accomplish?
Speaker 2: It's no question I mean support you know, again once I was given an opportunity, you know, and they saw the quality of my work, not only the quality of my work, the kind of person you know I am. I think, and all the residents, it's just not me, you know. If we look at you know all the residents that come through any program, the heads of those programs or the people who are making the decisions, you know, they know the worth of that individual on you know some level. You know nobody wants to just to be taking someone just to be taking them and not know, A, that they are quality people. And I think the Emory program is a quality program and they want quality people in their program.
Story_ID: 363566
Speaker 1: So now once you finish the program [general surgery residency at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's 1982, and what are your thoughts now?
Speaker 2: My thoughts are you know I wanted to get out and give back to the community. I you know, I look back and I say you know I'm ready for this. And one of, my vision is to open up a surgical practice that is recognized as one of the best and so that's what I set out to do.
Speaker 1: So when did you open your first practice?
Speaker 2: In '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: In '82 [1982]. So you came right out of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right out.
Speaker 1: --getting your surgical degree and started a practice. Now at this point was breast cancer or breast surgery an idea or?
Speaker 2: No. During this time you know breast cancer was not in the media as it is now. And it was not as prevalent as it is now. When I came out I wanted to be a good general surgeon, recognized as a good general surgeon, and I had a lot of my colleagues who trained with me in other subspecialties and also being raised in this community, I had a lot of supporters. So I came out and started working. And I practiced you know step by step, you know, grew into a very prominent you know general surgery practice. Now during this time there was not a lot of women here in Atlanta [Georgia], you know women surgeons. And although I had a lot of support from my male colleagues, male colleagues in general felt comfortable, although they referred me other things, but they just felt really comfortable referring their breast disease to me. Anytime, you know, a patient walked in and they had a breast problem, it was just automatically referred to Dr. Phillips [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips]. So that's how my practice start to transcending into a predominantly breast practice. And seeing that prospect for the future you know I started you know preparing myself and you know going to different conferences, you know, predominantly about breasts. And it just kind of evolved into a breast practice.
Story_ID: 363567
Speaker 1: And so now what year did Dr. Susan Love calls you about the trial study (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is way, way, this is about seven years ago, right. I met Susan Love, she came here [Atlanta, Georgia]. She came here to do a fundraiser for one of the organizations, I'm trying to think what organization it was. I think it may have been the Georgia Breast Coalition [sic. Georgia Breast Cancer Coalition Fund] and there was a reception for her. And we were the only two surgeons in the group, so we kind of migrated and had a lot of conversation, you know, sharing war stories and you know and she wanted to know if I wanted to do some research with her, and I told her I'd love to. And so that's how that partnership came about.
Story_ID: 363568
Speaker 1: But before that then we need to probably step back and talk about your practice grew and it was more about breast cancer, but Sisters By Choice came about before that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When, the, Sisters By Choice came about you know in '89 [1989]. My practice was still you know kind of a general surgery practice, as you know profile, doing about 50 percent breast. And one of the things that my patients, in talking with my patients, the support groups at that time was not something that doctors routinely said, "I want you, you need to go to a support group." And so there was this little interest, emphasis on support groups, and the ones that were out there, when my patient would visit the support groups, they felt that they really weren't getting anything out of it, what they felt they needed, they weren't getting the support that they needed and they were support group, primarily run by patients who felt that they know, knew how to run a support group and they had very little training you know as far as facilitating the group. And so it was just a recurrent theme. In talking with my patients we need to do a support group. And there was three patients of mine who, two have passed, one just recently passed and one is a twenty year breast cancer survivor, who kept saying, "Dr. Phillips [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips], you gotta do this, you gotta do this." So I just said, "Okay, let's do it." And we started Sisters By Choice, the support group that primarily wanted to support the family and the woman dealing with breast cancer along with you know educating the public about breast cancer. And so we started you know and for you know fifteen years, you know I funded you know all of the activities that we did. We started you know programs you know, outreach programs for the community, educating you know people about breast cancer, we visited women prisons, any woman organizations, churches, the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], you name it, you know, we would go and do a presentation. We started the three-day weekend that I do now. It evolved from a annual event that I started in '90 [1990] where the first weekend, or the first event was a play, 'It's Just a Girl' [ph.], that is about a one woman's journey dealing with breast cancer, and we did that for several, several years. And then we started adding days to it, you know and so it has grown to a really significant event. And when I look back on the hundreds and thousands of lives that we have touched through that organization, I am very proud of the organization. And it's not you know about Dr. Phillips, it's about all of the you know women who have extended themselves outside of their little journey to help other women you know dealing with the disease but also educate women who are not yet affected to let them know that this is not a death sentence if you're diagnosed with breast cancer.
Story_ID: 363569
Speaker 1: Well one of the things that I learned during one of those weekends was that there were also men--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--who have breast cancer and it was something that I never thought of.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So to bring that to the forefront knowing that it is not only women but men also, and they have a support there also.
Speaker 2: Right, right. You know, as I say, we're really proud of this organization [Sisters By Choice]. The young man that you're talking about and only you know he was diagnosed with breast cancer, but his mama was diagnosed with breast cancer. And you know we'd go out into the community we try and emphasize, you have to know your family history in order to take care of yourself, you have to know, you know, is there any history of breast cancer in my family. And your, and I'm amazed when I interview patients and they'll say I don't know anything about you know, my sister, you know, she had something done, you know, so you really need to open up and talk about you know your family history.
Speaker 1: So we know that the event, just it's huge now. Like you say it started very small but now the fundraising, you have golf tournaments and tennis tournaments and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Have very noted people to come and speak, I remember [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou being--
Speaker 2: Dr. Maya Angelou was here about five years ago and Sinbad, Patti LaBelle. You know, initially, when I started this organization, one of my dear friends and biggest supporter, [HistoryMaker] Jocelyn Dorsey, you know, she tried to get me early on to start doing some fundraising. I said, "No, I'll just use my own money." But as it got bigger and bigger, you know my account just kept saying you know what's your problem here, you know (laughter)? But we have some really, really innovative programs that are costly. And one of them that I want to briefly talk about is you know I have this vision to do a breast clinic on wheels. And the funds that we are raising most of them go to you know the breast clinic on wheels fund where we will go out to the rural areas of Georgia, connected with health departments and primary care physicians bringing, you know, technology, education to their patients. And so I'm really, really excited about this project and our goal is or my goal is to have our first trip come 2007, September '07 [2007], you know, if everything you know works out you know that we will have our first you know bus trip you know that month you know our (unclear), and so I'm really excited about that.
Speaker 1: And one thing I wanted to add is that I know that you also have done it, done the screenings for homeless women as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I started about five years ago. In my, the one thing that, there are different segments of society that we kind of forget about. And I felt that the homeless women living in shelters were a segment of our society that we don't embrace. And I wanted to do something about it. So I started a program with the help of a grant that I got from the Susan G. Komen Foundation [Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation; Susan G. Komen] where I will go you know out to the shelters and you know bring the patient, the women to my office and we will do breast cancer educational seminars along with breast exams, mammograms, sonograms, biopsies, whatever they need. And if they're diagnosed with breast cancer it's our responsibility to make sure that we get funds for them to be treated. This is a program as I said has been going on for five years, and the ladies are very, very appreciative. And at the present time you know the, some of those patients who, you know, when they're in shelters they have you know certain, you know, they don't have insurance or, but they transition into, you know, they population outside of the shelter and they will stay with my practice or there are people who are, year after year, they're still in the shelter and you know when we go back next year and pick them up you know. So we have, you know, we created a history with these ladies and it's very rewarding to be able to help them.
Story_ID: 363570
Speaker 1: I want to ask you a question. Are you frustrated by the fact that there's no cure for cancer yet?
Speaker 2: You know, I am frustrated but I, there is hope, and so that's what keeps us going, you know. We have come a long ways, way as far as our knowledge base about breast cancer. And the thing that frustrates me is not that we haven't found a cure, because for most people who are diagnosed with breast cancer, we do have close to a cure and that's early detection. So it's frustrating for me when I see a woman present with a huge nasty fungating mass in their breast that they have ignored for years and years. That's frustrating, all right. It's frustrating for me when I make an early diagnosis that I know that the chance of cure approaches 100 percent and someone say I'm not going to do anything. That's frustrating to me because this is something that I can do something about, you understand? The cure for breast cancer as the cure for many cancers, I think, is in the future. You know I think there is hope, I mean, when I think about breast cancer, I often say to people it has to be hope because without hope there's disparity and with disparity there's no future, you know. But our future for breast cancer is bright. And if you look at what has happened to the treatment in breast cancer over the past say two decades, or if you look at how we treat breast cancer today as opposed to say two years ago, we are constantly, constantly finding better ways to treat this disease more effective ways and less devastating treatment to our patient with less side effects. So yeah, we're on the right trail, and yeah, I think we are going to find that cure. But those are the things that really, really frustrate me because I can't do anything. I mean, you know you can sit and talk and we can discover all kinds of drugs you know, we can develop new techniques to help you know detect breast cancer at an early stage, but if people don't take advantage of that we haven't done anything. We're still you know behind the eight ball, so those are the things that kind of frustrate me.
Story_ID: 363571
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the innovative ways that early detection plays a part, the trial study, let's talk about that, that you did with Dr. Love?
Speaker 2: One thing that the study that I did with Susan Love was looking at an innovative way to try and detect breast cancer on a cellular level and the procedure was ductal lavage. If you look at the history of how that procedure evolved, we have known you know for years and years that most breast cancer starts within the duct system, and so if we can get at information from the duct system maybe we can detect breast cancer or, at an early stage, or we may be able to identify people who are risk for developing breast cancer. Unfortunately, that procedure is still, I think, it's kind of laying dormant right now. And the reason being is that it is sometimes very difficult to evaluate the information that we get from the ductal lavage in the sense that there is no absolute. When you get an abnormal cell count, it could mean a lot of different things, and you have to be very, very expert in trying to evaluate what information you get. And that procedure got a bad reputation because we had people who were trying to justify doing very, very aggressive surgery when you didn't need to, all right. We need to do more clinical trials with this. Throughout the world there's about two hundred to two hundred and fifty investigators that are still looking at this procedure. And I think this procedure is gonna take off when we can identify what we call markers that detect, that can be detected from the cell derived from the fluid obtained from ductal lavage that shows that that patient has a high risk for developing breast cancer or a marker that says somewhere in this breast this patient has an early cancer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: So that's where people are really looking today trying to get some markers from the duct fluid.
Story_ID: 363572
Speaker 1: Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: Dr. Rogsbert F. Phillips [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips], R-O-G-S-B-E-R-T, Phillips, P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 7/12/48 [July 12, 1948].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Newnan, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: General surgeon, with a specialty in breast surgery.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is 2/24/08 [February 24, 2008].
Story_ID: 363573
Speaker 1: I'd like to go back and talk a little bit about before you became a doctor. And actually before you went to medical school. And you worked at American Cyad--
Speaker 2: American Cyanamid [American Cyanamid Company] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cyanamid.
Speaker 2: --in Stamford, Connecticut. And I worked there for about eight months. It was a transition period for me. But it really gave me a chance to kind of decide you know what I really wanted to do in life in reference to working with people. During that period of time I was basically doing research. I've always loved you know working in the laboratory and that was a period of time I had just finished my master's [degree] program in physical chemistry and had an opportunity to extend the knowledge in physical chemistry in working with American Cyanamid. And basically I was just looking and doing research on new products, evaluating different chemical properties that American Cyanamid was interested in. You know we'd be given a project and you work on your own time and when you complete the project you made a presentation. And again it was an exciting time for me and time that I enjoyed working in the lab and not only working in the lab I owe it to my supervisor, who encouraged me to look at medicine, seriously because after working there for a short period of time, I really enjoyed what I was doing and I saw a future in what I was doing and right before starting working as a physical chemist, I had also applied to medical school. And about four months into working there I got accepted in medical school and there was a big decision to make and I had decided that I was not going to medical school and it was him that encouraged me to look at it and go down to Columbia University [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] and talk to them. And so I owe the decision to enter in medical school on my supervisor who had the foresight to encourage me to look into it.
Speaker 1: So the different products that the company that you were doing research, what types of products?
Speaker 2: There were basically, they were chemical compounds, different types of chemical compounds in trying to look at the physical principles or the characteristics of these compounds to be used in products that they would use there. American Cyanamid is involved in a lot of different, creating different products. And one of the industry that I was looking at was a medical products in using you know sponges that we use now to wash our hands prior to surgery. So we were just looking at different compounds.
Story_ID: 363574
Speaker 1: So you go on to medical school and you do your residency at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, University]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I went to medical school at Columbia University [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York]. And after completing four years there, I wanted to come back home. And I was fortunate that I matched with the program here in Atlanta [Georgia] and came back, did my internship here at Emory. And later entered into their surgical program [general surgery residency] and completed the surgical program here.
Speaker 1: What made you decide to go into surgery?
Speaker 2: It was a hard decision. I went through my internship liking everything that I did, and it was a rotating internship and at the end of that year, I still had no idea what I was going to do, but I knew I liked the follow-up care of patients, but I also liked the immediate gratification of surgery, you know. If you did something and the patient got better or worse, I mean, I liked that. And after finishing my internship, I went to my, the head of our program and said, you know, I still don't know what I want to do, but I knew I wanted to do a year in surgery and had the opportunity to do another year. And he could have easily said, no, you know. But my first month I was doing thoracic surgery and really not doing a whole lot in reference to a lot of surgery, because it was an advanced service. I mean, we had a thoracic surgeon who was doing most of the surgery. And what I was doing is what I called, or what we called in resident the scut work. I mean we make sure the patient are taking care of, they admitted to the hospital and all their lab work, the physical examination and whenever they needed a retractor then they call me to come to the OR [operating room] to retract. But it was doing that rotation that I really you know got a great deal of satisfaction working with surgical patients and made my commitment to surgery.
Speaker 1: Tell me what thoracic surgery is?
Speaker 2: Thoracic surgery is chest surgery, you know, they operate on the chest, the heart then the lungs and the esophagus, you know. So it's chest surgery.
Speaker 1: So you knew you wanted to be a surgeon by this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So general surgery, you learned what?
Speaker 2: General surgery is that part of medicine that, really no specialty, for instance, I said thoracic surgery, that's a specialty, vascular surgery, they deal with just the vascular. But general surgery is everything, total body surgery. We, you know, learn a little bit about orthopedic, neurosurgery, breast surgery, thyroids, you know, it's just a general exposure to disease process that require surgery to take care of that problem as opposed to medicine, pills.
Speaker 1: Now with your background in research and loving the research, how did that, or did that come into play in terms in your (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It really didn't as a resident. Later on when I started my practice. What we do the day in and day in activities of medicine, doctors taking care of patients, how we take care of patients is built on research in a sense that clinical trials defines the best practice in taking care of disease process. So once I entered community practice, I realized that it's important for my patients to enter clinical trials, and got involved in research.
Story_ID: 363575
Speaker 1: Well let's, let's talk about how you enter into private practice or community service as you or community practice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Community practice. Well, when I finished my residency [at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], the one thing that I knew I wanted to do was to take care of patients. I wanted to be what we call a clinician. When we look at medicine, we have doctors who are what we call basically strict clinicians where we go out in the community and practice our craft. And then there is academicians that are basically there are people who are involved in the academics. Now and sometimes you integrated. And I have had the opportunity to integrate, you know, being a good clinician with my academic work, I have clinical faculty positions at both Emory and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I love working with students. I think we as physicians are obligated to teach you know students coming up. But in reference to my research, particularly with my breastwork, over the past twenty years, you know, breast cancer is what I call a constant changing science. How we treat breast cancer, say two years ago is different in how we do today. And how breast cancer has changed has been based on research, you know, in clinical trials, new drugs which we use you know to improve the response to cancer, old drugs which we use in new ways. And we get that information by clinical trials. And so it was important for me to enter my patients in clinical trials. One of the trials that I am most proud of is the trial that we started oh, late in the, I guess, in mid-'90s [1990s], trying to look at Tamoxifen and how it would impact women who are at high risk. And initially in that trial we were having trouble getting African Americans involved, entering in that trial. We as African American people traditionally don't like clinical trials and it was important for us to enter African American women in trial. And you know the Tamoxifen study was a study that we had high risk women take Tamoxifen for five years and look at the overall results that prove that we can decrease your risk for developing breast cancer. Well that important, it's important for all women, but it's equally important to African American women who appear that we are not being diagnosed at, as an early stage as our white American counterpart. And so it was important for me to engage in conversation with my patients in educate them and get them to be involved in the trial. And here in the metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia] area I made a major difference in women, African American women, getting involved in that study.
Story_ID: 363576
Speaker 1: Before we get to that point, let's go back to when you start your practice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So then we can talk about the patients that come and how you get them involved?
Speaker 2: It was you know being an African American woman in a predominantly male specialty. It was, it was not easy, but it was made less of a hardship because of my, the community, the medical community supported me. A lot of the things that I did in starting my practice, it was like a hit or miss, you know, but having said that there were some people who embraced me and said, "Sit down, let me tell you what you need to do," you know, you were doing. And I can remember when I was trying to design my first office, and you know I was going to borrow a whole bunch of money and it was going to be this plush office. And one of my colleagues, older colleagues, I mean, much, much older, had been in practice like forty years, says, "Okay partner, sit down here and let me tell you what you need to do," and I appreciated that, you know. Sometimes, we as young doctors get out and practice and it's easy to sign your name on a loan, but it's hard at paying that loan back, you know. And so I appreciated that. There were people who said, "I'll look out for you," you know, make sure I'm not referring you know general surgeons, we're referring docs, I mean, it's not like you're going to come to me, your doctor sent you to me, and so you have to create relationships. And my practice from day one kind of started because of you know the support of the medical community here. And I feel blessed because, as I said, it's not easy for women to go into a surgical field and establish a good practice and it is doubly hard for an African American woman to do that, and I feel that I've done that. I feel proud of what I have created in my practice and the following that I have here in my medical community.
Speaker 1: But in the beginning, as you said, it was hard for African American female surgeons because it was a male-dominated field, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, how did you forge the relationships with these other, 'cause most of them were male doctors?
Speaker 2: Right. When I was in training, you know, I created good relationships and so people who finished the program [general surgery residency at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] the same time I finished the program knew me in my residency, they knew the kind of service that I delivered and they knew the passion that I had in taking care of patients. And so those, you know, I mean, don't get me wrong, it wasn't like people were knocking down my doors, you know, to refer patients, but it was those you know handful of doctors who knew me, you know, not only as a person, but also as an excellent doctor who trust their patients with me and knew that I would deliver good care. So it was that reputation that I wanted, associated with my name. You've given me the opportunity to take care of your patient, and I'll take excellent care of them. And you don't have to worry about it. And that's the reputation that I have.
Speaker 1: Where was your first office opened?
Speaker 2: My first office was opened on Linden Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]. And again because of the support, it was an older hospital, small hospital, Doctors Memorial Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], and they supported me in coming out in practice and enabled me to establish my practice there and from there I moved to Crawford Long Hospital [Emory Crawford Long Hospital; Emory University Hospital Midtown, Atlanta, Georgia] and then I branched out. I still maintain an office in downtown Atlanta [Georgia], but I developed my second office in the Decatur [Georgia], Lithonia [Georgia] area and that's where I am today.
Story_ID: 363577
Speaker 1: When you first started, when you first opened your office, you were not focusing on the breast surgery.
Speaker 2: I was not focusing on breast surgery and as I said, being an African American female there were certain doctors who just didn't refer patients to me because of that. Not because I didn't take good care of their patients, it was, it was just a good old boy system, you know. But as I, you know, made a statement here in the medical community, and that statement was that I was an excellent doctor taking care of their patients. I mean, there was no question about the level of care, quality of care I gave that patient. You cannot ignore that, I mean, no matter how you want to, and because of that, you know, people start you know giving me more of a chance to take care of their patients, and they were satisfied, the patients were satisfied, and by word of mouth, you know, and referring, patients came to me because, you know, their mother you know, or their father I took care of. But one thing that was unique is that the, my reputation for taking care of breast disease you know was dominated by everything else I took care of. And it got to the point that my referring doctors, no matter what else, you know, walked in their doors for disease process, if it was a breast problem, it was just automatically sent to Dr. Phillips [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips]. And early on you know if I think about how my practice kind of evolved you know into taking care of patients with breast disease you know I look back and you know my first operation as a student with a breast case, you know, the first, you know, as a resident [at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, I was on a breast service, my brief, my advisor in medical school was a breast specialist, all right. And so everything, I mean, I keep saying, you know, breast, breast, breast, I mean, it just kept coming, you know, hitting me right square in the eye, you know. And I enjoy taking care of breast patients. And so it just developed, you know, I was there and people you know were referring me, you know, their breast problems.
Speaker 1: And was it because of the great success you were having with their patients?
Speaker 2: You know if we look at how medicine has evolved for women doctors in general, there has been different aspect of medicine that women naturally excelled in. If you look at pediatrics, okay when women were allowed by the male you know, well, I shouldn't say that, when women was allowed to go to medical school, and if you look at the number one field they went into, it was pediatrics and then if you look at in late '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], you know, the OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] dominated, you know, choices for women. And I think it was just easier for us. I mean, let's face it, it's not easy being in a male dominated field, profession. I mean, no matter, you can go outside medicine, and I think it was just easier for men to accept us in different roles in medicine. When I came out in surgery, there was only a handful of women throughout the United States was into surgery. And most of us you know if you look at the development of our practice, particularly people in my age, breast was just easier for people to you know to refer to us. And then if you look at, women felt more comfortable you know coming to a woman doctor with breast disease. And that's not to say that men are not as compassionate and or not equipped to take care of the disease, I would never say that because even today medicine is still dominated by men, but I think people recognize that when it comes to breast disease, I bring something to the table that a man cannot bring to it, and that's my you know gender, you know. And women today you know will, you know I have a lot of patients who come to me primarily because I am a woman.
Story_ID: 363578
Speaker 1: So, two things, one, you talked about there being very few women surgeons throughout the country, what comes to mind is Nadine Poole Winter [HistoryMaker Nadine P. Winter].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know her?
Speaker 2: I know of her.
Speaker 1: Know of her.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you speak to any of the maybe research or things that she has done in comparison to your own practice?
Speaker 2: Well, I think if I look at my practice and, my practice I think, unique in that it is not, I mean, there's a crossover, you know, if we look at who I serve, you know, I not only serve African American, I serve white American, I serve Asian American, I serve Hispanic American. Granted my practice is predominantly you know about 65 percent African American, you know. There's you know a crossover, okay and that crossover has been because of the reputation that I have primarily in my breast work and the exposure that I have gotten you know in this community for my you know surrounding my breast work. I mean, when I think about the development of my practice, I just feel that you know I am blessed to be doing something that I enjoy thoroughly that it is not just a profession, it has become a way of life for me and I don't begrudge the time and energy that I put into my practice. I'm trying to concentrate in maintaining a balance because I think maintaining a balance in my life makes me a better doctor and a better person for my patients. It hasn't been easy and I don't think it will ever be easy because there will always be opportunities that will not be opened to me because of who I am and that is a black women, you know and I recognize that. That's unfortunately the racism of our society. I used to resent that but I don't anymore. As we look throughout the American history and when we look for the future of America, I think unfortunately and sadly there will be always you know some level of discrimination within the power structure that America is built on, and race will always you know be up front, you know.
Story_ID: 363579
Speaker 1: I know you said that it's not easy, it's probably never going to be easy, but it did get easier. Would you say yes or no (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah. I think as you mature, what you decide, if you can see problems that you can do something about and you pick your battles, all right. You become more of a strategic person in knowing where you want to be and who impacts your life, where you get your support and what's important. And ultimately where you, what you want to do and where you want to be at any particular time. And as you become more successful, you have more control over your destiny. And I don't think you ever have absolute control over it, but I think that's what has happened to my profession, or that's what has happened to me professionally. I recognize the different things that caused me concern and caused me to be anger--angry about, but I also recognize the good things, you know you say has gotten easier. So you dwell on the good things in life, you recognize the bad things. If you can do something about the bad things you do, but you recognize your limitation and you let it go, does that make sense (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It does. At this point where you have a percentage of your patients that are being referred that are non-African American, are you at the point where their doctors, the doctors who are referring them you know have white doctors and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Asian doctors referring their patients to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And I think that recognize- that says a lot for how far we've come in our society as human beings, okay. Judging as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said, you know, not the color of your skin, but the character of the person, the quality of the person, what that person brings to the table.
Story_ID: 363580
Speaker 1: Let's talk more about breast cancer research and other black surgeons around the country and the name Harold Freeman [HistoryMaker Dr. Harold Freeman] comes to mind from Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Speak on that for me.
Speaker 2: I met Dr. Freeman when I was a student at Columbia University [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] my, during rotation. Columbia has a system that we rotate not only at the Columbia Medical Center [Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York], but you know different hospitals within the city and Harlem was one of the hospitals that I rotated and that's where I met Dr. Freeman, and he has become a major figure in cancer research and delivery of healthcare, particularly when it comes to breast. He has done a lot of research and many articles on health disparities and particularly when it comes to breast cancer and delivery of care, how we can bridge the gap between the haves and the have not and still is working within New York City [New York, New York]. Had an opportunity to meet his son [Neale Freeman] recently here in Atlanta [Georgia], who is an OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] doctor.
Story_ID: 363581
Speaker 1: Now you start your practice and just one of the steps that you took was to take counsel from an older physician as far as setting up your office. And so what happens next to get you rolling in your office? You have patients now being referred to you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it gets better over time, so what steps after that counsel did you take to really get your practice rolling?
Speaker 2: I think as you, the kind of work that you do dictated for me how my practice developed and what ancillary services that I was going to provide for my practice. And as I said early on, my practice was leaning toward breast. It was way before you know we had considered breast as a specialty. One of the things that my patients needed was a support system, a support system outside of the family. In the late '80s [1980s], you know, we had reached a recovery, which was primarily American Cancer Organization [sic. American Cancer Society], which was the first breast cancer support group that was developed to help women deal with breast cancer. Most of my patients who connected with that organization appreciated the opportunity to talk with other women who had gone through breast cancer. But really and truly didn't connect. And one of the reasons it didn't connect early on, we just felt it was important for a woman to talk to another woman with breast cancer. It was a very, you know, superficial token, because not only did they needed to connect with a woman with breast cancer, they needed to connect to someone with their same background, with their same problems. And early on we didn't recognize that, you know. We did not recognize how important it was to be positive, you know. Put your patients in a positive environment and a lot of my patients would go to support groups and they would say, you know, they sat there and listened to someone you know talk how bad this disease and it was just everything negative, negative, negative and they didn't want to go back. And they kept saying to me, we need to start a support group, we need to start, and that, it was like, not just once, but over and over again, and it was not like, I just said, okay let's do it, you know. And I can't tell you why I was resistant to doing it, but eventually, and this was over a year or so, you know, I said yeah, okay let's do it. And we started looking at the strategy and how we wanted to set it up. And from day one when we started that support group we had women coming from all over. It is a rarity that I would go to the support group and the room wasn't packed. Women wanted answers, but also women wanted support, education, they wanted knowledge about breast cancer, they wanted positive feedback, you know. And when they came in and they saw a person that say, you know, I'm a seventeen year survivor and you know, I can do it, you can do it. They wanted information on how to survive. Remember you know this is twenty years ago. And the medicine that we have now that fights some of the side effects of chemo [chemotherapy], we didn't have it then. You know and so people having a hard time and particularly in the African American community. You know, it was hard sometimes when you mention chemo, you know, they ran the other way, you know, I'm not going to do it, which impact their survivorship you know. So we had to educate you know women about you know why they had to take you know chemo. I mean everything that you do today impacts your life tomorrow, your future tomorrow, not only with you, but your families. And families had to start understanding you know when you had a little grandmother with breast cancer they decide you know for their older family member that they were too old to be treated. You know, it's not like you're going to die tomorrow, you know. In two years, in three years, you know later, and grandma still got this big huge breast cancer and you know it starts smelling you know, maybe if you had made a better decision, she would not be in that situation. So when I say decisions you know that impacts that patient who's dealing with breast cancer, it impacts everybody in her world. So the support group was developed to not only help women dealing with breast cancer but extend it to their families, okay.
Story_ID: 363582
Speaker 1: And then I put pressure on my patient to go out in the community you know. If someone you know come to you and say, "I had breast cancer, it happened to me and it can happen to you," you know you listen to the patients. They don't you know, I like to think patients you know people, lay people listen to me. But a woman who has gone through breast cancer she has so much power. So we gave them that power you know. So this organization that we gave them the power to name it. It wasn't Doctor Phillips' [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips] name, it was the patients', they decided. They were gonna name it, Sisters By Choice why because they had no choice in getting this disease, but they can join together, they choose to come together to fight the disease in every aspect. And so this group developed you know some twenty years ago and now we have over, we have five chapters here in the metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia] area. I've had many, many opportunities to extend it outside of the United States and I'm not, yeah, outside, we've been to Antigua to develop a support group there, we've been to Republic of Georgia, you know, getting information out, but more importantly, you know, in this community, we have impacted hundreds of thousands of women's lives you know, by simply reaching out you know giving them a helping hand, putting a positive spin on a negative you know disease.
Speaker 2: So this is an intricate part of your practice?
Speaker 1: This is a major part of my practice. Everyone that's diagnosed with breast cancer they are immediately contacted by a patient who has had breast cancer who is a member of the organization Sisters By Choice.
Speaker 2: Who are your staff people who, maybe some started with you or helped you build your business?
Speaker 1: Well, one of the major staff person you know is my sister who has been with me from day one.
Speaker 2: Your sister, what is her name?
Speaker 1: Evelyn [Evelyn Phillips Meadows] (laughter). She has been my office manager since I started and committed herself early on to making me the best doctor's office you know that we could be, but she has been a trouper and we've had good days and bad days, and she's been through them all.
Story_ID: 363583
Speaker 1: And you started your practice, tell me again what year?
Speaker 2: I started my practice in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Now, with seeing patients and doing surgeries, are you doing any research?
Speaker 2: I am involved in clinical trials right now. I, there's different types of research that you do, you know. I am presently trying to get my patients you know involved in as many clinical trials as I can get them involved in, primarily because I believe in clinical trials. Clinical trials define the best way to treat disease. And we as African Americans, we need to get more and more involved in the clinical trials because when we look at how we treat patients, you know, clinical trials that are only, you know, and when you're only involved in one group, you know, predominantly Hispanic or predominantly you know white American, you have to legitimize those you know research projects by including all Americans, and so that's number one. That's why it's so important for African Americans to get involved. You know we say to our counterparts, reasons why you know I don't want to get involved and people say, "Oh, they'll use me as a guinea pig," you know. We are trying to develop best practice for all people. And it is so important for African Americans to get involved in clinical trials.
Speaker 1: So the clinical trials that you're involved in are these meds or?
Speaker 2: They're predominantly meds, medications and also we change how, for instance, one of the trials that we did that prove that we did not, up until fifteen years ago, if a woman was diagnosed with breast cancer, she got a surgery on her breast, and she got surgery in her lymph nodes, and that was called an axillary dissection. Well, we looked at a clinical trials that showed that we did not necessarily have to take all of the lymph nodes. If we did a sentinel node biopsy, which is the first node, that if you're going to have spread to that node, cancer cells, if you take that out and it was negative, and this is for early cancer, you didn't have to do the lymph node dissection. My practice is predominantly, or I say, 85 percent African American. In order for me to help get you know patients enrolled in clinical trials to make a difference as far as the numbers are concerned, I had to go to my African American patients and say, I need you to consider, you know, and some said no and some said yes, you know, why not, you know, I want to do anything that I can to impact this disease.
Story_ID: 363584
Speaker 1: We're talking about the clinical trials and how--
Speaker 2: Right. And you know the information that we can get from clinical trials impact diseases. I'm involved in another clinical trial where you know when we do biopsy, if you came in with that lump in your breast, or if you have an abnormal mammogram and you could not feel it but it was seen on mammogram, what we do is a stereotactic breast biopsy which means that we would go in you know with x-rays and biopsy this abnormality. And if the abnormality had a pathological diagnosis that put you in a high risk group for developing breast cancer then we had to take you to surgery and do a bigger biopsy. Well, I'm involved in a research now where we're trying to look at the pathology that we have when we do a needle core biopsy [core needle biopsy] versus the pathology that we have when we take you back, whether or not we need to take you back. Now I changed the kind of machine that I use, and instead of when I take a needle biopsy, I take a bigger bite, I take it all in one section, as opposed to taking it in one little sections. So the pathologists can look at the margins. So when I do my biopsy, I take it out in total and then we look at the margins and then we take it to surgery for this same high risk pathology report that said you are in a high risk group. We're trying to see whether or not when we take the, take you to surgery whether or not we find any more disease or higher disease. For instance, sometimes we'll find cancer, sometimes we'll find more disease of the same that we find in the biopsy and sometimes we won't find any disease. So if we don't find any disease then when I take out the pathology, when I take out the specimen, when I do my biopsy, and take it out totally, you know, we will eventually not have to take you back to surgery if it pans out that I was able to take out all of the specimen when I did my needle biopsy because it was an intact biopsy as opposed to a lot of little cores, you understand what I'm saying. See that's another project that I'm involved. You know, as we continue to redefine how we treat breast cancer and when breast cancer increases, when we are diagnosing more and more early breast cancer, we are trying to find ways to decrease the amount of surgery that we have to do and a lot of the trials and research projects that I'm getting involved in now relates to minimizing the amount of surgery that we have to do.
Story_ID: 363585
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about how over the years at one point, the starting point a woman had breast cancer automatically your breast had to come off. And now you know, there are different types of surgeries or they are minimizing the type of how much you have to take off. Talk to me about what they are and how that works (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well if we look at you know in the early '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] you know, a woman that was diagnosed with breast cancer, she got what we call a Halsted mastectomy [radical mastectomy], and it was a very radical mastectomy. We not only took out the breast, took out all of the chest wall muscles and the lymph node, because the feeling at that time was that breast was a localized disease. In order to cure it you had to get you know all of it out, and the bigger the operation it increases your chance to being cured. But what we realized is that it was a very debilitating operation, had no impact on survivorship. In '60 [1960] to about '70 [1970] realizing that, we started limiting the amount of muscles that we took, you know, the pectoralis major and minor muscle we took, but we still took all of the breast and the lymph nodes. The Europeans have always been a little ahead of us, and it was a European surgeon, an Italian surgeon, Dr. Veronesi [Umberto Veronesi] who recognized that when we took out all of the breast, a lot of times, particularly for early cancer, the cancer was limited to that area, one area, you know not all of the breast, and he convinced you know, the Italian medical you know community to do a clinical trial looking at breast mastectomy versus lumpectomy. And with the lumpectomy, he added radiation treatment. So it's mastectomy plus lumpectomy and radiation treatment. And what he found was that the overall cure rate was the same. And we duplicated that clinical trial here in the United States. So in the late, I guess, mid-'80s [1980s] we, breast surgeons, started looking at that as an option. And initially a lot of opposition, particularly from older docs [doctors] who felt that we were compromising the cure of our patients, but if we look at all the data retrospectively it's held up. So today for early cancer, small cancers limited to one area of the breast, we offer the patient a breast conservation, which is conserving her breast versus a mastectomy. And it's really interesting that about 60 percent of women who can conserve their breast will conserve their breast, about 40 percent still opt for a mastectomy, and that's basically because they don't want radiation, the fear of the tumor coming back. And sometimes it's because of the distance, sometimes you know people that live way you know in small rural areas, they can't come back and forth, back and forth for radiation treatment every day, which is now the standard is six weeks. Although in the next two to five years, I'm sure that's going to be decreased because we have another clinical trial looking at radiation for patients, and a lot of my patients are entering into the trial where we're looking at localized radiation in that spot where we do radiation over one week as opposed to six weeks. And so there's a lot that's changing. When I say breast cancer is an evolving science that's because we are constantly trying to develop new ways to treat this disease in ways that are less invasive for our patients.
Story_ID: 363586
Speaker 1: Is the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] involved in any research now regarding breast cancer?
Speaker 2: The CDC is more or less you know an epidemiology resource, I mean, you know, that's what we keep our data and they are extremely important in educating you know patients, and they have different divisions you know but--
Speaker 1: Well thinking about different issues, do you think that the issue of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] has taken away from the breast cancer--
Speaker 2: I think the amount of research today that's going, monies that's going into AIDS, I mean, into breast cancer I think if you look back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], when you know aids you know people were going to, our government saying we need more monies for research, research, research for aids, well breast cancer jumped on that bandwagon, so we owe you know the advocate people whose fighting for monies for AIDS you know and that time we all, I mean, if you look back, I mean, we weren't you know, going to our government and saying you know, demanding you know funding for different disease process, and I think AIDS was the first, you know, first disease that started you know going to the government and not only to the government, eventually you know to the community and said we need funds to help fight this disease you know. And now the funding for research or breast cancer, you know, is significant. I mean it was only in the early '80s [1980s] that we declare a war on breast cancer demanding funding, and you know like advocacy groups like Why Me and Susan G. Komen foundation [Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation; Susan G. Komen] and I like to think Sisters By Choice (laughter) started you know raising funds for more research, more research the breast coalition develop. I mean, it was, you know, that outcry came from you know public awareness and it appeared you know in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] that the incidence of breast cancer was continuing to increase, not only in the African American community, but you know in the community at large. I mean if we look at how breast cancer became a major issue in our society, I mean, it used to be in the closet. I mean I cannot think growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] you know ever, seriously, ever hearing you know someone saying I got breast cancer. It was never a conversation at the dinner table. It was never, you know, you flick on your T.V. and this breast cancer just hit you in the air or just pick up a magazine. I mean that was not the environment that I grew up in and I don't think I lived in a closed environment, I mean, it was just never as prevalent. But it was only in my early twenties and I think that was right after, I mean, you're the same age when Happy Rockefeller [Margaretta Fitler Murphy Rockefeller] was diagnosed with breast cancer and then Miss Ford [Betty Ford]. And then people started you know realizing and we thanked the media, because when Miss Ford you know was diagnosed with breast cancer, the world witnessed how devastating this disease could be because she was a very you know vibrant, positive woman, and this disease almost destroyed her, and we owe the media you know for that. But right after that I think people were willing to come out and say I have breast cancer. And the more that came out, I mean, it was almost like you know we're saying is this an epidemic going on. And it was because of that that we got congress involved in increasing the allocation for monies you know for research.
Story_ID: 363587
Speaker 1: So Sisters By Choice started as a small group. Who funds Sisters By Choice?
Speaker 2: Sisters By Choice is, initially it was funded by me, you know, up until the last two years, it was funded by me and donated, donations that were received, but primarily you know it was funded by me. Over the past five years, you know we have started doing fundraisers. And over the last two years, I'm glad to say that we have been able to, I have been able to really just like anyone else just make a donation and not you know try and run it all myself financially. But we do a lot of fundraiser, we have a major capital plan that I want to see happen. And we're hoping to kick it off in January 2009. And one of my dreams is to develop a breast clinic on wheels that will travel through the rural areas of Georgia. I see a lot of patients from you know south Georgia. These are women that are diagnosed with advanced disease. If you look at what we have proven you know over and over again over the last let's say twenty years we've been on a major campaign to get people out to do their annual mammograms because we know that mammograms saves lives, mammograms help us to diagnose breast cancer at an early disease. And we have improved the overall treatment. But if you look at the number of women that continues to die of breast cancer, there's that number stays constantly and every year you know I see so many women with advanced disease, and when I say advanced disease, these are people who come with you know their breast completely replaced by breast cancer. Those people we're not reaching, you know, for education, for culture reason, you know, lack of insurance, for a number reason we're not reaching, but we have to reach them, you know. And what this bus or this van will do, it will be not only a mammogram van, it will be a clinic and breast clinic on wheels that will go to the you know areas of Georgia that do not have resources, that do not have you know, have a large population of patients who don't have insurance, we want to serve those people. And that's what you know Sisters By Choice is dedicated to accomplishing over, hopefully, a short period of time.
Speaker 1: Well that's a major fee. What type of budget are you talking about?
Speaker 2: That's a $2.5 million budget. And we are hoping to get some funding from, you know, different foundations. Hopefully, once we're up and running get some funding from the state, because we will be taking care of indigent, you know, people, people with no insurance. I mean, when we talk about our healthcare situation and people saying that we need to change the healthcare system, you know, my thing is there's nothing wrong with our healthcare system, we need to, as changing the structure of what we have, but what we need to do is look at accessibility, you know. I (pause) I think that we need to improve, you know when I say people in rural Georgia you know. Sometimes they have money, you know, they have resources, no sometimes they have insurance but they don't have resources, all right, sometimes they have insurance and they don't have education, you know, sometimes they have no resources, no insurance, all right. But we in America we have always taken care of patients with no insurance. I mean, you know, is there a better system, yeah we can create a better system, but overhauling our medical system the way you know a lot of our presidential candidates wants to do, universal healthcare. Universal healthcare is going to ruin our medical profession.
Story_ID: 363588
Speaker 1: You were speaking about universal health insurance, some of the candidates are talking about, what's your take on it?
Speaker 2: You know universal healthcare, if we look at countries outside the United States that have universal healthcare, it doesn't work. And when we talk about millions and millions of patients or millions and millions of people who do not have healthcare and you know we assume that a lot of patient, people who do not have healthcare don't have money that's not affordable. I can tell you the patients that I see in my practice, some people elect not to have it. It's not an issue of affordability, they just elect not to have it. I don't know how many people are out there like that, but I don't think my practice is unique from any other practice. I think there are people in our, segment of our communities that absolutely cannot afford healthcare, and I think, yeah, they should, we have to create a system to take care of them. But healthcare in this country, the quality of healthcare if we go to universal healthcare, we will be destroyed, and that's what I'm concerned, you know, the quality of healthcare. We need to look at the delivery of health, we need to look at the cost of healthcare, not just the insurance cost. I'm talking about how much, you know, when the patient goes to the hospital, the cost of that, I mean, you know, we need to look at a lot of issues, you know. But it's not, universal healthcare is not the answer, it's absolutely not the answer. And it will really destroy you know our healthcare system. There will be less incentive for doctors to go into medicine, because the ones, like myself, we will be abused, you know, I mean, we will be abused, okay. The quality of healthcare is going to be--we will set up a system that will end up with mediocre medical care and it will be again the haves against the have not. The ones that have medioc- have universal healthcare it will be a mediocrity as far as you know delivery of healthcare and the quality of healthcare, and the people who can afford to go elsewhere just like people you know, in Europe coming here because they afford to come here and pay for medical care, you know. That's what going to happen, you know, it's going to destroy the quality of our healthcare system. Yeah, I don't think we have a perfect system, but you don't need to overhaul it, you know, completely. We need to change some of the things, and I think looking at health disparity, it's going to be extremely important and how we can decrease, you know, the number of people that live in--I mean, our health issues are surrounded by a lot of other issues in society, and we need to recognize that and correct those problems, poverty, you know. Why you know we have so many people living in poverty here in the United States that is abundantly in wealth, you know what I mean. I mean we need to look at a lot of other things except just saying we're going to give everybody universal healthcare, you know.
Speaker 1: What would you change, you said just a few things need to be adjusted to the system that we already have, what would you change to make it better?
Speaker 2: Does, when I can go to the corner store an get a bottle of Tylenol that will cost me, what less than five dollars, why would I go in the hospital and I say a Tylenol and I have to pay you know a hundred and fifty dollars for a Tylenol, you understand. There's some things that we need to look at you know. But universal healthcare is not the issue you know. What I'm afraid, that the profession of medicine is not going to be as attractive to our bright young students. And they're going to start choosing alternative careers. And we have to find, we as doctors, we have to find some way to encourage you know, our bright young students to consider medicine you know. I'm concerned when I need Medicare you know that nobody's going to be taking Medicare you know. There's a lot of things that we need to look at, but again, it's easy changing and getting yourself into trouble and its hard getting out, and that's the way it's going to be with universal healthcare.
Story_ID: 363589
Speaker 1: I want to step back, back into talking about breast cancer and surgery and preventive measures. There is a surgery that is now being performed as a preventive way of not, getting breast cancer if you know it's in your family, is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, you're speaking of prophylactic mastectomies. A lot of our women are choosing to remove their breast if they are in a extremely high risk for developing breast cancer. Women for instance who carry the gene that predisposes them to develop breast cancer in the order of something like 85 to 90 percent in their lifetime. If you carry the gene that's your risk for developing breast cancer in your lifetime, and it's not just one breast, it's both breast. If you carry the gene, you have different options, one option is to increase surveillance and hope that if you get it you know be detected at an early stage and you know, you'll be cured. The other is to go on Tamoxifen again that would decrease your risk for developing breast cancer and the other is to do prophylactic mastectomy. More and more women are opting to do prophylactic mastectomy. It is devastating when a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer. And a lot of these women, their option, their utilizing their option for prophylactic mastectomy, they're seeing a loved one, their mother or their sister, you know die with breast cancer. And when you tell a young woman you are carrying the gene and your risk for developing breast cancer is your lifetime is upward to 85 percent, that's extremely high. The other thing that's concerning is that when you carry the gene, you're not only at risk for breast cancer, you're also at risk for ovarian cancer. Unlike breast cancer we do not have a good screening tool for ovarian cancer. And most people who are diagnosed with ovarian cancer they die. So not only you're carrying the gene, we recommend you prophylactically to do something to address your risk for developing ovarian cancer. Other people who consider removing their breast, a young women who's had one cancer, they don't want to deal with cancer again. More and more younger women, women thirty-five and younger are you know again utilizing you know their option to take one breast, you want the opposite breast removed. So prophylactic mastectomy in today's society does bring value to a woman's life, a woman who is devastated by just the thought of having to deal with breast cancer.
Speaker 1: So what is the process that they have to go through to get to that point?
Speaker 2: When a woman comes into the office, we assess what her risk is for developing breast cancer. And that risk increases if they've had multiple family members with breast cancer. Multiple family members at a young age with breast cancer, they've had a brother with breast cancer. It increases if they've had multiple breast biopsies. And as I said, if you know, they carry the gene. So a conversation is you know to assess their risk for developing breast cancer. And if they are considered at a high risk for developing breast cancer, you go through what their options are. And after a thorough conversation, what I'd like to do is I have a little DVD you know I kind of give it to my patients and have them look at it and then we have another conversation. They come back and they say they are interested in bilateral mastectomy. I like for them to talk to other women who have undergone bilateral mastectomies because it's easy removing your breast, but you gotta live with that decision. Most often patients are interested in reconstructive surgery, so you want to give them some information as to you know what options they have for reconstructing their breasts. One important thing that I tell my patients, and I think we as breast surgeons need to emphasize is that simply because you are removing your breast, it doesn't decrease your breast to zero, I mean, your risk for developing breast cancer to zero. It decreases your risk about 90 percent, 90 to 95 percent, but you'll never be at zero. So that means that you still need to be followed, you know, do you know go in and have your doctor examine your breast. And you need to be examining your breast, you don't necessarily have to have a mammogram, but you need to also emphasize that to that patient. But a 90 percent risk in your breast, of getting breast cancer, I mean, I think anybody can live with that, I mean.
Story_ID: 363590
Speaker 1: What you're saying is that even after you remove your breast, you still have a 10 percent chance of getting breast cancer?
Speaker 2: You have a 10 percent in getting your breast cancer. Has that ever happened?  Yes, I've seen a couple of patients, I've seen about three patients in my you know career that had their breast removed and subsequently developed you know breast, and when we do breast, removal of the breast tissue, we try to remove all of the breast tissue. There's always, you know, some microscopic disease left. There's always microscopic breast cells there you know. And those cells are at risk for developing breast cancer.
Speaker 1: And the gene that you talk about, tell me about the gene?
Speaker 2: The breaker [breakpoint cluster region protein (BCR)] is a gene that was, in like '80s [1980s], I'm sorry '90s [1990s] and early '90s [1990s], BCR 1 and BCR 2, they were discovered in sequence. It's a gene that's associated with an increase risk of developing breast cancer. And any woman who is considered at increased risk, not just increase risk of breast cancer, and there's a difference, okay. You can be at increased risk for developing breast cancer but not at increased risk for developing hereditary breast cancer. Only about 10 percent of people who develop breast cancer has hereditary breast cancer, okay. 15 percent of people have what we call familiar, meaning that you have a family member diagnosed with breast cancer. Characteristically people who have a history suggestive of hereditary breast cancer they're going to be younger. They're going to be younger when they're diagnosed or they're going to have multiple family members, breast cancer. If you had a mother that was diagnosed with breast cancer and that was your only risk factor and your mother was diagnosed say at sixty that you put you at risk for familiar breast cancer, but not necessarily hereditary breast cancer, and your insurance will not cover for you to do the gene test, okay.
Speaker 1: And is the test very expensive?
Speaker 2: The test runs about three thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: So do you, would you like to see that, something that the insurance companies will begin to pay for?
Speaker 2: Most insurance companies do pay for it if you meet their criteria. The thing that I'd like the insurance company to do, it takes an average of two to three weeks to get someone certified or get their insurance to approve paying for the test. If you have a woman, a young woman who's diagnosed with breast cancer, you don't want them to have to wait three weeks because it takes out another three weeks to run the test, all right. So that's six weeks this person is just sitting around you know waiting for the results. What I'd like to see most insurance companies do if you meet the criteria, their criteria, they turn your referral around within five days or less, that's what I'd like most insurance to do.
Story_ID: 363591
Speaker 1: Is there something else about breast cancer or about your practice that you would like to speak to?
Speaker 2: You know one thing about, you know this thing about breast cancer when we talk about having a society free of this disease you know and when I look at how we have come and what we have learned about breast cancer, you know, there's some patients who present to me and they have early cancer, but they die of the disease, all right. So we don't know everything, we don't know everything about breast cancer, but what we do know, we do know that early breast cancer is highly curable. We do know that annual mammograms, not mammograms every three or four years, we do know that if a woman is doing annual mammograms and if she is unlucky to get breast cancer, it will more than likely be an early stage cancer, all right. So the thing that really and truly bothers me because we have made so much progress in taking care of this disease, we still have forty-five to fifty thousand women in the United States die of this disease. They are not always the women who are uninsured, they're not always, you know, the women who did not you know come forward, all right. Part of that are people who are not getting their mammograms, all right. Do you realize we can wipe out this disease as far as killing people? I mean it's the number two, if you look at the cancer deaths in women, I mean, you know, it's behind lung cancer. We can decrease that dramatically you know if we can just get every American woman who is eligible for mammograms, screening mammograms and do it year, after year, after year. That's something you know that I think I'd like to see us reach a goal, that we will prevent women from dying from breast cancer, and how you prevent it, I mean, the one tool, the one tool that about 40 to 50 percent of women are not doing is doing that annual mammogram. I mean you talk about the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], they can give you that statistics throughout the United States you know less than 60 percent of women, no I say 65 percent of women, about 65 percent of women are getting their annual mammograms as recommended by the American Cancer Society. I mean we can decrease the morbidity the mortality of this disease, you know, within you know five years if women did that, drastically decrease. And in another five years you can decrease the morbidity to almost zero, seriously and I believe that. So that's something that we really and truly need to do. And it's not just the patients, it's the doctors, you know I had a ninety-six year old lady in the office with her breast replaced by breast cancer yesterday. "When was your last mammogram?" "I haven't had a mammogram." "Why?" "Because they told me I'm too old to get one," all right. "When was your last breast examination by a physician?" "I can't remember." Those are things that we can do something about. You know when I say doing something about, we can do something about that.
Story_ID: 363592
Speaker 1: So is it the education?
Speaker 2: It's the education that we have to do, the education, the education, the education. We have to break down a lot of the fears you know, the culture, you know, in some cultures, because we look at how multicultured the United States is. We can't take you know statistics from Asia and say that you know Asian women are lower in the instances of breast cancer, because we look at Asian American women and their risk for breast cancer, after being over here ten, five to ten years approaches American women. So we look at American woman, you know, putting Hispanic American, we just look at women in general, and we need to focus in on that changing their culture in a sense that they will go to the doctor and get a mammogram. You know here in the State of Georgia when I have a patient tell me I didn't get my mammogram because I don't have any insurance, the State of Georgia for years and years has provided mammograms for anyone who does not have insurance. Go to your health department and say I need a mammogram, I don't have any insurance, you'll get it, all right. There are so many programs throughout the State of Georgia providing free mammograms for women who do not have insurance you know. Sisters By Choice, we, every year we actively seek out grants so we can provide free mammograms for women who are uninsured. So that's not an excuse. So you got to get the knowledge out and the knowledge that yeah, if you don't have insurance, you can still get a mammogram, all right. We have to educate our primary care physicians and our OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology], all of that you know. And we have to open up a way, for instance, here in Georgia, if you're diagnosed with breast cancer you know, you get immediate Medicaid, all right. So when I say to you, you know, you understand when I say our healthcare system, universal healthcare, we're taking care of patients, you know, there are ways. Universal healthcare is not going to solve the problem that we have with our healthcare system, it's just going to make it worse, okay. We just need to look at the good things that we have about our healthcare and keep it, and the bad things we need to do better, you know. We need to change things, but we don't have to go do overhaul on healthcare.
Story_ID: 363593
Speaker 1: What age should a woman start getting mammograms?
Speaker 2: The American Cancer Society says base line mammogram at age forty. In my practice I do it at age thirty-five simply because I have, my practice is a group of young women, you know, breast cancer so. The American Cancer's guideline is age forty. These are women who are completely asymptomatic, meaning that they don't have, they're not considered high risk for developing breast cancer, they've never had breast disease, you know like a lump, you know, significant pain or tenderness in the breast, they are completely asymptomatic. Age forty mammogram depending on the information you get from that mammogram, do it every two to three years until age fifty and then once a year. Dr. Phillips' [HistoryMaker Dr. Rogsbert Phillips] recommendation is age thirty-five, these are again, completely asymptomatic people, age thirty-five with a repeat mammogram every two to three years, depending on the information you get from that mammogram, and then at age forty, once a year. I mean, a 100 percent age forty, do a mammogram once a year. If you have a significant family history for breast cancer, if your mother, your father, men get breast cancer, was diagnosed with breast cancer, I start at age thirty or ten years earlier than the affected person who was diagnosed for instance if your mother was thirty-five, I start at age thirty-five, with a cutoff at age twenty-five. If I get a mammogram of someone twenty-five and younger, I have to have a very good reason you know to get the mammogram.
Story_ID: 363594
Speaker 1: In your personal life you have spent many, many years working on your practice, have you ever gotten to the point where you decided you wanted to marry, have children, I know you take care of all of your nieces and nephews?
Speaker 2: I live my life that things happen for a reason and for whatever reason I'm still trying to figure it out that I was not, a person was not put in my path when I was younger. But I am happy and proud to say that I am engaged and will be getting married November the 15th.
Speaker 1: Congratulations. Congratulations. Now when you look back over your life, is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: You know when we go through life there's a lot of lumps and bumps, you know, just life in general. And there are things, each experience you learn from, okay. So the second time you have that same experience if the result was not good, or if you made bad choices, hopefully you're smart or you wise up and you make different choices, all right. So if I could go back with all the knowledge you know that I have, yes, there's a lot I'd change, you know. But I don't think you know we have that luxury. But again I try when I, you know, when I, I go through life, I try and do the best I can. We make decisions and I try to make the best decision that I can given the situation. Do I always make the right decision, no I don't always make the right decision. But again when I have the luxury of doing the same thing, hopefully I've learned and I address something differently and that's about maturity and growing up. That's why you know I think when we're young we sometimes make bad decisions and when we're older, we're hopefully a little wiser and we make different decisions and there are situations that I made as a youngster that had given the same situation I would not make it again.
Story_ID: 363595
Speaker 1: At the beginning of the interview when we asked did you have a favorite phrase, one of them was by Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he said that each one of us have gifts, you know, God gave each and every one of us a gifts and there's a purpose, and there's something that we're supposed to do. And if we don't find that purpose, the world or you know would be less better off for us not having found that purpose.
Speaker 1: Have you found your purpose? Do you feel--
Speaker 2: I feel that I make a difference in people's lives. I think that I have impacted positively, you know, many lives, and I wake up in the morning and I wake up with a smile and I, for the last ten years, when people say how do you do it. You know I wake up, I don't set my alarm clock. And no matter what time I have to get up in the morning, I get up, you know. And I don't say I want to sleep another fifteen minutes, you know I get up and I enjoy my life, you know. My life is surrounded or it is, what makes me happy is when I make someone else happy, you know, no matter what I'm doing you know. So yeah I think I'm doing what I'm supposed to do and I think I've been rewarded having really good positive people put in my pathway. I mean I've had the opportunity to be, to be mentored by just great, great people.
Speaker 1: Who are some of them?
Speaker 2: I think some of the people don't even--I guess as a youngster, first of all my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell], I mean you know she's always you know my hero, my shero, you know because you know is a lady with eleventh grade education that has a great deal to do with the person that I am, I mean the example that she showed you know her kids you know, and always wanted us to have a better life and did whatever she could to support us in whatever, but gave us principles and guides, you know, boundaries to live by. But you know and I don't think--when I say different people that came into my life, I can think of many, many growing up you know. Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] is one and I don't think he knows it. I met him when I was twelve years old, you know, and I've always been involved in civil rights. And we were just going door to door trying to get people to register to vote and you know, it's the first time I met him and watched you know his career and you know, it's just been many others.
Story_ID: 363596
Speaker 1: You were telling me about people who influenced your life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, in growing up in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, you kind of latch onto a lot of people.  I mentioned my mom [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], but you know, I don't know if you remember when Barbara Jordon you know she made her, you know, I mean, she was, you know, these are just positive people that you kind of latched onto and you kind of watch and listen to them when they are in the news.  I remember, and although, and these are people that growing up you really did not have a direct contact with, but through the media, you felt you knew these people and you wanted to be like them.  I remember when, I guess I was thirteen years old when I changed you know went from the predominantly white high school, predominantly black high school, to the predominantly white high school--
Speaker 1: Which was Murphy High School [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Murphy High School, yeah.  And I met Mrs. Coretta Scott King, she brought her kids you know first day for music class and then I had been taken music lessons, I was a flutist and my instructor you know said he wanted to work with the kids.  And here I am and she found out that I was you know starting to a new school.  And here I am this little black girl, you know, and Miss King came over and she spent about forty minutes just talking to me, encouraging me and different things, you know, and that is something that I'll always remember, but I'm sure it was just something that she did and there was no reason for her to remember it, but that was a moment that I remembered you know.  And for her to do that it meant so much to me, to encourage me and little, you know, things that she said to me and during that same summer it was another it was another young lady, Norah McNiven, you know, she was a sociologist who impacted my life and kind of prepared me for you know the new environment that I was going into and you know I think about high school and I always--I was, I guess you'd call me the teacher's pet because I kind of connected with all of my teachers and I owe them a lot to the person that I am because I studied, I think I was, I know I'm bright, but bright people don't necessarily have to be, you know, make good grades, you know what I mean, but I wanted to please my teachers and so when they give you a chapter to read, you know, I'd read two or three chapters, or if we had homework to do and I was always doing special projects, you didn't have to tell me to do anything.  So you know they impacted my life.  I had an opportunity, as a surgeon, to meet the great Dr. LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.] you know in different--I actually got to operate with him, which was you know just fantastic you know.  And these are people who did not directly you know come into my life but they were put in my life, you know what I mean, for a reason you know.  And you know the great Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], I mean, when I met her she just made you want to be a better person, you know what I mean.  You think you're okay you know, but then you meet her, and she instill upon you, you can be better than you are, you know what I mean.  So these are things, I say you know my life has just been kind of blessed because I've had the opportunity for so many people, so many good people to impact my life and that's why you know when you come up, yeah, there's a lot of bad things that happened to me, but you don't dwell on that, you know.  Dwelling on bad things can ruin you as a person, it breaks your spirit, understand.  And that's why you know I choose to focus in on the good things you know.  Some people say, "Oh, you're a little Pollyanna," but no you know that's part of my survivor mechanism and that's part of the person that I am, and I like that part, you know.  I deal with the bad things, but I don't let the bad things define me as a person.
Story_ID: 363597
Speaker 1: Because this tape is going to be available for future generations, and you just told us all of the things about you and how people impacted your life, what would you say to the future generations, what message would you want to send to somebody that's going to see this fifty years from now?
Speaker 2: I think it's so important for you to be your own person.  And in today's society it's hard doing the right thing you know.  No matter what your personal beliefs are you got to do the right thing.  And I think we, when you are looking for a profession, make sure it's something that you enjoy.  Our youngsters these days are so involved in money, you know.  Go to school and they'll say how much money you make you know.  Money doesn't make you happy you know.  Doing something that you enjoy you are most apt to be successful.  So enjoying what you do breeds success and success breeds financial security (laughter).
Story_ID: 363598
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: When it's all said and done I want to be remembered as a person that was compassionate about life that in spite of some of the mistakes I did you know, I think, I want to be remembered by the compassion that I have in my vision for a better world in reference to breast cancer you know.
Story_ID: 363599
Speaker 1: And your legacy, what would like that to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm working on my legacy, I want it to be the mobile clinic, I really and truly do.  When I retire that's what I'm gonna, that's going to be my baby, you know.  I'm gonna, I think that that's my vision and I want to be remembered by developing a way to impact breast cancer in a positive way to the women who lack resources.
Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to thank you very much--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --for sharing your story with us.
Story_ID: 363600
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my family at a family gathering two years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, what was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was a breast cancer awareness two years ago that my family participated.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that I took when I became a member of the American College of Surgeon [American College of Surgeons], my fellowship.  I am a fellowed American College of Surgeon.
Speaker 2: Do you know when it was?
Speaker 1: That was '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Okay, go ahead tell us about this?
Speaker 1: I'm scrubbing right before surgery.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, was this taken for any particular reason? Just--
Speaker 2: Do you know what year it was?
Speaker 1: That was 2- that was 2007.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is my family, my mother [Olivia Bohannon Mitchell] is centered, my oldest sister Hendra [Hendra Phillips Meadows] is on the left. Then there's me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spell her name?
Speaker 1: Hendra, H-E-N-D-R-A.  The next person is myself, my brother Zack [Zack Phillips, Jr.], Z-A-C-K, and my sister, Evelyn [Evelyn Phillips Meadows], E-V-E-L-Y-N.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was 1990, no, 1965, I was a junior in college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 2: This is 2007 and I'm doing a procedure, ductal lavage, it's in the operation room.  Ductal lavage is a new technique to extract cells from the nipple.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: Two thousand eight [2008], I'm sitting at my desk.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], going over a mammogram for a patient.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is 2004 and I can't tell you anything (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  One second. Okay.
Speaker 1: This is 2000, I can't remember what I was doing.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right, next one.
Speaker 1: That's me in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Lord have mercy.
Speaker 2: Second grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduation from Columbia University [New York, New York] it's my family surrounding me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. This is graduation from Columbia medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].  My brother on the left, I'm next to him and my sister Evelyn and my sister Hendra.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 2: This is the last one.
Speaker 1: Yeah. This is, first year, huh?
Speaker 2: It said twenty on it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was in, this is my first year in practice, so I guess it was about '82 [1982].
