Story_ID: 465660
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Huel Davis Perkins [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: Can you spell it for us, can you spell your name out for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, H-U-E-L, Davis, D-A-V-I-S, Perkins, P-E-R-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 27, 1924.  Place of birth, Baton Rouge, Louisiana,
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: University administrator, retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right?
Speaker 2: I retired from Louisiana State University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Louisiana State, okay, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March, you told me 25th?
Speaker 1: Sixth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand--
Speaker 1: Twenty-six, yeah.
Speaker 2: --sixth, 2008 [March 26, 2008].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in Baton Rouge, 1923 79th [Avenue], 1923 79th, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 465661
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up, and management compels me to ask them of everyone.  They only require a brief answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Famous food?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess I'm not hearing well--a favorite what?
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Food?  Yes, um-hm. What is it?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: It's, I guess it would be meatballs and spaghetti.  I love meatballs and spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I do or not--maybe blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite phrase from 'Fountainhead' ['The Fountainhead,' Ayn Rand]: man comes to arm--to earth unarmed except for his mind.  His brain is his only weapon.  That comes from Ayn Rand's 'Fountainhead.'  That's a favorite phrase of mine.
Story_ID: 465662
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your father's [John Perkins, Sr.] side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.  Her full name was Velma, V-E-L-M-A, Valeria, V-A-L-E-R-I-A, Davis [Velma Davis Perkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was born at the end of the last century.  Well I'd say about 1998, something like that.
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898]?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-eight [1898].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And she, she died in 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Oh, Baton Rouge, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace your mother's people?
Speaker 2: I can go as far back as my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother, and then I had, no, my grandmother, and I, those are the only ones I knew.  My great-grandmother was Mary Jane Davis, M-A-R-Y, J-A-N-E, Davis.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: And her husband was Jared Davis, J-A-R-E-D, Jared Davis.  To that union was born one child, and that was, that's my grandmother, and her name, Lillie Celestine Davis [Lillie Davis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She married a gentleman by the name of Huel Davis.  There were two Davises who married each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To that union was born three children: my mother, who is the oldest, Velma Valeria Davis--I've told her about her--and her two brothers, David Huel Davis [David Huel Davis, Sr.], and Henry Huel Davis [Henry Davis].  You see the Huel keeps coming up.
Story_ID: 465663
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the Huel name?
Speaker 2: I wish there were.  I've tried to find it out.  Somebody said it has biblical connections.  Somebody else says it's Irish.  Somebody, so, the L in it could suggest Jewish connections.  I, I think it's closer to the biblical, a biblical name, but it's a rare name.  And, and the reason I have it is because there was this practice of naming--my, my parents [Velma Davis Perkins and John Perkins, Sr.], when I get to them, had two sons, my older brother, John Earl Perkins and he was named junior [John Perkins, Jr.].  And that was a, there was the practice then--name the oldest boy junior, name the second oldest boy for the mother's father.  My mother's father was named Huel Davis, so I became Huel Davis Perkins [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins].  And the little idea of playing out, first born for the father, the second-born for the mother, mother's father, and that's about as much as I, I know of it.  I have a son and I've named him Huel Perkins.  Huel, he's Huel Alfred Perkins and he's an only child, Huel Alfred [Huel A. Perkins], and I wasn't going to name him that because I thought the name was so odd and the, and I had trouble with it when I was growing up in school--James, Charles, Johnny, Huel, Huel, it was just so odd.  But then I came to appreciate it.  I mean, I, I liked the odd- oddity of it.  When my son was born, I said I was not going to name him that.  The morning he was born, I went to the hospital and saw him.  He was a perfect Huel, so I named him that.  I gave him his, his grandfather's middle name, Huel Alfred.  And the joke is a little later on when he got up, I said, I said, "If you don't particularly like the Huel, you have Alfred there, and you can certainly drop the Huel and use Alfred."  He said, "If I drop anything, I'll drop the Alfred."  He said, "I like Huel." And he grew like, tell you how he grew to like it.  He named his first born Huel (laughter).  His, but changed the middle name, his first born is Huel Jared Perkins, J-A-R-E-D [Huel J. Perkins], and he has another son, Vincent Frederick Perkins [Vincent Perkins].  And, and he has asked his son, he said, "Now, you're Huel Jared, I'm Huel Alfred, your grandfather is Huel Davis.  If you have a son, grow up, and got married or some, name him Huel, change the middle name, but name him Huel." So that, none of us are juniors.  There isn't a junior behind the name although somebody, some people like to say, I saw your son, he's a junior.  He's not really junior because we changed the middle name.  So, the name, Huel, and as I said, I wish I knew more about it, has really become a family name, and has just remained in the family, and we are perpetuating it.  We are perpetuating, as I said.  I named my son, he named his son Huel, so we've, we've got it going, and we enjoyed, I enjoyed it now.  It keeps, keeps from getting my identity mixed up with other people, although we have run into Huels in, at various points.  And we always, it always amaze me we run in somebody whose named Huel. I remember there was a little fellow who passed in (unclear) by the name of Huel Williams [ph.].  I didn't know from Adam, but he spelled his name the same way we did, and I sent it to my son.  There was somebody who died (unclear) by the name of Huel.  We, we, we're very, we're very conscious of, of the name whenever we, whenever we see it, run across it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You remember the naturalist, Euell Perkins [sic.] that used to be on television--
Speaker 2: No, I, I remember him.
Speaker 1: No, Euell Gibbons, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Gibbons, that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Euell Gibbons.
Speaker 2: --I remember him, yeah, I remember him.
Speaker 1: That's the only name like it or close to it--
Speaker 2: But did he spell it, E-W-E-L-L [sic.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, he was E-W- Euell.
Speaker 2: That's, that's--
Speaker 1: Euell, not Huel, yeah.
Speaker 2: Not, not Huel--Euell, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But there's some around.
Story_ID: 465664
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about what your family was doing back in the 19th century?  Now you go, if your mother [Velma Davis Perkins] was born in 1898--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you can go back to your great-grandmother, you're going back to the mid-1800s.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what's the story?  What, what were they doing?  Were they slaves here?  Were they free?  Were they--
Speaker 2: My grandmother [sic. maternal great-grandmother], Mary Jane Davis, my, I've already mentioned, was the child of the slave mother and the white slave owner. She's very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --when you see the picture of her over there, she's very, very, very fair with very good hair.  Now I'm not certain of, of my great-grandfather, Jared [Jared Davis].  All I know is that he worked for years at Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] plant, at the SO [Standard Oil Company] plant, the refinery [Baton Rouge Refinery] here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], which is the life blood of Baton Rouge.  Many people worked there, and he worked there for years.
Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather worked at, at, at Exxon.  S- it was SO then, later became Exxon, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, my [maternal] grandfather [Huel Davis], for whom I'm named, was a carpenter as far as I know from the family history.  He, he worked on the houses, repaired houses, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are there any Creole people in your family at all?
Speaker 2: Not really, unh-uh, unh-uh. We all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, it's not really about that.
Speaker 2: --we're all straight from Africa, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No, no Creoles--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, but there are a lot of them here.  Baton Rouge is, is full of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother, did she grow up in the city or like on a farm or--?
Speaker 2: She grew up in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She grew up in the city.  By the time she was born, my grandfather and my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Davis] had moved to the, to the city.  My mother was the recipient of a very good education.  She finished high school here in, in, in the city.
Speaker 1: Where did she go to high school?
Speaker 2: I've forgotten.  It was the only high school in the city for blacks [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I've forgotten the name of it, but I remember there were only three in her graduating class.  But she went to college at Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  Her, her parents had the wherewithal to send her off to college.  And she went to Hampton, which was only a two-year school then, a two-year college.  It's now a full four-year college.
Speaker 1: So, it's Hampton Institute then, right?
Speaker 2: Hampton Institute, that's it, Hampton Institute.
Speaker 1: Okay, two years of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And finished the two years there, and then she came back to Baton Rouge, and she went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and she finished her, the last two years at Southern.
Story_ID: 465665
Speaker 1: She was a teacher for a while (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teacher, okay.
Speaker 1: --for a while, and then she was a housewife for a while.
Speaker 2: Now when she came along, did they have that rule that if you got married, you can't teach anymore?
Speaker 1: I think, I think she escaped that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That may have been a little before her teaching career.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But there was a rule, so much so that people who got married wouldn't, wouldn't tell people, (laughter) wouldn't, wouldn't admit it, yeah, well, 'cause they would lose their jobs, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, did she have any interesting stories or any benchmarks in her life that she talked about as she grew up in and came of age here [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: No, but let me tell you.  It's interesting you should ask that.  I had never visited Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and she always told me that she wished I'd gone to Hampton--I went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but she wished I'd gone to Hampton.  And she wished I'd visited, and I'd never visited Hampton.  One time I was in the area.  I think I was somewhere in Virginia.  I said, I'm going to drive over to Hampton.  There, I found in their archives more about my mother than she had told me, really, I mean, she, she--they had all sorts of things there about her.  For instance, I found out she'd played on the basketball team, women's basketball team.  I found out that she had won essay contests--the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], Washington [Booker T. Washington] essay contests.  I found out that she had been on the debate team.  All of this I found out because they had a folder, a, a file on her.  And I like to feel I'm fairly decent writer.  I've done quite a bit of writing.  And I, I now know I got it honestly from my mother who wrote and won essay contests.  My mother was a prolific reader.  She loved to read, and I have recollections of my brother [John Perkins, Jr.] and me crawling into bed on Sunday morning for her to read us the funny papers, the funnies.  She always had lots of books and magazines around that she was reading.  And I remember my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Davis] once said, she said, "When Velma [Velma Davis Perkins] puts her head in a book, those children can tear the house down."  The--she, she might be said was a bookworm.  She liked to read.  She liked to sew.  She was very good at that as well.  She I think passed one year after we [Perkins and his wife, Thelma Smith Perkins] had gotten married.  We got married in '48 [1948], and she must have passed in '49 [1949].
Story_ID: 465666
Speaker 1: Now, I will not be able to tell you that much about my father's side, I really won't.
Speaker 2: Now, well, give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 1: John Earl Perkins, Sr. [John Perkins, Sr.].
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: His place of birth is McComb, Mississippi.  And he passed--oh, I have that information upstairs.  He passed about nine years after my mother [Velma Davis Perkins].  She passed in '49 [1949].  He passed--I think he passed in, in '57 [1957], something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I don't keep those dates, but I can give them to you before you leave.
Speaker 2: Now, was he much older than your mother?
Speaker 1: A few years, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, he was born maybe 1895 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay.  Now, what can you tell us about his ancestors or the ancestors on his side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 1: Can't go very far back on his side at all.  All I know is that he was born in McComb, but he migrated to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and it was here that he met my mother.  I also know that he had two brothers and a sister, and on occasion, we'd go to McComb to visit his sister, that was Aunt Emma [Emma Perkins].  He also had a brother who had a farm in Hammond [Louisiana].  He, he had a brother who was an educator, who was a principal of a, an elementary school in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And that's about as far as I can go with my father.  I, I--his siblings, I knew, you know, brothers and sisters he had grown up with.  I know this, too, and this is a fact, of all four of those children, Uncle Bud [A.E. Perkins], Uncle Hun [ph.], my Uncle Son [ph.]--that was, they all had nicknames.
Speaker 2: Bud, Hun, and Son.
Speaker 1: Son, Hun and Bud, they all had nicknames (laughter).  All I can remember about them is that they--none of them had any children, except my father.  My father was the only one of the four who had any offsprings.  So my brother and, and me were, were honored among the Perkinses (laughter).  He was Perkins, John Earl Perkins [John Perkins, Jr.], and oh, they were so, so enamored of us.  Anything we wanted, we got because we were the only, only, grandchildren, the only children of, of my father--the two of us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, we didn't grow up close to them.  We had visited them, but it was always a case for adoration and adulation.  We are so glad to see you boys and whatnot, but they, on special occasions, we may go up, drive up with him, but not--I know very little about them beyond that, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, they apparently had a chance to go to school and--
Speaker 1: He had a chance to go to school.
Speaker 2: H- do you think that he--was he in the first educated generation of his family or would you, do you assume that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably, probably.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And his brother--now his brother in New Orleans, Uncle Bud, A.E. Perkins, went to s- went to school, went to college.  My father went to Utica College [Utica Junior College; Hinds Community College, Raymond, Mississippi] and to Alcorn and to Alcorn State it was then [sic. Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Now Utica College, is that like a--
Speaker 1: Utica College, Utica College is a small junior college not too far from Jackson--Jackson, Mississippi.  And I know a number of people who passed through, through Utica.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now his, his brother, A.E. Perkins, taught in New Orleans?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was a principal, principal of Danneel, principal of Danneel Elementary School [Danneel Public School] in New Orleans.  Now, you know, even as I do this interview and I'm trying to recall, all I knew was Uncle Hun, I can't tell you his (laughter) his real name.  I guess I can look it up somewhere, but I couldn't tell you Uncle Hun's real name.  They all, I just said, they all had nicknames, Bud, Son and Hun (laughter).  But I knew A.E. Perkins, and I knew my father, J.E. Perkins, but I don't know Hun's name.  This won't happen again.  Next time, I interview, I'm going to be able to tell you his own name.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those are my, my uncles and my, and my aunt, Aunt Emma, on my father's side.
Story_ID: 465667
Speaker 1: My father [John Perkins, Sr.], as I said, went to school in Mississippi.  There's a story there and that was this.  He went to school to Utica [Utica Junior College; Hinds Community College, Raymond, Mississippi] and then transferred to Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].  While going to school at Alcorn, he was working his way through college.  He worked in the laundry.  While working in the laundry one day, a belt flew off of a piece of machinery and broke his arm in three places. I think it was his right arm--it had to be amputated.  So when I knew my father, he was an amputee.  He had one arm.  And it had come from an accident in school.  Now, the family history says he got some money from it.  He got insurance and he got some money.  And, and that was when he decided to come to, come to Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  And here, he opened up an insurance company, and he always was interested in business.  And I'll tell you what else he did.  He read for law.  They--he was black, they would not admit him to any law school.  There was only one law school in the state and that was LSU [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  He couldn't go there.  But as was the case with many, many of the earlier lawyers, they read for law and took the bar.  He became very friendly with a lawyer by the name of Dewey Sanchez [Dewey J. Sanchez], and read Dewey's law library, and took the, took the bar.  Unfortunately, he never passed the bar in Louisiana.  He did take it in Mississippi, and he passed the bar in Mississippi and, ultimately, was able to practice even before the supreme court [Supreme Court of Mississippi].  But Louisiana was, was determined that no blacks would become lawyers at that time.
Speaker 2: So, he actually passed the Mississippi bar.
Speaker 1: Passed the Mississippi bar.
Speaker 2: So that meant he can practice in Mississippi--
Speaker 1: He could practice in Mississippi (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but not--
Speaker 1: --but it wasn't reciprocal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He could not practice in Louisiana for some reason.  I don't know all the details of that.  I was very small.
Speaker 2: So, then, for most of the years that--his adult life, was he considered a lawyer?
Speaker 1: He was a lawyer--
Speaker 2: A lawyer, okay.
Speaker 1: --oh, he was a lawyer, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and would have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were his offices here in--
Speaker 1: He had offices here and Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he always kept his offices in Mississippi because that's where he was licensed to practice.
Speaker 2: So, how did he manage it here?  I mean, if--did he have some, some of this?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a, a secretary here and a receptionist, and she'd, she'd take whatever things.  And then, he'd take them to Mississippi and then he'd come back and, and he, he had contacts here, let's say, if he needed some, some legal somebody here.
Speaker 2: Advice or---
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But let me tell you what that did, too.  He would like, he would have liked for either my brother [John Perkins, Jr.] or myself to study law, but it was so precarious a profession at that time that I didn't want to go into it.  My brother did try law, but he ended up being a teacher as well, but no law for me.  I, I just didn't think that was, that was a viable living, but he would love for that to have happened.
Story_ID: 465668
Speaker 1: Is there a story that's passed down about how your parents [Velma Davis Perkins and John Perkins, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: I suspect that they met at my grandmother's house.  My grandmother [sic. maternal great-grandmother], Mary Jane [Mary Jane Davis]--my great-grandmother, Mary Jane and her daughter, Lillie [Lillie Davis], ran a boarding house.  They had about a twelve-room house that, when they moved into town [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], they, they bought this big house.  And many people--blacks couldn't stay in hotels--many people stayed there with them.  And I, I'm told that my father had rented a room there, was staying there.  And when my mother came back from school, he met her, and that's how they met.  They met at my grandmother's boarding house and that's where he was staying.
Story_ID: 465669
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Speaker 1: --the right questions to ask.
Speaker 2: Well, good, I'm glad.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now here's a good one for you, now.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: When you think about your parents' [Velma Davis Perkins and John Perkins, Sr.] talents and personalities and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 1: I probably take after my mother, I probably take after my mother in terms of, of interest in, in reading and writing and personality.  She was open, kind of easy going.  My father was a, was a stern disciplinarian.  He believes you had to do it this way, you know.  My brother [John Perkins, Jr.] probably takes after my, took after my father.  He passed.  But I suspect my personality is closer to my mother's, um-hm, in, in many ways.
Story_ID: 465670
Speaker 1: Tell us about growing up.  Now, what, is there a name for the neighborhood that you grew up in, in here, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually, I don't know if there's a name.  I grew up in what I like to call central Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's south Baton Rouge, and there's east Baton Rouge, Eden Park [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but I grew up in central Baton Rouge right, right around (background noise) South Boulevard--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We're on again?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We're talking about Central--
Speaker 1: Central Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: --Baton Rouge, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I grew up in central Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I grew up on Europe Street, which is a block from Government Street, which is right in the sort of center of town, and a big Catholic church on the corner, and the School for the Visually Impaired [State School for the Blind; Louisiana School for the Visually Impaired, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] right down the street.  It, it was, it was sort of central.  I grew up there, and I think I've already told you, I went to school at the Southern University Laboratory School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from first through twelfth grade.
Speaker 2: So is that, did your parents [Velma Davis Perkins and John Perkins, Sr.] teach at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?  Did--
Speaker 1: My mother did teach at Southern--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for a while.  She did, she didn't stay, she stayed for a while, but she did teach at Southern.
Speaker 2: Did she teach in the lab school or the, or the university?
Speaker 1: No, she taught home economics--
Speaker 2: Home economics, okay.
Speaker 1: --Home economics.  She taught in the department of home economics.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I know we lived on the campus for a number of years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you grew up partially on the campus--
Speaker 1: I grew up partially on the campus--I really did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And they call Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, well, just describe, and I guess you can mix the places up in some ways.  Just let us know which one you're talking about, but describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 1: Of growing up?  Well, I think I had a very normal childhood.  As it turned out, there were about six or seven boys who grew up in the same neighborhood around, around my age, so, we had, made a lot of fun together.  We shot marbles.  We build skate mobiles.  We went swimming, and we were friends.  I know that there were the Urbans [ph.], Charles [ph.] and, and Willie [ph.] down the street.  And then, there was Lloyd Barrett [ph.] across the street, Eddie Robinson [ph.] down the street, Johnny Emery [ph.] just, it was just a little group of fellows, of, of--
Speaker 2: Now, that's not the Eddie Robinson that became the coach, is it?
Speaker 1: No, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, different, okay.
Speaker 1: --this is another Eddie.  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: All right, I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 1: I know.  We had the same name, um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: This Eddie Robinson was just a good friend, and he went in the service.  And we all--I think all of us, that whole little group went to the [U.S.] Navy.  We all wanted to go in the Navy.  We didn't want to go into the [U.S.] Army for some reason.  We all went in the Navy.
Speaker 2: Well, what was it about the Navy then?
Speaker 1: It was cleaner (laughter), it was cleaner.  And, and, and, and, and, and, and you didn't have that specter hanging of you, over you, of being sent, sent to fight.  You might go on a ship, but the Navy, the Navy just seemed to appeal to all of us, all of us.  And as I told you, I came to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois], saw Chicago [Illinois], trained out of Great Lakes, and was stationed there for just about the entire time I was in the service.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I don't want to get us off the trail.  But let's, now, so you're talking about the neighborhood--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --the sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 1: --and, and, you know, I went, went to church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in the neighborhood.  And, as I said, came to Southern Lab School, had friends, sights, the normal sights around the city.
Story_ID: 465671
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, things have changed a lot and, and, you know, it's now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and people that watch this are going to not know what it was like to grow up when you grew up.  So--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what did it look like?  Did you see a lot, as many cars in those days, or did you see (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The one thing I remember, though, was that the neighborhood [in Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was mixed.  It was not half so segregated as it is now.  We lived across the street from a, from an Italian.  We lived down the street from a fellow by the name of Prian [ph.], who I think worked at the, at the local paper.  We--the neighborhoods are much more integrated then than they are now, so we had white friends.  We played with them.  I don't remember much beyond that.  I mean, when we grew up and they moved out, and the neighborhood became kind of monolithic, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there some sort of event that marked when the other neighbors moved or--?
Speaker 2: Some sort of event?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or did something happen in the dynamics of the city where the people moved away?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I guess they--the dynamics must have been changing because people did move.  As these people died out, their, their, their children did not relocate there, you see what I'm saying?  As a--
Speaker 1: So you were like near the center, the center section of downtown--
Speaker 2: Center section of downtown, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, I know--
Speaker 2: And I was not--my neighborhood wasn't the only one that, that was integrated that way.  Just about all over the city, you could find people living everywhere, next to each other, and any friendly, any friendly relationship.  I mean, they, they--there was nothing adversarial about it.  We got along with our neighbors who were different.  Then, I actually said, I don't know what caused them to, I know, as older people died, the younger people that moved elsewhere, and it, it, it became pretty much a black neighborhood, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have much occasion to go downtown (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, we had occasion to go downtown.  We didn't have to ride the bus very often and very, rarely, we did ride buses 'cause our father [John Perkins, Sr.] had cars, and they, he would take us downtown.  And I always felt I did not run just slap-dab into segregation because I was pretty much always, always shielded.  We lived in a very comfortable neighborhood.  We had cars, and we went to a school which almost semi-pri- almost semi-private.  The Southern University Lab School [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] really was, it was kind of upper crust, mainly because there was a tuition associated with there, so that kept some people from, from attending there.  Then we had the high schools, public schools in town.  I never went to the public schools.  I, I knew friends who went there.  And after I finished high school, I went on to college at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  If I had to recall my childhood, I would say that it was a very pleasant period in my life.  I have no, no quibbles with it.  I grew up well.  I had fights.  I had friends, we made up.  We went swimming.  I was in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  We went to camp, did all the little things that boys--climb trees, and had a little camp out in a vacant lot.  Those sorts of things.  It was a pleasant time in my life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I do not have any, any untoward memories of my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the Boy Scouts were all-black?
Speaker 2: All-black.
Speaker 1: The troop, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, you had a camp for the, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember earlier, we--you'd go to camp.  Again, in Mississippi, there was a camp for Boy Scouts in Mississippi and we went every year.  And that was where I learned how to swim, camp.  What was it called--Bolton Smith [sic. Camp Currier, Eudora, Mississippi], I think it's the name of it.  But we went there and we, we rubbed sticks together, and we cooked marshmallows, and we swam, and we did what scouts do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But scout- scouting was segregated.  You didn't, you didn't belong to mixed groups at all.  And I think our troop was sponsored by a church.  I know it was.
Speaker 1: Now, was it sponsored by your own church, or--?
Speaker 2: I think it was sponsored by Mount Zion [Mount Zion First Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I'm not certain, another church, but scouting was fun.
Story_ID: 465672
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what church did you attend?
Speaker 2: I grew up my first eighteen years at Bethel, Bethel Methodist Church, Bethel A.M.E. [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Bethel, Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, Bethel A.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bethel A.M.E.
Speaker 2: Now, this is interesting.  That church, to show you how integrated things were--that church was uptown--downtown in the downtown section for years.  Then they sold that property, and they moved out over into, principally the black community over on, on 13th Street.  But when I first, started going, Bethel was uptown.  We'd walk uptown to, to church.  Now, there I was a member for my first eighteen years.  I'd stop going to church.  I was going back to my, my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Davis].  My grandmother was a member of Mount Zion Baptist Church [Mount Zion First Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is a kind of cathedral church of, of the city.  It's the oldest and perhaps the most prestigious.  My grandmother was a member there, and she went to church regularly around, as I said, I'm, I'm eighteen now, I'm driving.  She, she would ask me to bring her, take her--to pick up and bring her to the church.  I'd do that on Sunday mornings.  I wouldn't even put on, put on my robe--probably do it with my pajamas still on, pick her up, and take her.  Finally, she kept prevailing on me: "You put me out Sundays.  Why don't you come in church, you come in church, and sit and hear the minister?"  She kept harping on that.  Finally, I decided to do that.  They had a minister there by the name of Gardner C. Taylor, Gardner Taylor.  Did you ever hear that name?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's [HistoryMaker] Reverend Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 2: Reverend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was, he was the first person I interviewed back in 2002 in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Brooklyn, that's right.
Speaker 1: He was the first person.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: He's from down here.  I know he's from here, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, he's from, he's a Baton Rouge [Louisiana]-born.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Went to school at Leland [Leland College, Baker, Louisiana].  All right.  Gardner Taylor was pastoring Mount Zion at that time, and my grandmother kept asking me to come.  She said, "This man can preach." Finally, I decided to not put her out; to park the car, and go to church.  It was a revelation.  I had never heard anybody preach like Gardner Taylor in my life, so, I, I eventually joined that church.  I joined, I joined Mount Zion Baptist Church.  I remember the date I joined.  It was Easter Sunday, 1943.  Now, why do I remember it so well?  Uncle Sam had sent me greetings (laughter).  Uncle Sam was trying to get me to join the [U.S. military] service, or I, I hadn't gotten them yet.  I was eighteen; I was draft age, and I knew eventually I'd have to go.  I said, well, before I go to service, I'd better make a commitment, so I joined church.  And he always says, I was the first person to--that he baptized when he came to Mount Zion to preach.  So, it's a little circle that we have, we're forming, but Gardner is my friend.  He, he's my spiritual leader and, and the reason I am Baptist today.
Story_ID: 465673
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, he had just, I guess, returned from Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Oberlin, he did go to Oberlin (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) College in Ohio, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Leland [Leland College, Baker, Louisiana], and he took his divinity degree at Oberlin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he went to Leland College and then to--
Speaker 2: Leland College--married a girl [Laura Bell Scott Taylor] he met at Oberlin.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And came back here to work, came back here to preach, and she worked at the, in the Department of English (unclear).
Speaker 1: What was it about [HistoryMaker] Reverend Gardner Taylor's sermon that persuaded you?  I mean, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 1: --what--what--how was he different from--
Speaker 2: From other preachers?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Can I put it in words?  I guess he's able to make you see vividly what religion is all about.  He's able to make it real; to make you see it.  What impressed me about Gardner was he never used any notes when he spoke.  If he had some notes on a sermon, he'd crumble them in his hand, and get up, and go from the hip, shoot from the hip.  Oh, he, as I said, I can remember, I remember sermons he preached back then.  And I've even told him this.  Easter Sunday, tragedy in triumph, white robes, and (unclear).  I remember one time he spoke up in my wife's [Thelma Smith Perkins] home.  And he was speaking to ministers, and he told them, you must be worthy to be sufferers.  You're suffering for Christ, but it's a worthy endeavor.  And I remember, he said they had a Christian saying (unclear) lashed me here, I'm proud of this.  I'm proud of (unclear), you see what I'm saying?  He made the stuff all coming up.  Now, there's a story there, there is a story there, and the story is this.  Gardner Taylor was selected as one of the five or six great preachers in the country.  I think it was Time magazine or Life magazine--whatever it was.  Anyway, I wrote him a note, and I congratulated him.  And I said, "You are indeed one of the, the outstanding ministers of the gospel in this country."  And he wrote me a letter back.  He wrote me a letter saying that, that he was glad to hear from me, and he appreciated what I have to say.  But this is what he said.  He said, "Growing up--," I don't know why I remember that, that letter so vividly--he said, "Growing up in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], there were a lot of disincentives," nothing, disincentives, a lot of things to, you know, that would say no to black children.  He said, "But I remember your mother [Velma Davis Perkins] and father [John Perkins, Sr.] as being really role models in the community."  That's what he said.  All right.  I shared that, that letter with my son [Huel A. Perkins], and he said, "I don't know my grandparents.  I don't know what, you know, your father and your mother were like."  He said, "What were they like?"  He asked me that question and I said, well, I'll tell him what they were like.  I went to the typewriter, and for three straight days, I told him everything that I knew about my family, beginning with I've told you about my [maternal] great-grandmother [Mary Jane Davis], and my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Davis], and my father, and my [maternal] grandfather [Huel Davis], for whom I was named.  And I told, told him all that. Chapter on each one of them, and I ended the chapter with when he was born.  And I called it 'Since You Asked' [ph.], and I told him all of that.  He treasures that now.  I've copyrighted it.  I've never published it because I thought it was kind of personal, but anyway, Gardner Taylor is responsible for me writing that, that letter, and I called it a letter to my son, 'Since You Asked' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is a good story.
Speaker 2: It, that's a good story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Gardner Taylor went on to be the founder of the Progressive National Baptist Convention [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.].
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --back in '61 [1961], I guess--
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --yeah, a big split with Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] and the National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 2: That's right, you remember that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Jackson from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: Well, he and I remained, we remained friends through the years.  He--whenever he comes here, obviously, we get a chance to see him--(cough) excuse me--had some, some distant relatives here.  But he has now moved to--I think North Carolina, his second wife's [Phillis Strong Taylor] home.  You know, his first wife died.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He remarried, so he's now living in North Carolina
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't realize he'd remarried (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You didn't realize he--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: And let me tell you the reason.  When I talked with him, he said, "Huel [HistoryMaker Huel D. Perkins], I just got tired of, of climbing up those steps in Brooklyn [New York]."  He said, "My house in Brooklyn was three levels."  He said, "I just needed to get somewhere where it was all on one, on one level."  So, with his second wife--and I think she was from North Carolina--that, that's where he is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So I know, when we were there, his wife had passed the year before, I believe, in 2001, I think, or so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was very much still, you know, grieving about her, yeah, 'cause he did meet her through the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] when he saw her picture, and then he went to Oberlin and actually met her (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It was a very interesting story.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But--
Story_ID: 465674
Speaker 1: How many people were in your high school graduating class from Southern in lab school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: You know, you know the questions to ask.  There were twenty of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were eleven girls and nine boys, a very small high school class.  I lost a classmate just last week, one of the nine boys that was in the class.  A young lady by the name of Veraldine Carter [ph.], she was then, was the valedictorian, and I was the salutatorian, and one, two.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1941 or--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Forty [1940], okay--
Speaker 2: You were close, right on it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) nineteen forty [1940], okay.
Speaker 2: --nineteen forty [1940], class of 1940, lab school.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you were at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and now, in, had you finished Southern in '43 [1943] when they drafted you?
Speaker 2: They drafted me, drafted me in '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: That- that's before you finished, right?
Speaker 2: That's before I finished (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I had one year left, I had one year left.  I was drafted between my junior and senior year.  There's a story there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  I played music.  I was a clarinetist, saxophonist.  Anything you need, I played (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now wait a minute.  We're probably going too fast 'cause I, I need to ask about that.  Now, you, now when, you started studying music in lab school, huh?
Speaker 2: I started immediately--Southern.  After I, I finished in '40 [1940], and I went to Southern.  And I was at Southern from '40 [1940] to four- '43 [1943], and then I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but when did you start playing music?
Speaker 2: I started playing music in high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in high school.
Speaker 1: Was Southern then famous for its music the way it is, I mean, was it noted for music?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not--Southern wasn't really noted for its music.  I don't know how I got attracted to that.  It was, again, a number of us who were interested in music.  And then, you have realize now, we're coming right after the big band era--Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Fletcher Henderson.  Who's the drummer, vio- xylophone, or somebody talking about--
Speaker 1: Lionel Hampton?
Speaker 2: Lionel Hampton, all, all of these names were, were spinning around.  And youngsters wanted to do the same thing.  I wanted to lead a band just like, just like Cab had led--had led a band.  I wanted to lead a band just like--who was it that were, oh, just so many around, so many big bands around that time.  So music was the attractive field, so I went in, I went into music.  I was playing clarinet then, but I, eventually learned how to play all of the, all of the reed instruments, saxophone, flute, bassoon, oboe.  But it was between my sophomore--I mean, junior and senior year, after I'd gone in the service and, and after I'd begun to associate with these musicians.  And I liked that life--you play at night, and you sleep all day and, and I'd gotten to know them, and I, I was a pretty good musician, and I was a very good (unclear) singer.  I didn't want to come back to school.
Story_ID: 465675
Speaker 1: I did not want to come back to, to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I said that, that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, how did, how did you manage to get to the [U.S.] Navy?  I mean, when they drafted, did they draft you to the Navy or did, how did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know--you always ask the right questions.  I got to the Navy this way.  They--the draft office was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And this was just at the beginning, when they were beginning, they were about to admit blacks to the Navy.  I--my uncle, my, my mother's [Velma Davis Perkins] brother, said, "I have a, I know a fellow in the recruiting office there.  When you get to the recruiting office, tell them you'd like to go to the Navy.  And he will make sure that you get there." Because the (unclear) a number of them, of us, were not opting for the Navy?  So, I asked when I got there, "May, may I go to the Navy?"  "Oh yeah, we're trying to get some recruits for the Navy."  And then I had friends who were already at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] who were telling me about the band.  And that was when, when they were just forming these bands at Great Lakes.  So, I said, I'd like to go to the Navy, and they sent me to the Navy.  But as I said, I was (unclear) in, in contact with some very good musicians and a lifestyle that I particularly liked, you know.
Speaker 2: Now, who were some--now, these musicians are now, a lot of these musicians are legendary now.
Speaker 1: They are, they are (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so tell us, who was there?  Who's in the band with you in Great Lakes?
Speaker 1: There was Willie Smith.  Willie Smith had played with Jimmie Lunceford.
Speaker 2: Is that the piano-playing Jimmie--Willie Smith?
Speaker 1: No, Willie Smith is not, there is a Willie Smith at the piano.  This is Willie Smith who was a saxophone.
Speaker 2: Okay, not Willie The Lion [Willie "The Lion" Smith].  The Lion is always--
Speaker 1: Not Willie The Lion.
Speaker 2: --he's older than him.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay, Willie Smith.
Speaker 1: Willie, Willie Smith played with--Jimmie Lunceford had a band of college kids.  They were formed at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Erskine Hawkins had a college band formed at Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  And, and Fletcher Henderson had a band that was formed over in Atlanta [Georgia] at, at Clark [sic. Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University].  And those were--most of them started around colleges.  But then, they ended up in New York [New York], and then they traveled all over the country.  Oh, that was the life, oh, that was what I wanted to do.  There was also Clark Terry.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Clark Terry--
Speaker 2: Great trumpet player, yeah.
Speaker 1: Trumpet player, Clark Terry is still alive.  Clark has played with Duke Ellington.  He's played with Tommy Dorsey.  He's played with just about everybody.  He played with the night--on 'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] for a long time.  Let me see who else was there.  There were the Pillars, Charlie Pillars [Charles Pillars] from St. Louis [Missouri], and they had a band [Jeter-Pillars Band] when they came to St. Louis--came from St. Louis.  When I look at that picture, I'll think of some more.  They, they were all just super musicians, and they kept the best musicians they, that they could find at Great Lakes.
Speaker 2: Now, who was the, who was the conductor of all these people (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: A fellow by the name of Lyn Bouton [ph.].  Lyn Bouton came from, from, from St. Louis.  And these fellows had all been playing up and down river boats and, and they were just good musicians, but they came in the service.  So, there was Lyn Bouton.  There was another fellow by the name of Noble Sims [Harry Noble Sims], who had come from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  When I look at that picture, I'll tell you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --some of the people that, that I remember (background noise).
Story_ID: 465676
Speaker 1: But the story is, I didn't want to come back to s- to school [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  My mother [Velma Davis Perkins], bless her soul, prevailed upon me.  She said, "You have only one year to go."  She said, "Don't stop here, you'll need that degree down the road, go on back to school."  Oh no, I don't want to mess around with those little college boys any more.  I'm, I'm gone (unclear).  But there was another little element there that, that had a lot to do with it, and that was this.  I was a fraternity man before I left school.  I had not come back to school.  And that spring, my fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] voted me president of the fraternity, and I wasn't even in school.  I'm still in the [U.S. military] service.  I'm getting out, I'm getting out in, I'm getting out in, in July.  So, I said, since they had that much faith in me, and since mother is leaning on my back to go back to school, I came back.
Story_ID: 465677
Speaker 1: So your mother [Velma Davis Perkins], the combined forces of your mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother and my fraternity--
Speaker 1: --and the A Phi A Chapter [sic.]--
Speaker 2: --A Phi A Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].
Speaker 1: --at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--fraternity--they persuade you to come back.
Speaker 2: They persuaded me to come back to college--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --which led to my graduation in 1947.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you away from Southern, I have to ask you this question.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers, the teachers and mentors at Southern University?  There had to be some and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --you know, to produce you--
Speaker 2: --oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --so who were they?
Speaker 2: As I said, you just, you, of course, you've been doing so long and so many times, you ask the right questions.  I'll start with the president of Southern University, Felton G. Clark [Felton Grandison Clark].  Felton G. Clark was my role model as it were.  He was every inch a president.  And it was Felton that influenced me to go into higher education--to go into the university teaching.  Felton had an a-, associate degree from Southern, a bachelor's [degree] from Beloit [Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin], a master's [degree] and a Ph.D. from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  But he was articulate.  He was urbane.  He was suave.  He, he was just--he dressed well, just everything.  He influenced me greatly.  All right, that's Felton Clark.  But there were other teachers along the way.  Oh, let me go back to high school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and say there were two or three teachers who really influenced me, in terms of language, in terms of being able to use the English language--a, a teacher by the name of Ms. Bowley, Ms. A.A. Bowley [ph.].  I remember Ms. Bowley saying, "The word is going with a G; it's not goin'," you know, little things like that--going, put the G on the word.  Another teacher by the name of Ms. Solete, S-O-L-E-T-E [Lesley Solete Banks].  Mrs. Solete's favorite expression was: "It's better to remain quiet and be thought a fool, than to open your mouth and remove all doubt" (laughter).  Oh, I can remember that.  She was a good teacher, too, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Are you ready?
Speaker 2: Yes, okay--
Speaker 1: Now, where were we (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, we were in the middle of something.  And, oh, your teachers and--
Speaker 1: We were in the middle of teachers and my role models.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at--right.
Speaker 1: And I told, told you of two in high school--
Speaker 2: Yes, Ms.--
Speaker 1: --which were very, very impressive.
Speaker 2: --Bowley and Mrs.--how do you spell the second one?
Speaker 1: S-O-L-E-T-E.
Speaker 2: --L-E-T-E.
Speaker 1: Solete.
Speaker 2: Solete, okay.
Speaker 1: I told you about Felton Clark, and who else do I remember?  I remember in graduate school, a, a fellow by the name of George Howerton who, who was just brilliant.  And he's the one who encouraged me to pursue the doctorate at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  He was an influential teacher as well.
Story_ID: 465678
Speaker 1: Now what was your major at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: At Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: No, at Southern.
Speaker 2: At Southern?  Music.
Speaker 1: Music, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a music major at Southern.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I wanted you to say it so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I wanted you to say, so we can (laughter)--
Speaker 2: You wanted me to say it (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I said, all right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, all right.  And so, did you go to Northwestern immediately after you graduated or--
Speaker 2: Let me see, after I finished Southern--
Speaker 1: And that's in nineteen forty-f- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven [1947], '47 [1947]. I did go to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].  I've been to school at Oberlin.  I went to Oberlin for a year.  But I got a job, and I got married and got married in '48 [1948].  And I figured I'd better take the job.  So that's when I moved over to Lincoln, Lincoln University in Jefferson City [Missouri], not the one in, in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].  Lincoln University in Jefferson City, and I taught there for two years.  Then I came back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri, okay.
Speaker 2: Jefferson City, Missouri, Lincoln University.
Speaker 1: Now, did you re- okay.  Do you remember a, a student named Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] by any chance 'cause we've interviewed him.  I think he went to--
Speaker 2: To Lincoln?
Speaker 1: --Lincoln University.  Was a chemistry major, but he was a musician.  He learned how to play all the--
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Phil Cohran, C-O-H-R-A-N--
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember him.
Speaker 1: --from St. Louis [Missouri], okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I, I passed through there very quickly--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and I, I don't remember--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a number of people.
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us how you met your wife, and this is a story you got to tell.
Speaker 2: Well, I met my wife this way.  I was still in the [U.S.] Navy.  And s- it's pure fate, it's fate because this is what happened.  I left Southern in '43 [1943].  She ca- I left Southern in July of '43 [1943].  She came to Southern in September of '43 [1943].  So, for her freshman, sophomore and junior years, I was not there because I was in the service.  As it turned out, when I was persuaded to come back to college, we both ended up being seniors in the music department at the same time, but I met her before I had come back to school.  It seems--. I was in the Navy, and I was courting--you mentioned Creole, I was courting a little Creole girl from New Orleans [Louisiana].  And she was singing in the choir here at Southern.  The choir came down to New Orleans to perform.  The young lady I was courting had a mutual friend or, or, I'll tell you this.  My wife had a friend, and this young lady I was courting had a different b- it was the same person, but they, they were just friends.  For instance, the lady's name I'm talking about is Consuela McDonald [ph.].  My wife was close to Consuela, and the young lady I was courting, Katherine Burrell [ph.], Creole as you can get, was also a good friend of Katherine--I mean of, of Consuela's.  I was in New Orleans.  I was taking Katherine out.  Thelma [Thelma Smith Perkins] was spending the weekend with Consuela.  And her boyfriend had come down to be with them while they sang at the--in New Orleans.  I'm over there with my girlfriend, Katherine, and she's over at Consuela's with her boyfriend, Clayton.  His name was Clayton Gray [ph.].  That was the first time we saw each other.  Nothing happened then.  I don't, I don't think any sparks flew at that time.  But as I said, we both came back to Southern, and we are both seniors in the division of music in the same year, '46 [1946], '47 [1947].  We both finished in '47 [1947], we both finished Southern in '47 [1947].  There was a friend of ours, Isaac Greggs who is, who was a band director for Southern, kept encouraging us to get together.  "You all ought to get together, y'all, y'all, y'all, y'all ought to be courting (unclear)."  Well, didn't work out at first.  But after a whole year of us taking some classes together, the whole year associated in being, being close together.  Well, we were, started off just friends, but we decided, well, maybe this is, this is it.  So, she, she decided to go to Northwestern, and that was when I went to Oberlin that year.  She stayed at Northwestern.  That's when I transferred over to Northwestern.  (Laughter) But, that's how I met.  We met, we were both seniors in the, in the division of music the same year, '46 [1946], '47 [1947].
Story_ID: 465679
Speaker 1: We [Perkins and his wife, Thelma Smith Perkins] got married in September of 1948.  We will celebrate sixty years in 2008.
Speaker 2: Okay, congratulations.
Speaker 1: Yeah, thank you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: May I digress just a minute to tell you--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: For our fiftieth wedding anniversary, our son [Huel A. Perkins], the same (unclear) fellow, gave us a trip to Europe, sent us to London [England], Paris [France], Rome [Italy].  We just had a ball, about ten, twelve days, and that was our, that was our fiftieth anniversary.  We--he had connections with a travel agent.  We were able to have dinner atop the Eiffel Tower [Paris, France] on the date of our fiftieth anniversary.  That was September 14th.  We were there, Eiffel Tower, courtesy of our son.  I remember I was talking with a lady.  She was on the, on the tour with us.  I ran into her in Italy, and she said, "Well, what brings you all here?"  I said, "We are celebrating our anniversary."  She said, "Well, we are, too."  She said, "We, when we got married at first, we couldn't afford this, so now, we're over here."  I said, "Well, look, when we got married, we couldn't afford it, but our son has given this to us as a fiftieth anniversary gift."  She said, "Oh, I'm beginning to like your son already," (laughter).  She didn't know him. But it was a very pleasant trip.  Now, for our sixtieth, I don't, I don't think we'll go back, I don't think we'll go back to Europe.  We, we had--it, it was just perfect.  We didn't want to erase the memory.  We went to the National Gallery in London.  We saw all the Gainsboroughs [Thomas Gainsborough], all the, the artists there.  We went to the Louvre [Musee du Louvre] in Paris.  We saw the 'Mona Lisa' [Leonardo da Vinci].  We saw everything we needed to see there.  Then we went to the Vatican [Vatican City].  Then we saw the 'Pieta' [Michelangelo].  We saw, we--it was pretty much art-centered, but we had a ball.  We really enjoyed it.  And so, that's what I'm saying--it's hard to beat that for our sixtieth, and we're not going, we're not going to try.
Story_ID: 465680
Speaker 1: When you were in school, did they talk about any of the black composers?  When you mentioned Europe, I thought of, like Samuel Coleridge-Taylor--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and some of the black composers.  Did they teach you about those in school or did you have, do you get a chance to learn about--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, they taught us about those--Nathaniel Dett [Robert Nathaniel Dett], who went to How- who, who was at Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I think, arranged spirituals.  And William Dawson [William L. Dawson].  Oh yeah, I got to know all of them, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's, that's--
Speaker 2: And John Work--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --John Work at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]--try, I grew up on them.  I know them well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, what did you basically teach in terms of music when you were a teacher?
Speaker 2: When I was a teacher?
Speaker 1: When you started teaching, yeah, when you taught at (unclear) school--
Speaker 2: I taught music history--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then for about twenty-five or thirty years, I taught courses in the interdisciplinary humanities, both the humanities of the Western world, and then the black experience.  I taught those for, for many, many years at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and taught a large number of students, a large number of students because I had large classes.  It seems that--I'll tell you how that course came into operation.  Black students were not doing well on standardized tests.  They did not know enough of what had taken place to, to perform well, so they started a course called the humanities course, and I taught it.  And a number of students still remember I taught them things they did not know.  I said, I shall teach you some of the enduring achievements of mankind, so that you can make it your very own, so that you can live fully and intelligently in this world.  Now, I used to use an expression, I said, "You need to know that Michelangelo painted the Sistine Chapel [Apostolic Palace, Vatican City], and that he is not the tailor down at, down at the local men's store" (laughter).  And, and they remembered things like that.  And I'd tell them stuff that--
Speaker 1: Was there a Michelangelo down at the local men's store (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but there was an Italian (laughter), that was an Angelo (laughter) down there.  And I used to have an expression--I think I picked this up at H- at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I think it's a Persian proverb: "If I had but two loaves of bread, I would sell one and buy some white hyacinths to feed my soul." "If I had but two loaves of bread." And students took that to heart.  I was just trying make them aware that you don't live by bread alone, that you have to have something to feed your soul.  You must find beauty as you go through this life, some sort of way, in music and art, portrait, drama, architecture, sculpture, find beauty in these things, and they en- they, they can enhance your life.  So, I used to tell them and, even now, I get students who say, "If I had but two loaves of bread, I'd sell one, buy some white hyacinths."
Story_ID: 465681
Speaker 1: Now before we get too far along now, let's go back to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for a minute and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: --who were some of the teachers you had in graduate school?  And--or I mean, what were some of the things you learned in graduate school?
Speaker 2: Some of the things I learned in graduate school.  Well, for one, I took a course in comparative arts that completely opened up this whole world of art and culture and sent me in a new direction really.  I'd been music up until that time.  I decided I wanted to a humanities professor.  I wanted to--that's what I wanted to do.  And Northwestern let me design a program of graduate work that would make me, make me proficient as a humanist.  I took courses in English, Irish, and American portrait.  I took courses in founders of modern philosophy.  I took courses in, in American architecture.  I took courses in impressionism, all that.  I, I really became a, a, at Northwestern, I really became a very, very literate, artistically literate person.  So, I brought that back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and I started teaching.  And, and my--our students at Southern needed it so very much.  They had no idea of when somebody wrote, and what happened and when.  Somebody asked a question about Victor Hugo.  She said, "I, I think he reigned in the--."  Said, "Victor Hugo didn't reign--he, he wrote, and when did he write?"  And they, they had no idea.  I mentioned the Sistine Chapel [Apostolic Palace, Vatican City].  They had no idea of, of the Italian Renaissance and of impressionism, of modernism, of romanticism, and all those sorts of things, and, and they came out, came out better students, better, better informed.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--okay.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.  I just said, I said, I'm, I'm trying to make your college education worth something.  You're supposed to learn something.  (Unclear) something you didn't know when you leave here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was, now Northwestern, now I was shocked when I found out, and I didn't find out 'til the 1970s, I guess, that Northwestern, University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], Michigan--
Speaker 2: Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] were all, like, centers for the study of African history and well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of African studies.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And there are big African studies departments not so much culturally focuses as, as maybe we would think they should be, but, but they do have these African study departments, and they're the center for African studies in the United States.  What--did you, were you aware of any of that at Northwestern when you were there?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I didn't, I didn't move in that area, but I do know that they had a very good, a very stable program of African studies at Northwestern.  Herskovits--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --a fellow by the name of Herskovits--
Speaker 1: --Melville Herskovits [Melville J. Herskovits], yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're on the same page, but I knew it was there, but I didn't move over there then.  I'll tell you when I really--I got a scholar- a, a fellowship to spend the summer, pardon me, in Richmond [sic. Cambridge, Massachusetts] at Harvard [Harvard University].  And that was when I really, when I really became conversant with black literature because you could read, you didn't have to go to class.  I went to a couple of classes and whatnot, but really just, just emerged myself in, in black literature.
Speaker 1: Now, when was that, when did that take place--your Harvard fellowship?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  I cannot date it precisely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it in the '60s [1960s] or the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: It would to have been in the--I went to Southern, '50s [1950s].  It had to had been in the '60s [1960s] maybe.
Story_ID: 465682
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--from what I have here, from '51 [1951] to 1960, right?  You taught (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-one [1951]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was in from '51 [1951] to 1978, I think.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: All total.  I, I taught at Southern for twenty-seven years.  Then I left, and then I went to, I went to Washington, D.C.  I was, a deputy director of educational programs in the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH].  Then, when I came back, I went to, to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, when you were--let's see, so you were deputy director of the National Endowment for Humanities in--what year was that, do you know?
Speaker 2: That must have been seventy--'78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  My resume will (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, here it is, yeah, '78 [1978], '79 [1979], you're right.
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979], did I get it right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, sir.  Yeah, that's when--I guess Gerald Ford was--no, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president, right?
Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter was president, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Jimmy Carter was president, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Well, that's, that's exciting stuff, so but, but you taught for like--so, most of your teaching career, you, you taught, well, you taught music and humanities then--
Speaker 2: Music and humanities, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and humanities, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I moved into administration, became the dean, dean of College of Arts and Humanities [College of Humanities and Interdisciplinary Studies].
Speaker 1: Now you were here in 1960--were you here when the students were--the sixteen students got--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --were expelled from school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was there.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you tell us about that story 'cause that's one that, you know, I think is probably more complicated--
Speaker 2: I knew them all--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I knew them all.  I think they were caught up in the surge of the age.  That--the student sit-ins had started, I think, over in Greensboro, North Carolina at A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University].  And then they, all the other colleges and students felt compelled to, to join them, to, to show support for what they were doing by trying to integrate counters and whatnot in their city, and that's how it got to Southern, that's how it got to Southern.  And I taught most of them, and that ended up being a donnybrook for the president because there were those who didn't, who felt he shouldn't have expelled those students.  And he said that he was following out the, following the dictates of the Board of Education [Louisiana Department of Education], and he wanted to keep Southern open.  Those who felt that he should have resigned and protested (unclear), so that was a, that was a very difficult period for my friend.  And Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] was my friend.  We were very, very good friends.  And when I came back to work, he was a role model before I came.  When I came back to work, we, we were very good friends.
Speaker 1: So, I know he suffered a lot of criticism.
Speaker 2: Oh, he did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've, I've talked to people who--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: --were very critical of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they didn't like, they didn't like how he handled it at all.
Speaker 1: But you think--you're saying that he was a--in your opinion, then, he was caught between the--
Speaker 2: He was caught--
Speaker 1: --between the Board of Education of the State of Louisiana?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And--
Speaker 1: And the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and what, what the black population wanted him to do with the students, but he was caught between that.
Story_ID: 465683
Speaker 1: You think it would have been, in retrospect, do you think it would have been better for him to resign and then, let the Board of Education [Louisiana Department of Education] reform Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to its own plan or something or--
Speaker 2: Not really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or did he think that--okay.
Speaker 2: --not really.  He was so, so efficient, and had taken Southern to unprecedented heights.  And add to that that his father [Joseph S. Clark] had been president of Southern before he was.  He had grown up on the campus.  Southern was his life, his life's blood.  He could no longer have walked away from Southern than, than I could fly.  He--
Speaker 1: So, had he resigned, it would have meant walking away from all that tradition.
Speaker 2: It, it--walked away.  But it would have left Southern and he knew that.  It would have left Southern in the hands of the enemy.  Whites would have taken, would have taken over the control of it.  We don't know who they have put up here then, who they would have sent.  As the president, he made the right decision although he got criticized for it, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you think that he was able to communicate, you know, what happened to the students and the parents of the students in any way?  I mean, or did he try to communicate the dilemma to them?
Speaker 2: I don't know if he did.
Speaker 1: Or did it make any better if he?
Speaker 2: I don't think he did.  I don't know.  I don't think he did, um-hm.  But in retrospect, I think, I think he saved the university by not doing that.  If, if he had given in to his detractors, this university would begin, would be completely different now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that people that hear this story for the fir- I know when I heard it for the first time, I was very angry at him.
Speaker 2: It (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I did, but I didn't know the situation.  But, you know, when I hear you talk about it--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --it presents a different kind of scenario.
Speaker 2: --oh, it's different, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Tragic for the students and dispirited on one level--
Speaker 2: It was enforced.
Speaker 1: --but on the other hand, had he walked away--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he would have left the school to--
Speaker 2: --to the whites--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to, to, to, the whites.  I don't know who they would have put up here then.  And--
Speaker 1: But it wouldn't have been Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark].
Speaker 2: It wouldn't have been Felton--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) anybody like him so--
Speaker 2: --it wouldn't have been Felton Clark--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it wouldn't have been Felton Clark, it wouldn't have been Felton Clark.
Speaker 1: So (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was the bane of his existence.  He, he died with that, with that problem upon him, you know.
Speaker 1: Now has the community here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] or Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Forgiven him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, has there been--I know that the students were forgiving officially.
Speaker 2: Students were officially forgiven, and they were brought back and awarded degrees.  Well, I guess you still could run into a mixed, a mixed reaction to it, that there are those who felt he did the right thing in trying to preserve the university.  And there are those who feel that he should have, should have resigned, should have left it.  And then, there are those who feel that of all the presidents they've had at Southern, he is the number one president that Southern had.  A lady told me that, that Southern hasn't had a president since Felton Clark.  That, and that's what she said.  I mean, which means that it's still some sentiment out there favoring him and what he did, and what he did for--.  There is no doubt about it.  He built that institution from, oh, three or four doctorates to about a hundred and some when he left.  Oh, he--a school that was respected.  They respected him so much that, that in all the circles he moved in, he was exhibit A of Southern, and he gave Southern a positive spin.  I mean, they--people liked Southern, sent their children here.  All--as he once said, he said if there was something wrong, well, we have grown to be the largest black college [HBCU] in the country, over 10,000 students.  Something right is going on here.  Probably, there was my friend, Minnie [ph.].  Minnie (unclear) right on that college, and we discussed problems and see what, see what he should do, and I, I never advised him, but at least I was an ear.  I was a sympathetic ear, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, when did he--
Speaker 2: When did he die?
Speaker 1: Well, when did he, when did his tenure as president end and when did he--
Speaker 2: When he--the president--
Speaker 1: --pass, yeah.
Speaker 2: Let me see if I can pinpoint that.  I know when he was appointed, he was appointed in 1938, and I think he served--it was 1960s, 1963, '64 [1964], something like that.  I can't pinpoint the date that he, he left the presidency, but I know he was appointed in '38 [1938].
Story_ID: 465684
Speaker 1: Valerian Smith was a dentist.  And he got to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] by marrying one of our Baton Rouge girls, Jean Butler [Jean Butler Smith].  He came here to practice, but he was also a very talented musician.  He organized what was called the Community Chorus [Baton Rouge Community Chorus], and they used to perform annually throughout the city.  They, they were called upon and they were, they were just really good.  He wrote music for the group.  My wife [Thelma Smith Perkins] sang with, with the Community Chorus.  But his daughter, Lynn, Lynn Whitfield is going to be honored--I think on May 1st as a Louisiana legend.  The local LPB station, Louisiana Public Broadcasting station, honors four or five people in Louisiana every year at a, at a gala.  And they isolate these people who have, who are natives of Louisiana, and have given so much to the state, and they've helped to move the state forward.  And she'll, she'll be one.  Now, how did I know?  I've already done a little spot, a little TV spot for her.  Our families were very close.  Lynn's grandmother, Estelle Butler, and my mother [Velma Davis Perkins] were best friends.  My mother finished high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] with Lynn's grandfather, Dr. Leo S. Butler, and there's a story there.  Dr. Leo Butler, who is Lynn's grandfather, grew up fairly, with fairly limited resources.  When he finished high school, he made the vow that he was going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and he would not return to Baton Rouge until he returned with a doctor of medicine degree, with an M.D. degree, and that he did.  And he came back, and he practiced here, and he had all girls.  And all the girls married, and one of them married Valerian Smith.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, Jean Butler--
Speaker 1: That's Jean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  Now, he was--when I was, I've heard he was also an architect, too.  He had something to do with redesigning his home or there was a stream flowing to his home.  Have you ever heard that story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He, he designed his office and probably redesigned his, designed his home as well.  But I remember most for his, his musical talent.  He was extraordinary.
Story_ID: 465685
Speaker 1: You taught humanities and music here.  Who were some of your students over the years that you remember that were--
Speaker 2: Well, Alvin Batiste comes to mind first.  Alvin Batiste was a clarinetist.  He came back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and organized the, the Jazz Institute at Southern.  Alvin was a clarinetist.  In most of my other courses, students were not majors.  You don't major in the humanities and that sort of thing.  And while I've taught a number of them, they, they've done well for themselves.  They were not a major.  You--we had no humanities major.  Who else comes to mind--a young lady by the name of Barbara Kilgore Lee, who is an extraordinary musician, who has become an evangelist, a musical evangelist.  She, she goes all over the country, she and her husband [Bud Lee], (unclear) music for revivals.  Another student by the name of George Williams [ph.] I taught in humanities--went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], got a, got a master's degree, and then went into, what is it, lending money, what is it, venture capitalist?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's now moved to Houston [Texas].  He, he's doing very well.  Oh, I've taught hundreds of students, almost thousands of students in my career, and they're doing well--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they're doing well.
Story_ID: 465686
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in administration, you know, what happened?
Speaker 2: How did I get involved in administration?  I think one reason is that when I came back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] with a doctorate, the then head of the department decided to take another job.  I had the doctorate.  Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] appointed me director of the division of music.  That was my first administrative job.  From there, I went to dean of the College of Arts and Humanities [College of Humanities and Interdisciplinary Studies].  From there, I went to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] as the vice chancellor for, for academic affairs.  Then, when I retired from that, I went back to LSU as the executive assistant to the chancellor.  And then, I returned as the, as the--what was it, the--always I, I was in the chancellor's office in my last administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was, was it--was the transition to LSU, now that was--I mean, did it, was that an easy transition for you having been at Southern so long and--
Speaker 2: I'd been at Southern.
Speaker 1: --LSU being a segregated school for a long time.  I mean, how did you feel about--
Speaker 2: There's a story there.
Speaker 1: There has to be.
Speaker 2: There's a story there.  True, I had taught at Southern for some twenty-seven years.  LSU was just, about that time, I think it may have been in the '70s [1970s], trying to enroll black students.  They were getting a few black students.  I went to a reception at another college here in Louisiana.  And we were waiting to meet the president, and I was in the line with the chancellor of LSU.  And he started talking to me.  He said, "We would really like to get you to come to LSU."  I said, "No, no, no, I--." He said, "Well, my reason is this," he said, "the only blacks at LSU are either serving food on the line or cleaning, cleaning up the campus."  He say, "We need some professionals down there that students can look up to and relate to" and whatnot.  I was not ready to leave Southern.  I said, I've been there too long.  His name was Paul Murrill [Paul W. Murrill].  Paul sent me a contract--I think that was in March.  He sent me a contract in June or July--I turned it down.  The next year, he sent me another contract--had upped the ante on the salary.  Turned it down.  Finally, he sent me a third contract.  And I said, I'm making more--I'm not making this much money here at Southern.  I'm going to take the--they, seemingly, really want me at LSU, I'm going to take this contract.  I'm going to sign this contract and go to LSU. I signed the contract.  Would you believe, between--I signed the contract, I think, in April, between that time, and I was, I was supposed to report in September, I get an offer to join the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH] as a deputy director.
Speaker 1: So, this was in 1978, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, and, and I'm in a quandary, really.  And I got, I got that offer from the National Endowment.  There was a, a public hearing in Dallas [Texas], and we were asked to speak to the importance of the humanities.  At that time, I was dean of the College of Humanities, and I was also president of the LEH, that's the Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities.  So they sent me to Dallas [Texas] to, to, to speak.
Story_ID: 465687
Speaker 1: I spoke there [Dallas, Texas] on the importance of the humanities.  The fellow was there, who was the chairman of the endowment for, for the humanities.  And he came to me right after that and said, "Would you like to come to Washington [D.C.], would you like to come to the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH]?"  I said, "No sir, no sir, I would not like to."  I said, "Besides, I've only, I've recently signed a contract to go to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]."  He said, "Oh, what's his name, I'll talk with your chancellor down there.  I, I think I can get you released from them."  I said, "Well, I, I'm not certain I want to do that."  He twisted my arm and said, "You come up and you look at our operation.  I think you will want to be a part of it."  I went to Washington on a kind of a look-see.  I decided that's what I wanted to do.  They offered me a contract to, to join them in September.  I'm supposed to report to LSU.  What do I do?  Now, I have, I've signed a contract.  I have that commit- commitment.  I go down--I'll never forget this.  I go down to the chancellor, Paul Murrill [Paul W. Murrill], the same fellow who had enticed me to come to LSU.  I said, "I agree, I will sign, I will sign my contract."  I said, "I'm supposed to report September 1st."  I said, "But in the meantime, I have gotten an offer to join the National Endowment for the Humanities in Washington."  You know what he said?  I'll never forget this because he made, he made me feel so relieved about it all.  He said, "Take the job in Washington."  He said, "It will be both beneficial to you and to LSU. Drop me a note, and request a year's leave of absence, and go to Washington."  That's what I did, that's what I did, and I am very happy that I did it, I am very happy that I did it.
Story_ID: 465688
Speaker 1: Well, I--in Washington [D.C.], I was reading proposals, making speeches, interpreting the endowment [National Endowment for the Humanities] to, to the various publics and whatnot.  At the end of that year, I didn't want to come to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (laughter).  They sent a dean up to Washington.  He came up for another meeting.  When he came by to see me, he said, "I'm told--we hear that you, you might want to stay in Washington a little longer than this year."  He said, "I'm up here to tell you that we want you back, that we're expecting you back, and we have increased your salary just to make you, make sure you come back."  So, I'm in another quandary--look, look, the qua- the quandary I gave to you earlier was when I wanted to go to--come back to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and finish my, my senior year, you remember.  And I said, my mother [Velma Davis Perkins] and the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity]--. Here I am, another quandary in my life: do I want to negate the contract down there, and stay on in Washington? 'Cause I was, I was really doing nicely in Washington, I really was--traveling all over the country and making speeches.  And they liked me at the endowment, and that sort of thing, so I had to come and make some hard decisions there.  My decision then was to come back to LSU.  I talked with somebody, and they said, Washington is temporary.  It changes administration every four years (laughter).  You, you put your, your eggs in that basket, you don't know how long you're going to be there, you know, it could change.  Well, I had some good counseling, so I came on back to LSU, came back to LSU, and stayed twenty-three years.  I did twenty-seven at Southern, and I came back to LSU and did twenty-three, including two retirements.  I retired once--they asked me to come back.  I retired again, they asked me to come back.  Then, this last time, which was in 2005, I think it was, I said I'm not going back this time.  It became a joke: you're back (laughter) you're back down here. Every chancellor would ask me to come, come, come back there, mainly because I, I, I did a lot of letter writing, a lot of speech writing.  And they would let me represent the university and I could represent it well, and people would see they have a black now at LSU, I mean, you know, who, who represents the university.  Each chancellor would ask me, ask me to come back, and I, I'd stay here two or three months and, oh, come on, I'd go back down there.
Story_ID: 465689
Speaker 1: Well I had a question about the National Endowment for the Humanities [NEH].  Who, who was the director then when you were assistant (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fellow by the name of Joe Duffey [Joseph Duffey].  Joe Duffey had been appointed by--and, you know, we said that Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president then.  Joe Duffey was the chairman, and Joe Duffey wanted--he said, "I'm trying to get some blacks and women in the endowment."  And I went, I went there, and really enjoy- I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Were you surprised that some of the projects around the country in the humanities and the breadth of what was going on in the country?
Speaker 2: Not, not really because I, I'd kind of grown up with humanities.  I, you know, I knew, I knew it in Louisiana, I knew what the Louisiana endowment [Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities] was doing, and I, I had made many meetings.  I had gone to endowment meetings, so I, I was really much, fairly familiar with, with what went on at the endowment, so I, so I could move, move easily into that.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Were you, do you think that black people are really--'cause I know this question is raised in the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arts, okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, in fact Lynn Whitfield's husband, Vantile Whitfield, or ex-husband, was a part of the National Endowment for the Arts.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: But they, there's also a feeling that black people are kept at the second rung on the funding, and don't really get all that they should get in the Expansion Arts program and that sort of thing.  That's been a struggle for years.  I don't know.  Is there a similar kind of struggle in the humanities council in terms of the kind of projects that are funded and who the major institutions being--
Speaker 2: We really didn't have--I, I know what was going on in the arts, its expansion program, that sort of thing.  We really didn't have that in humanities.  Our big problem in the humanities was getting people to apply for grants.  And that's why I went to a number of black colleges [HBCUs] and tried to get them in, to, to involve themselves in the humanities.  They just didn't apply.  We, we funded a number of projects for, for black colleges.  I know that.  I remember a girl over at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].  They had a nice project going.  They had one at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  We had a number of--and, and the young lady at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Jessie Smith [HistoryMaker Jessie Carney Smith], the librarian there.  She, she got some money from the endowment.  And I can remember those, but we just didn't have enough tr- applying for grants, but usually if they applied and, and their grants were competitive, they were funded, they were funded.  We, we, we, we would fund a good, a good solid proposal coming from a black college or from a black person.
Story_ID: 465690
Speaker 1: Now we were speaking off camera about some of your--you went to a, a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I guess a--
Speaker 2: Harvard enrichment summer?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, enrichment seminar.  That's when you first kind of got--I guess awakened to the breadth of what the black arts were doing--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what was going on in the Black Arts Movement.  And we were talking about some of your friends, Hoyt Fuller, the late Hoyt W. Fuller--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti of Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: --that's right.
Speaker 1: --and Gwendolyn Brooks, and some of the other people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I know them all.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, so you were able to incorporate, you know, the black arts into your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, I was--
Speaker 1: --the humanities.
Speaker 2: --I was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was.  And as I told you, for a number of years, I caught--taught a course called The Black Experience, where we read Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], where we read Langston Hughes, where we looked at the artists who were black and, and the writers, dramatists, and whatnot.  And then, for a long period of time, I had a research interest, and it was the Harlem Renaissance.  I wanted to know as much about the Harlem Renaissance as I could, as I could do.  I took a semester off, and went to the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], and went to the library at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  There's a excellent collection of black writers there.  And, and I did end up with a manuscript on the Harlem Renaissance.  I have a fragile ego.  I sent it to somebody, and they didn't publish it, and I, I put it on the shelf.  I--don't reject me.  I, I'm through with it then.  I've done a number of things.  I've written some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you might want to try to--I don't know, I hate to see anything worked upon with such passion, you know, discarded so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I did work on it with passion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you should then try again, you know.
Speaker 2: And that, and with passion, and that's why I was wounded when they, they--I also wrote a book when I left L- LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] called 'Education in Black and White in Louisiana' [ph.].  I sent it over there to LSU Press [Louisiana State University Press, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. You think they'd publish it?  No.  They wrote it--it came back, and they said, we'd be more interested in your, in your--I guess, reaction to all of this.  Do you think I rewrote it and sent it back?  No, I was through with it.  Fragile ego--don't, don't reject my stuff.
Story_ID: 465691
Speaker 1: I've had enough published, enough of my stuff published that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, yeah, some of your works were published in Black World.
Speaker 1: They were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they were published in Black World.
Speaker 2: And what about, what, Phylon [Phylon: The Clark Atlanta University Review of Race and Culture]?  Do you have anything published at Phylon or--
Speaker 1: I don't--nothing in Phylon.  I published in--well, The Sphinx magazine.  That's a fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] magazine.  I published in that, and I'm trying to think where most of my, my publications went.  These were articles.  I could do articles and, and book reviews.  Finally, I said, well, maybe I'm, I'm better in the shorter things, you know, the, the--don't try to write a book.  You, you had two or three books rejected, forget that so, so I have--but, I, I have about in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], I have about five or six books that are copyrighted.  But now, I haven't published them because as I said, if you, if you don't take my stuff, and publish it right away (laughter), you're through with me.  I'm not going, I'm not going to bother you anymore.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --it sounds like a loss to us but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I have them all.
Speaker 2: --you know, at least they're there (unclear).
Speaker 1: I have copies of them, and I know they're copyrighted in the Library of Con-.  And I get--look, I get, I get feelers from publishers like Xlibris and Vantage [Vantage Press] and whatnot.  We ran across a, a publication of yours at the Library of Congress.  Would you like to consider having it published?  No, no, I'm not going to have it published--not if I got to pay (laughter) to have it published.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And that's what Vantage would want.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I guess Xlibris, the same thing.  But they're all there, yeah, I haven't--.  I, I, you know, my son [Huel A. Perkins], who's doing very well in, in television--I'm going to ask that he publish all of my works posthumously after I, after I'm gone, just you publish all of these things I said, or some publisher said it was not worth publishing.  And his, that letter I wrote for him is in that group, 'Since You Asked' [ph.].  I also have a, a biography there in the Library of Congress called 'My Life' [ph.].  I wrote that after I read Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] book, 'My Life.'  I said, well, look, he has a life.  I had a life, too.  And I sat down and I wrote 'My Life,' and I wrote 'My Life.'  I like these things.  I think things that I write, I like (laughter)--I fall in love with them.  That's why, that's why when you reject me, you wound me, and I (laughter), I, I don't go back with it.  But, but I just said, I know I've got three or four chapters in books.  I know I've got a chapter on humanities in, in the, in liberal arts colleges.  I've got, I've got another publication--I've forgotten the book it's in ['A Century of Service: Land-Grant Colleges and Universities, 1890-1990,' eds. Ralph D. Christy and Lionel Williamson]--but it has to do with land-grant colleges.  And I think I called it "Widening the Base of the Triangle" ["Widening the Base of the Triangle: What the 1890 Institutions and Tuskegee Institute Have Done and Must Continue to Do," Huel D. Perkins], and how, with land-grant colleges, everybody could go to college.  This wasn't a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] that you, you, you, you, you widen the base of the triangle, and then you could go to the top.
Story_ID: 465692
Speaker 1: Now do you have a philosophy of how the humanities should be taught in the, especially in the black colleges [HBCUs] and, you know, I suppose that in the, having gone to a white college myself and talked to others that did, I mean, we're always shocked that we don't seem to be human in the white colleges.  When they teach the humanities, they don't teach about black people--
Speaker 2: No, they don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for the most part.  So, I mean, do you have a philosophy about that should be taught in, in--I guess in any setting (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The philosophy is this.  Some people have known how to feel, to dream, to put words together, to paint on canvas.  Some people have know-how to do this.  They are our talents.  They're the talented people.  We need to somehow come to know what they have left us as legacy.  These people who, who knew how to do these things, who could probe deeply, who could make you understand life, who could, who, who could show you something you've never seen.  They need to be taught.  They need to be shared.  And that is my philosophy.  Some people have known how to do these things.  All of us can't do them.  We need to somehow have contact with those who know how to do them, who know how to, how, how, to probe life, and to make you see it more fully, to see, make you see it more intelligently.  And, and, and we need them, that's why we need them, and that's why we need the humanities in black colleges as well, just so you can understand life a little better, understand somebody has been able to solve the riddle.  You need to know how the riddle was solved if you're going to live fully.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You, you're asking the right question.  You make me come up with, with stuff I didn't even know I had (laughter).  You're a good interviewer, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did, when you teach humanities at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--have you ever taught humanities at LSU?
Speaker 2: I didn't teach it--humanities at LSU.  I taught the novel and the short story, and I only did that for a semester, and then I moved into administration at LSU.  It seems I, I was always destined for administration.
Story_ID: 465693
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: The black community--my concern is simple.  Somehow, teach black people to stay in school, to stay in school, to have respect for education.  That is my deepest concern, that I've said this one time, that a lot of blacks have lost interest in education.  And the tragedy is that nobody at home cares, nobody at home cares.  You know, they know, don't, they don't have the historical perspective to let them know how important education was.  When we were emancipated in 1863, 4 million black people with nowhere to go and nothing to do because we were uneducated because our minds were not trained.  Many of them went back to the slave master.  They didn't want to do that.  What else could they do, what else could they do?  Blacks need to know historically how important education was.  I know there's a novel by, by this lady out of, out of Jackson [Mississippi], 'Jubilee.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, Margaret Walker.
Speaker 2: Margaret Walker--you, you're on the ball--who had the--the main character of Vyry [Vyry Brown] had but one hope for her children, that they could read, write and cipher.  And I say that's still the hope of our race.
Story_ID: 465694
Speaker 1: Who are some of your favorite figures in the humanities?  You've been a teacher for many years, so in terms of artists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who is--
Speaker 1: --and writers and--
Speaker 2: Who are some of my favorite--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --favorite p- all right.  Well, I'll start with both renaissances.  I like all of the people that we studied in the Italian Renaissance: Michelangelo, Donatello, Leonardo [Leonardo da Vinci], Ghiberti [Lorenzo Ghiberti], I liked all of those.  They, they were, they were unusual.  Then I liked--and one fellow told me this--I, I like the people we encountered in classical antiquity.  I like the artists, Praxiteles, Myron, Phidias.  Then I liked the writers, Sophocles, Aeschylus, Euripides, I liked all of these people.  I think these people, I taught them so much they became, became a part of me and, and I, I liked reading them, I liked what they did.  Then I liked the Harlem Renaissance, and these were people I used to teach to.  I used to love to teach Langston Hughes, lo- loved to teach Countee Cullen.  The musicians also because that was my background became my favorites in humanities.  Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven], Brahms [Johannes Brahms], Verdi [Giuseppe Verdi]--I'm an opera buff, I particularly like opera.  And I taught my students to like opera.
Story_ID: 465695
Speaker 1: There's a story there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There was a little fellow who was in my class.  He came from Bernice, Louisiana.  Bernice is in the, in the red clay hills of North Louisiana--rural.  He was a biology major, but he took my course in humanities.  He said, "I didn't know the difference between an orchestra and an opera."  He said, "But I took your course, and I realized there were some things I was missing in life."  He became--I wouldn't say addictive, but he came to like opera.  He said--the opera came on every Saturday.  And he said, "You had shown me some things about opera, how to listen to it, and I started listening to opera, and I liked it."  The same fellow had done very well business-wise.  He had amassed five McDonald [McDonald's] restaurants in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He was a very enterprising young fellow.  Oh, he'd invite me down.  He'd come here.  Finally, he said, "I've never seen an opera at the Met [Metropolitan Opera House, New York, New York]."  He said, "Let's go and see one.  I'll pick up the whole tab."  This is a student who just, as I said, wasn't a major in humanities.  He just caught something from the course.  For three straight years, he took care of the tickets, the hotel and the food and the three--two of us, and one, one time, one time another fellow joined us--went up to, up to New York [New York], and we took what was called the out of town trio where they bunch three operas together on--one Thursday night, Friday night, Saturday night, or Monday, Tuesday, Wed-.  He picked up the tab, he did all this.  I said, I didn't know the course was going to result in that sort of thing, but that, that, that's a story.  I mean, and, and, and I'm as proud of that as I can be.  He also has given me a standing invitation to go to La Scala [Teatro alla Scala] in Milan [Italy] with him.  He said, "Whenever you want to go, get the tickets, the whole trip will be on me" (laughter).  And, I, I haven't gone, I, I haven't gone to Milan.  But I had another student who--
Speaker 2: Oh, what was this student's name?
Speaker 1: Lonell Wright, Lonell, L-O-N-E-L-L (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lonell Wright.
Speaker 1: --Lonell Wright.  And even now, I have contact with him.  He lived in New Orleans, but he's recently left New Orleans and gone back to San Diego [California].  That's where he lived for a while.  Sold his five McDonald restaurants.  He's doing well financially, he really is.  But would you believe?  He now wants to become a priest in the Episcopalian church, and has begun to study for it.  Just a rare little fellow, he really is, and he brags about the fact that, that, that I was his teacher and now, he's my friend.  He, he considers me a friend.  We were in New York (laughter), we were in New York, and we were having a drink after we'd gone to an opera performance.  And he's sitting there and tells the man on the next, on the next bus--, "I know we're an odd couple, but this ain't, this is my professor who taught me how to like opera and I have come up here to see."  And I said, "Don't tell people we're the odd couple."  I said, "Just tell people we're here to see an opera."  But he, he--we really become very good friends now.  We really have, but that, that course, I know, redirected his, his whole attitude toward the arts.
Story_ID: 465696
Speaker 1: You were asking for people I like.  I like the people in the Harlem Re--I like, I like, I like art, and I, I've gotten to know a lot of artists.  I like, Picasso Pablo, Salvador Dali, Joan Miro. I think those are pretty much most of the modern artists.  I, I never go to New York [New York] without going to the art museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York].  In Chicago [Illinois], I used to go to the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago] down on South Michigan [Avenue], uh-huh.  So, my, my life has been significantly enriched by what I have, what I've taught, but it also has, has done something to me, you see what I'm saying?  I can teach these, these people for twenty-five years and, and not, not really take something away from them.  Two things I used to teach--I don't know if you want to hear all this--two things I used to teach in humanities that I particularly like.  One was a drama by Rostand [Edmond Rostand] called 'Cyrano de Bergerac,' you know it.  I teach it to my students, and I was trying to make a point with it.  I said, "Cyrano, by anybody's appraisal, was grotesque.  He had this nose that marched on before him by a quarter of an hour."  I said, "But he had the finest mind, and the purest soul in all of France."  I said, "The, the man could use words.  He could, he could woo a, a, a damsel.  He could fight a duel.  He, he was just a, a, a superior person because of his mind."  The mind is that of that, which is no matter how you look, is what's up here.  It's your mind.  This is what you have to, have to develop.  All right, that was one of my favorites, 'Cyrano de Bergerac.'
Story_ID: 465697
Speaker 1: My other favorite was Ayn Rand's 'Fountainhead'--'The Fountainhead,' I don't know if you ever--. Every time I get a chance--I, I used to read it in all of my classes.  Her theory is that man's ego is a fountainhead of progress.  I tell my students, if you don't believe in yourself, you can't make any progress.  And, oh, we could--it's a long book, but we could go through it and just enjoy, just enjoy it, this architect.  It's about architecture and journalism.  And this architect is kicked out of school because he will not change his design (laughter).  The book just unfolds so well and, and, finally, it comes--well, before I get to that, there is a foil to make Howard Roark look even greater than he is.  His name is Peter Keating.  Peter Keating would love more to make a, a contact than to design a house.  He, he, he's the kind of people person and some.  He comes to Howard Roark in every stage of the book, and he said, "Oh, well, Howard, I feel sorry for you.  You won't get your degree.  You won't change the design, but, but give me some advice."  He said, "I have been offered a fellowship to study in Paris [France], but I've also been offered a position with an architectural firm in New York [New York].  Which should I take?"  Howard Roark says, "Peter, you must be miserable."  He said, "Never ask anybody about your life" (laughter).  He said, "You don't know what you need to do, what you wish to do?  Don't ask anybody."  And this was the whole point--confidence in yourself.  And, and students would get that.  They really would.  They would get that when they read the book, that man's ego, his feeling of, of, of, of self is the progress.  And then, that book ends with this.  Howard Roark dynamites a housing project.  You think I'm teaching a course in human- teaching you a course in humanities?  Howard Roark dynamites this housing project that he told Peter Keating he could use, but don't change a thing on it, but he redesigned it, and he dynamited it because it wasn't, it wasn't his, his design.  And he is put in jail.  And, or, or put on trial--I'll put it that way.  And he decides to defend him, so and he goes be- why am I getting emotional about this?  He goes before, before this jury and he gives his speech that I've used so many times in speeches.  At eighty-three, am I getting--am I losing it?  But, anyway, in this courtroom speech, he says that man comes to earth unarmed, except for his mind.  His brain is his only weapon.  Man has no great strength or muscle, no fangs, no claws, nor horns.  He must either plant his food or he must hunt it.  To plant his food requires the process of thought.  To hunt his food, you must make weapons and, thereby, a process of thought.  Everything we are from the wheel to the skyscraper, from the simplest necessity to the highest religious abstraction is a product of our reasoning mind.  I used to teach that, I used to teach that with a passion.  I used to tell them, if you can't read, write and think, you'll be forever at somebody's mercy.  My father [John Perkins, Sr.] used to have an expression--the man who can beat you thinking will always be your boss.  And I took that to heart.  I tried to reduce the number of people who'd, who could beat me, saying, would you tell me?  I haven't taught humanities in ten years, I don't guess, and here I am getting all emotional about it, but I talk with a passion.
Story_ID: 465698
Speaker 1: Now that's--leads to another question we always ask.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that question is, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, what--most of your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing, not a single thing.  I have had a wonderful life.  I have enjoyed what I've done.  I've been fortunate enough to do it where I wanted to do.  You, you're looking at a man who never left home--born here in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], went to school here, came back and taught at the two universities here.  There's hardly anything I could, I, I would change.  I've had some successes.  I, I've had a number of firsts.  I knew I was the first black they invite- invited into Rotary Club here in Baton Rouge [Rotary Club of Baton Rouge].  The Rotary Club was eighty years old and never had a black in it.  I was the first black who was chairman of, of United Way [Capital Area United Way, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and we get a lot of help--black people from United Way, but we had to have a chairman.  First black to, to really get tenure down, tenure down at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And I haven't mentioned it, I've very proud of the fact that I was elected grand sire archon of the Boule, Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] Boule, 1992 to nineteen four, 1994.  I'm proud of that because the Boule is the best collection of black minds in this country.  It's based upon achievement--what have you done?  You cannot get into the Boule if you have only one degree.  You have got to, if you don't have a college degree, I'll put it that, if you don't have a college degree, you can't get in.  You have to, you have to earn a college degree and most times, many of them have more--Ph.D., M.D., whatever you have.  Founded by a group of physicians in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and it was just to bring men together who, who were, who are similar tastes, similar income, similar predilections, things that, that they had in common.  And this has expanded not, but not to the extent, expected to expand.  We don't have five thousand members yet, and it was started in 1904, um-hm.  But I'm proud of that because as I said, I was leading a group of, of achievers, of, of Indian [Native American] chiefs and--not Indians--and you could only stay in the position two years.  I was in two years.  Manford Byrd [Manford Byrd, Jr.] has a long history with the Boule.  He's been the treasurer, I don't know how many years.  It's an organization I've enjoyed.  I've also enjoyed my fraternity very much.
Story_ID: 465699
Speaker 1: And I guess I've enjoyed Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I never left it.  I've, I've been here all my life.
Speaker 2: So, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and the city has changed.  It's changed completely.  I went to live downtown on Europe Street.  The highway [Interstate 110] took my house.  I built a house out here and--
Speaker 2: Is that what they called urban renewal I guess?
Speaker 1: Urban--no, highway.  It was just the interstate, interstate was coming through there.  And this was a community that's changing a bit now, of just about everybody who worked at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], most of the people out here were on the faculty at Southern.  All were professional men, and it's been a nice community.  Our son [Huel A. Perkins] grew up here.  He went to the lab school [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  He went to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  He also went to Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  So, life is, life has been good to me.  I'm a man of eighty-three.  I'm, I'm in pretty good health.  I, I, I work at it.  I try to stay healthy.  One little strange quirk about me and I think this has to do with my health.  I do not eat any meat with a bone in it.  I don't eat chicken, fish, steak.  My diet is principally fruit and vegetables; I grew up on them.  Now, there's a story there, too.  The story there is that my brother [John Perkins, Jr.], who is two years older, got a fish bone caught in his throat.  I know it was Friday 'cause my people had fish every Friday, as was, is the custom down here, and they couldn't get up.  They hit him on his back, they gave him bread, they--he rolled his eyes back and somebody said the boy is fainting.  My mother [Velma Davis Perkins] had--my--the boy, the boy is dying.  My mother fainted.  They had to pick them all up and take them to Dr. Butler [Leo S. Butler], Dr. Butler is the same Dr. Butler who is Lynn's, Lynn Whitfield's grandfather.  They said from that day on, I never ate another piece of meat that had a bone in it.  Now, for a while, I could eat ground meat--no bone associated with it.  I could eat chili, I could eat hamburgers.  In later years, my tests--my taste is waning for those.  I don't even--he tells me--I'm pretty much eggs, cheese, vegetables and fruit.  And I'm eighty-three, and I don't know if I've got any, any ailments.  I remember once I went to a physician and he put his hand around my, my folder, the chart.  He said, "You're eighty."  He said, "Your folder should be larger than this.  You should have been to see somebody more times than you've been than this, this folder indicates."  I'm blessed.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 465700
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy--good name, reputation, the thousands of students I've had contact with, both at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and, and at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  What is it--Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], good name is best to be desired.  He who steals my purse, steals trash, 'twas nothing.  There's something to his mind that has been slayed to thousands, but he who robs me of my good name, filters from me that which enriches and not and leaves me poor indeed ['Othello,' William Shakespeare].  My reputation--I think that's all I've got.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't have much money.  They never paid me much.  Now, would you tell me when you cut this off, why is I can't recall all of this stuff without, without being emotional, without welling up and--
Speaker 1: I don't know if I could tell you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You don't know, you don't know if you could tell me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it indicates a passion for what you teach, and what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I've done and--
Speaker 1: --and what you think, and what you believe.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 465701
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we should talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, you have asked me my guts, you have asked me everything (laughter).  I think I've told you everything, too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think there are hours more of time we could probably spend--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we could.
Speaker 1: --but I'll ask my last question now then.  Similar to legacy, almost the same thing actually--
Speaker 2: What's that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  That's a good question, that's a good question and now I'm recalling epitaphs.  I remember once I read somebody, somebody's epitaph.  I don't know who it was and it went something like this: he wished to be in all things admirable. And that was it, he wished to be in all things admirable.  I guess that's how I'd like to be remembered that, that, that I was a good fellow, that I liked people, that I helped people, that I made a difference passing this way.  I chose the profession of teaching.  I would not have been as comfortable in any other.  Every mother wants her son to become a doctor--I didn't want to become a doctor.  My daddy [John Perkins, Sr.] wanted me to become a lawyer--I didn't want to become a lawyer.  I found what I liked, and I did it for some, what, sixty-odd years--I really did.  How would you like to be remembered?  I guess I can't do any better than that--to have been in all things admirable.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you sir (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You pulled it out of me, boy, you pulled it out of me.
Story_ID: 465702
Speaker 1: That is the, the Great Lakes Navy Band, and we used to broadcast every Sunday night on a Chicago [Illinois] station.  I think it was WGN [WGN Radio, Chicago, Illinois], and that was a picture we took of all of us down in the recreation hall.  And there I am on the front row playing the bassoon.  Clark Terry is on the black--back row playing trumpet.  And those are the only famous ones that I remember, but it was a very good group.  It was some of the best musicians in the country at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Go with that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yep, let's do this one.
Speaker 1: All right.  That is a picture of my son and his wife to the left and my wife and me to the right.  And the occasion was when the Boy Scouts, the local Boy Scouts named me citizen of the year and they came down to be with (unclear).  That's Priscilla [Priscilla Perkins], Huel Alfred [Huel A. Perkins], me, and my wife, Thelma [Thelma Smith Perkins].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me when I was at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  It would either be '43 [1940] or '44 [1940].  I went in as a, as a band and played in the band--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --and, and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's good.
Speaker 1: --left out as a musician, first class, Great Lakes naval training station, Chicago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and this one?
Speaker 1: Right.  That is my father; that is John Earl Perkins, Sr. [John Perkins, Sr.].  And why you cannot see there, he did have a handicap that he, he had, he lost an arm in college [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, (unclear), starting with the top.
Speaker 2: Starting at the top, that is my great-, my [maternal] great-grandmother.  That is Mary Jane Davis and as I said earlier, she is the, she is the daughter of the slave and the slave master and you can see she's very light.  And she married Jared Davis and that's Jared over at the, the next one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that, these are my great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.  All right, what about this one?
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at my mother and father's twenty-fifth anniversary.  Again, I'll have a problem with the date.  That is me to the left, my mother next, my father, and then my brother, John Earl, John Earl, Jr. [John Perkins, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: That is my mother and father.  That is Johnny Perkins, Sr. and Velma V. Davis Perkins [Velma Davis Perkins].  I don't know where that was taken, but, but it's a nice picture of them.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, please.  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That, that is a picture of my [maternal] grandmother, Lillie Celestine Davis [Lillie Davis].  She was married to Huel Davis for whom I am named, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Come from a very small family, and that is my family and it's taken at the back of my house.  To the far left is my wife, and in my arms is my oldest grandson, Jared [Huel J. Perkins].  And then, there's me, and then, there's my son holding his youngest grandson [sic. son], Vincent [Vincent Perkins], and over on the end is his wife, Priscilla.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That is my wife and me, and that was taken at our fiftieth anniversary.  This is what we used when we put a little announcement in the paper that we had celebrated fifty years.  My wife Thelma and me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's 1998, I guess.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: All right, that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Description, go ahead.
Speaker 1: All right.  To the far left is my daughter-in-law, Priscilla, and I'm next and my hand around her.  The third person to the left is my wife Thelma.  Then, there is my oldest grandson, Huel Jared, and then, the, the little fellow down at the bottom is Vincent Frederick, and then it's his daddy who has his hand around him.
