Story_ID: 465850
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Neculai Burghelea. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare. First name spelled, E-L-E-O, last name P-O-M-A-R-E.
Speaker 1: All right. Now is there an accent over the E or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was decades and decades ago when I lived in South America (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 20, 1937.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And place of birth is Colombia, South America.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or Latin America.
Speaker 1: All right. Is there a particular town or city that--
Speaker 2: Santa Marta [Colombia].
Speaker 1: Santa Marta, okay. M-A-R--
Speaker 2: T-A.
Speaker 1: --T-A, all right. Okay. And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a choreographer and I would say (gesture) an artist.
Speaker 1: All right. And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What's today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Why do I have to tell you that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, it, it sort of authenticates the oral history, that's so, but I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it should be, oh, goodness, it should be (laughter) the 18th of, what month is this?
Speaker 1: It's April.
Speaker 2: Of April.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Two thousand what?
Speaker 1: Seven [2007], I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. Okay. And where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your whole address if you don't want to but--
Speaker 2: We're in Manhattan, Chelsea [New York, New York] on 16th Street.
Story_ID: 465851
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management requires that I ask to everyone. And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer. And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like all exotic foods. I would say West Indian food, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I love all colors again, my favorite color is actually black (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: All right. And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place warm.
Speaker 1: All right. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite phrase? Well, I'm known for saying, "I ain't doing that (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 465852
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's side [Tawny Forbes] of the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but first we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: That's difficult. First name is Mildred [Mildred Pomare Lee], and her marriage name is Lee, her family name is like mine, Pomare.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So is Lee her maiden name? I mean, is that what they call her, like Lee is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Lee is her husband's [Eustace Lee] last name.
Speaker 1: Today? Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Well not anymore because--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they are both deceased.
Speaker 1: And, all right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I haven't the vaguest idea. It's there (gesture) but I don't have it memorized.
Speaker 1: Okay. About how old was she when you were born, do you know?
Speaker 2: When I was born? I guess, she, she must have been in her late twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay. So may- maybe around, okay. All right. That gives us some picture. Well, what do you know about her side of the family? How, how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Her side of the family, I know my grandmother [Jessiett Pomare] who was kind of the matriarch of the island where the family is located or was located.
Speaker 1: And, oh, I'm sorry, where was your mother born, I'm sorry, where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born on an island off of the coast of Colombia that is called San Andres [Colombia].
Speaker 1: A-N-D-R-E-A-S?
Speaker 2: San, A-N-D-R-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, all right. So, so you knew your grandmother who was the matriarch of the family?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And--
Speaker 2: She had thirteen kids. And mainly girls, so she had a house full of girls to command. And on, I guess, one of my ballets ['Las Desenamoradas,' Eleo Pomare] that I made is based on 'The House of Bernarda Alba' [Federico Garcia Lorca] and I think psychologically it must have come from my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very domineering.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did she have any stories about life back in the, I guess, she would go back to the 19th century, I guess, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of her--
Speaker 2: No, she read the Bible so we heard a lot about, about the Bible. And it's sort of typical islandic living. And any stories heard I'm, long forgotten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. So she didn't talk any about the ancestors, where, where the family came from or, or any stories about what it was like in the, you know, at the turn of the century or anything like that? You think it was pretty much the same as--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my father, which is the second largest, I'm the product of two feuding families, the Pomares and the Forbes, and my father was a Forbes.
Story_ID: 465853
Speaker 1: What was your father's name, fu- full name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: His name?
Speaker 1: His full name, yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Tawny [Tawny Forbes].
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's T--
Speaker 2: A-W-N-Y (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Forbes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. F-O-R-B-E-S?
Speaker 2: B-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. So was, was he older than your mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] or--
Speaker 2: No, they were about the same age.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where, where was he born? Was he born on the same island [San Andres, Colombia] or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 465854
Speaker 1: Now you say they were feuding families what, what, what happened? What's, what's the story there?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, it dates back like in some strange way to slavery. That, the, during the time when that area was being colonized, on that island [San Andres, Colombia], I guess, two different colonialists started families. And one side was the Forbes and the other were the Pomares, the two largest families on the island. And so it was about property, land, money, and complexion.
Speaker 1: Now who is who? Who had the money and who had the property and who had the complexion (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The Pomares, the Pomares.
Speaker 1: They had all of it?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: More than or that kind of situation. And--
Speaker 1: Okay. So, they had higher status than the Forbes?
Speaker 2: Yeah. The Forbes were the poor and the Pomares were above.
Speaker 1: Okay. And it's, this is a conflict that goes back a ways as you said?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it goes back quite a ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A traditional conflict.
Speaker 2: --because there have been many countries that have had their fingers in that part of the, of the world.
Story_ID: 465855
Speaker 1: Well, give us a little bit of background. Now how did your, how is your mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] raised? How did she come up in the, now, she's, she's the more privileged Pomare side, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's your classic upbringing. I would say sort of with all of the, I would, kind of mixture of Spanish and European behavior patterns which is like imitate, an imitation of some place where they have never been but that is the result of enslavement is that you behave like your oppressors.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so did she go to school? Did, did she have a chance to go to school and get a, a decent educate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did I?
Speaker 1: No, no, her, her, your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Yeah. There were two types of schools there one could go to, English school or Spanish school and, and learn, on my mother's side, and learn how to behave like a lady, good housekeeping and playing the organ and stuff of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay. So which one did she go to? Did she go to the--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --Spanish school or the English school?
Speaker 2: I am not, I don't know exactly where the focus was because I for instance had been to Spanish school one season and then English school another time. And there, there was no public schools so people paid.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, I take it your mother was bilingual and or maybe even, so she spoke (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Spanish and English?
Speaker 2: Most of the family are bilingual.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she talk about growing up with you about what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: I guess, fairly, well there's, there's not that much to talk about on an island [San Andres, Colombia] that's only a few miles long. I know that the tradition is in the family is that everyone wants to get away as quickly as, as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So sailors or whatever it takes to, not to be confined.
Speaker 1: Now, was, was your mother into the arts at all, did she play the piano or sing or dance?
Speaker 2: No. I am the first artist in the whole, both family structures.
Speaker 1: Okay. What did she like to do, or, or what did she do?
Speaker 2: Very, very ambitious. And she, she's a nurse, was a nurse. And became head, head nurse in the hospitals that she's worked in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In like Central America and the U.S.A.
Speaker 1: Okay. So she, she migrated to Central America and then later the United States (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Later on came to the U.S.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. Did you, did, did you come to the United States with your mother, is that, is that--
Speaker 2: No, I came before my mother.
Story_ID: 465856
Speaker 1: Now, tell us a little bit about your father [Tawny Forbes]. Was, was he, so he wasn't artistic either as far as you know?
Speaker 2: No. I didn't get to know my father. I met my father a few times because he was a captain of a vessel that traveled between, between Panama and San Andres [Colombia] and it was torpedoed so he died.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what happened? Who torpedoed it? Was this--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) There are lots of questions about that because it's near the Canal Zone [Panama Canal Zone], and the question is whether it's the Americans who did it or the Germans who did it.
Speaker 1: Now this is during World War II [WWII], so--
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I was on the boat when it was torpedoed and was rescued and taken to Central America to a U.S. hospital in Panama.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that. I mean, can, can you tell us some details about that day, and can you, how old were you when--
Speaker 2: I must have been around eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, one remembers only boom (laughter) and know that someone has grabbed you and really came to conscious, being aware once I was in the hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did he have a fishing boat or, or what was it, what kind of boat was it?
Speaker 2: It was a boat that carried some, some of everything but mainly something they call copra, it's a, it's, it's coconut, dried coconut. I think that it was then used for making soap and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, as the story goes that was told to me is that they were warned not to keep on going between Colombia and Panama. And, and going back and forth the torpedo incident was the result of that.
Speaker 1: Did you know who warned them about it or--
Speaker 2: No, I haven't the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: --vaguest idea.
Speaker 1: So you don't know who it was--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --which side it was, you know. Okay. Now, well that must have been a, a traumatic thing, you know, to be blown out of the water and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 465857
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your parents [Mildred Pomare Lee and Tawny Forbes] met, yeah?
Speaker 2: Again, we are on this small island [San Andres, Colombia] and swimming or--there are a whole lot of ways of meeting on a small island but she was forbidden to be with my father. And so they ran away to the mainland of Colombia. And again the get out of here syndrome, get (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they, did, did they live in the city when they, in, in Colombia?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: They lived in two places, Santa Marta [Colombia] like I mentioned and another city called Cartagena [Colombia].
Story_ID: 465858
Speaker 1: Well, when you think about your parents' personalities from what you know, 'cause I know you were young when your father [Tawny Forbes] was killed, when you think about their personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I would like to think that I would be more like my father. From what his mother [Hannah Powell-Forbes] has told me is that he was fairly, very outgoing and inquisitive and very natural about the things that he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, I mentioned my [maternal] grandmother [Jessiett Pomare] who was so strict and whatnot and I think that influenced my mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] in some ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: I have two half-sisters [Barbara Dixon and Annis Collins], and one blood sister [Selina Stevens].
Speaker 1: Okay. And so did the two half-sisters come after your parents were, you know, after your father was killed?
Speaker 2: After my father died my mother remarried and that's where the name Lee comes from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 465859
Speaker 1: I know you grew up in several places, so but do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: What type of memory, I'm trying to figure out.
Speaker 1: Well, what, what, what's the first thing that you remember remembering in life? Your first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, my first childhood memory relates to, I mean, concrete situation where I would say that impacted on me would, was indeed the waking up in the hospital. And, and my other memories revolve around my [maternal] grandmother [Jessiett Pomare] and her, her treatment of me. And my, another clear memory is the desire to always go away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that has remained a strong element in my personality, you know, to be away from.
Story_ID: 465860
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: You tell us (laughter). There's a lot of different places but--
Speaker 2: In terms, in terms of South America, it's just the smell of the island [San Andres, Colombia], of Latin American places, you know, the ocean, the breeze, the food, they all sort of combine and make like one huge medley of sound and smell and sort of nostalgia or--
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what did it look like growing up? I, I know it didn't look like New York [New York], so--
Speaker 2: Where is this?
Speaker 1: When you were growing up in, on the island, what, what did it look like? And, and this is for, you know, somebody who watches this years later, I imagine this will be around for a while so--
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of, lots of fruit. We had banana trees and we had guava trees, and I used to like to climb trees, coconut trees. And in terms of making food we had fish from right across the road we could go fishing. And some neighbors had pigs that one would be killed, a year or, and then the whole district would come and buy pig from there. There was like one Jewish family on the island who came to open a shop there. And they brought in canned goods and in terms of odor and whatnot my [maternal] grandmother [Jessiett Pomare] had a pantry which was like it's an open kitchen, where there was like stacks of, of rice that came in bags and there would be molasses and stuff that, to last a long time because when the boat comes in, if you, you would make an order and they'd bring back stuff for you to the island.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's about the, there were no incidents or so--
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2: --in that history.
Speaker 1: Incidents of what?
Speaker 2: I, I mean to, to hold on to. You know, people sit on their porches and they talk about people that you, who died a decade ago and you're not interested anyhow it was that kind of small town, small island thing. I think once I moved to South- to Central America, there was, there was the one, the annual Carnival and there was the room to go in Colon [Panama], in Central America, one can go, can run away for hours.
Story_ID: 465861
Speaker 1: Just give, give us kind of a chronology here. When, now you lived on an island [San Andres, Colombia] up until your, your father [Tawny Forbes] died (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until, yeah.
Speaker 1: Passed away.
Speaker 2: I was on the way to Central America when the torpedo incident happened.
Speaker 1: Okay. And were, were your parents resettling in Central America?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were, were your parents going to settle in Central America at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] was already in Central America.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so, so you just, you made a transition to Central America at around age eight, I guess, right? About the same time that the boat--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so, and I read that you moved to the United States at age ten, when you were ten years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Between the U.S. and Colombia I was in Panama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had an uncle who was a seaman. His intent, he was like the most promising of my [maternal] grandmother's [Jessiett Pomare] men children and the favorite, and he was sent away to the U.S.A. to study. And he studied ministry here in the U.S.A. and became an atheist (laughter). And he is the person responsible for my being in the U.S.A.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, well, what's his name?
Speaker 2: A long name. His name was Barsabas Anab Pomare. So you get a feeling of my grandmother and the one who was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. How do you spell his last name? Can, can you spell it?
Speaker 2: Pomare.
Speaker 1: Oh, Pomare.
Speaker 2: Like mine.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. All right. So well, you said Panama was different from the island because it was, there was Carnival--
Speaker 2: It, it was larger.
Speaker 1: --and larger.
Speaker 2: But the same mentality exists. You know, it's like the mentality of Jamaica is so similar to Barbados. And in Central America, in Panama, it was occupied by, when it came to black people, it was mainly people from the other parts of the Caribbean. And so like my stepfather [Eustace Lee] was Jamaican. And so there's a great similarity in the attitudes about life and the food and because of that nature.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've, I've heard that a lot of the, a lot of Jamaicans and from, and people from other islands--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot--
Speaker 1: --come over to work with United Fruit Company [Chiquita Brands International, Inc.], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And the Canal Zone [Panama Canal Zone]. The, it seemed as if people from that district, the West Indies and whatnot, is that they didn't get malaria as often as the white men who came and so there was a large influx of them there.
Story_ID: 465862
Speaker 1: You were describing like the Carnival in Panama. And what was the music like and what, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the music for Carnival varies because we have like different kind of mixtures of people often. And so (unclear) sambas and rumbas and cumbias. It was really Latino and black and African music, drumming. And, of course, the Carnival queens and bands of people. And different groups, it represented different parts of Panama. And it was mainly sort of done outdoors and they built these small platforms where people danced and you can go from one platform in one part of the town to another, they were called toldos or dance trucks. And, of course, that influence, later on when I saw the work of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, how much that environment had influenced her work. So the whole anthropologist that she was, it, she brought back so much of that stuff from places, the West Indies and Brazil and brought it to the United States.
Story_ID: 465863
Speaker 1: Now did you like to dance when you were a, a youngster?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. Movement was, it has always been my major love and, and theater. And where else to find theater than in, during Carnival time, you know, in Brazil or Panama or the West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any particular rhythm that you like to dance too better than others?
Speaker 2: Not especially but my favorite instrument is, is the drum and that gives some ideas. The drum is such a versatile instrument that, that it makes the body move differently. And a conga has drums, a samba has drums. And then there were the dances that were influenced by European movements. Slaves in that area would imitate the behavior of some of their, oppressors I call them, but would do like very strange variations on them as poking fun at them. You'll see a lot of that in Haiti in all of the minuet type of thing done, tongue in cheek. All of that reached as far as the island [San Andres, Colombia] where I am from.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so these are, these dances were sort of mocking--
Speaker 2: Yeah, some things are mocking.
Speaker 1: Okay. Similar to the cakewalk in the United States?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Get together and dress up like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us an example of, I don't wanna put you on the spot but example of the kind of rhythms that, I'll, I know you don't have a drum but can you kind of give us an example?
Speaker 2: I, that would be very difficult. Well, a six, eight time for instance would be (makes sounds). And you would, you would find that in a pseudo minuet, you'd find it in a quadrille. And then you might find it also in a watusi from Africa, you know, the same sense of ride, lift and ride. And that shows the influence of Africa on these islands, so we had to have come, or, or, or have been brought during the time of slavery to these spaces. And the music was brought, the rhythms, and the food.
Story_ID: 465864
Speaker 1: What you're describing is actually an unbroken link with Africa, right, and not something that had to be learned later on, you know, after it was broken but something that's continuing, a continuum (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Africa was a forbidden place to be from in those parts of the world because I think psychologically people are taught not to like themselves. So the last thing in, you say Africa where, you know. That, that denial that happens and lack of education that happens that people, they identify with the fairer complexion and if you're darker something is amiss, something is wrong. But the, one would have to be away from a, from that district and see things at a wider perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying that slavery basically is responsible for the--
Speaker 2: Yes, all of the impact of, the impact of slavery all over that area is incredible.
Speaker 1: So do you think that the people were a lot more African than they thought they were? I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I would say the, the food, the, the mode of walking and the, the, the patois, the broken language, you know, is Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: But they would deny that they're African?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Consciously but--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but would exhibit all the traits--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a lot of the traits.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I know when I first came to the U.S. until I got things properly aligned, I would say I'm South American, I wouldn't say I'm of African descent, you know. Of course, it took a while to realize the impact that Africa had via slavery on where I'm from. And based on my complexion it's the only place I could have been from.
Story_ID: 465865
Speaker 1: When you moved to the United- to, was it New York [New York] at first (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And when you were ten years old, it's (background noise) 1947?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, this [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] that I mentioned before, his first, his first move was to become a preacher and then he, before he got a church, he be, he became an atheist. He--
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind what happened to, well what happened?
Speaker 2: He studied so much, he was extremely brilliant and curious about everything. And he had, his thrust in life was to save three of the male children from the family because there were, the, the, the family structure is female dominated. And that's one level but, of course, it might be that some of the women had to get rid of the kids, you know. And so he selected three male kids to come to the U.S.A. to, to study or to make something of their lives or whatever those dreams are.
Speaker 1: Okay. So when you, when you came your, your mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] came with you, right? Or, or did she come right up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: She didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you came--
Speaker 2: A sister--
Speaker 1: A sister?
Speaker 2: --came first and then, then the boys were brought.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you all lived with your uncle when you first--
Speaker 2: My, yes, we lived or was supported by my uncle. He became a seaman after, after studying his ministry he decided he liked the sea more. And so he traveled on one of the huge passenger ships. And that's, that's one mode of supporting the boys, he called us.
Speaker 1: Now how, were you the youngest or the oldest or where, where, where did you fit in?
Speaker 2: I was the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you had what teenagers--
Speaker 2: They had like a year in between--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all of it.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: The three men.
Speaker 1: So when he, when he would go out of town for a long period of time would you, you all would be home by yourselves?
Speaker 2: We'd have my aunt--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's sister. And I was in time to start school here so, it, it was like a culture shock.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, to come from Central America to New York City.
Speaker 1: What was the, the most shocking thing about it?
Speaker 2: The, the, the shock is first physical. You know, the physical things that, the height of buildings. And I arrived on, in '47 [1947] in the worst snowstorm in America's history, New York City's history. The whole idea of living five flights up, (laughter) you know. And drive, riding underground, those are, those are all things that sort of, it's like very baffling and surprising and frightening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and the, the, the people are so different in, I would say I was brought up like in a, a middle class kind of situation on the island [San Andres, Colombia] from one of the bigger families and, and the education for instance was quite different. I, when I came to America, I spoke with an accent but grammatically correct. I had to learn black English (laughter) the minute I hit P.S. 184 in Harlem [New York, New York] and to find out what's happening around me. And it's, it's nothing, it's, it's just like night, night and day.
Speaker 1: Now, now where did you live in Harlem?
Speaker 2: 116th Street and 5th Avenue.
Story_ID: 465866
Speaker 1: You started school, did you start, start in the fifth grade or when you, when you came over?
Speaker 2: No, then they, yes, or something to that effect. I went through school like this (gesture) because I was way ahead of the American kids in my classes. And my first experience in school was kind of very, very weird because I had a social person whatever they're called, an interview, immigrant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Social worker or--
Speaker 2: A social worker--
Speaker 1: --counselor or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Who I think was a bit, I must have antagonized her a bit with my (laughter) whole way of, my being was threatening to her in answering questions and she wanted to find out where did I learn my English, I went to private school (laughter) in Central America. And she put me in a class in 4-C or something like that, they had numbers, letters then. And this was, it, it was a mad house. It, she, the teacher spent more time trying to control the kids. And it turned out the social worker just did that purposely, I think, just sort of put me in, in, in a difficult children or class or something of that kind. And the, when the regular teacher came it turned out to have been a black man and he just looked at me and said, "What are you doing in this class? Who put you in here?" I said well, (unclear) that's it because there wasn't anything for me to do in terms of whatnot, what of education and whatnot. So I got skipped, I got skipped and skipped and skipped. And I can't remember years but in elementary school [P.S. 184, New York, New York] I literally, literally just (makes noise) (laughter) through it because of, the mode of teaching, British teachers are like very different and they had permission to punish you and so you learn rather quickly, (laughter) you know, how to behave and even handwriting, penmanship lessons and things of that nature. But I can recall when I was in the sixth grade, my aunt found a novel or something I was reading and said, "What are you doing reading this kind of stuff," based on the picture on the cover. And she said, "I'm going to, to your teacher." And, and I was, I think in the fifth grade, yes. And the teacher said, "You should be excited this kid is reading almost at a college level." But again, she's from the islands and the whole mentality of I'm here to make some money to build a house when I go back. I'm here to, to go home to die on my native land. And here you have an uncle [Pomare's maternal uncle, Barsabas Anab Pomare] who is a seaman and who is an atheist and who is very involved with what is happening to black people in the U.S.A. So there's that cultural conflict, you know. And the, the excitement that the two different things often clash.
Story_ID: 465867
Speaker 1: Was your [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] the member of any organizations that you can, that you can remember that--
Speaker 2: I can't remember exactly but I think, and I don't even think it's necessary to because he was an educator in the sense of books, you know. And you'd be handed a book and then asked when, when he's back from whatever trip he was on, "Okay, what about this, what happened here, what do you think it means?" And so that I was always more sophisticated than the kids in my class. And yeah, so he, he, in terms of my, of my mentality I would say that he was responsible for my mentality and for my mentality. And he prepared me to go to school, so to speak, you know. I was never lost in the system, you know.
Story_ID: 465868
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the cultural life in Harlem [New York, New York] in those days. I know the, did, did you go to the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] at 125th [Street] and Lenox [sic. 7th Avenue]?
Speaker 2: I, wait, oh, that's fun. I lived one, for my first move was the year of the snowstorm, I was on a 116th Street and 5th Avenue. My aunt was the kind of the person, who she worked at Straph's [ph.] and didn't get along with American women, American black woman, women, because she was fair skinned and could have done quite well because at that time if you're foreign and have this exotic look, I mean, she had gray-green eyes, and, you know, she could have made a whole deal of it but we are taught so much to dislike one another because of our complexions. And but she was bent on going back home [to San Andres, Colombia] as soon as the boys got old enough to take care of themselves. And so she thought of taking in washing. And she tried to open a restaurant on a 116th Street and 5th Avenue but the, this, those were the days of Wonder Bread and fried chicken, (laughter) you know, (claps hands) and how are you gonna open this restaurant there when there is no connection between you and the people you want to buy stuff from you. But you had mentioned the book shop.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because a 116th Street was, was so very different. You had like one, one side, the, the, going, the, the crosstown bus and then there's I would say the nouveau middle class, blacks, mainly from the West Indies, you know, here I am on that side, and across the street begins a 117th Street, which was one of the most dangerous blocks in Harlem. And so, (laughter) so we moved from one side of the street (laughter) to the other. We moved to 1410 [ph.], which I would say is the beginning of hell (laughter). And I told you about this business of buying a house. I have, I don't know better house buyers than my, the women in my family.
Story_ID: 465869
Speaker 1: And so my next move is, was to a 125th Street [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and is it Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard]?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I lived at a very famous place actually. It used to be the diamond jewelry shop [Herberts] at the corner. And right around the corner was this fascinating bookshel- bookstore, I have to find out the name of it, that carried all sorts of literature about slavery and black Muslim material, it, it was just jam-packed.
Speaker 2: I think he called it the National Memorial African Bookstore [sic. African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York], and that was Lewis Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Well, it's a bookstore that I would go in and out of because it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the one with the posters of the African presidents outside?
Speaker 1: Yes. On the wall. And I lived in the, in, in, I think, there were two brownstones on that side, I lived right where the huge diamond clock was and Davin [ph.]. So, so it's like living on a 125th Street was, it was good because you had to go into places. A 125th Street except for Blumstein's [New York, New York] and all of the shops, had no, no real personality. On that cross street there was lots of things but there was a, a Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York], you know, and--
Speaker 2: You were right in the hub, you were in the hub of everything--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Harlem [New York, New York]. You were in the center, you were in the bull's eye, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah. And I, I, the, the soap box arena, I was right in that, you know. I heard Malcolm [Malcolm X] talk so often without knowing who he was or understanding philosophically what he was saying but that that was, that was my, I would say political exposure. And also it, it, it made me curious about going back into let's say a 117th Street. And the food, again, I don't know why I'm so hung up on soul food (laughter) and the music. For instance, the music which I heard in that part of Harlem was, was not heard in South America, not unless it's black market. And not allowed into the house, (laughter) you know. My grandmother called it black noise, (laughter) black people foolishness. And so here I'm, I'm becoming used to hearing Ruth Brown and Bessie Smith. And these are impacting on me, however, not like on the rest of the family. So that, so that made me quite different, you know. And starting to understand my placement in the universe so to, so to speak. And, you know, going back to South America is something that one would have to be really loco to, to do, there would be nothing there that would satisfy my, my curiosity. And not necessarily who first but what I identified with and which is the underdog. I, at a very early age I started being interested in people's identity and my identity and things like that.
Story_ID: 465870
Speaker 1: I was close to so many places where I'm, I'm excited by music, the way Carnival, the music affected me, the, the parallel to it was the small churches or the churches in Harlem [New York, New York]. And at the time I didn't realize that I was really studying theater (laughter) by attend, by going to these places. I can remember at the corner, at the corner of a 125th Street [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] was Daddy Grace Temple [Grace Temple, New York, New York] right there at the corner. And, and I used to visit Prophet Jones' [James F. Jones] small church. And mainly for, for the music, it's the music that attracted me. And a passion that, that is very difficult to define, the, the life, you know, that, that pushed you, (laughter) you know. And I wouldn't say it had anything to do with my beliefs, my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] had already influenced me when it came to the purpose of an Almighty and whatnot. But the sincerity, the humanness of what I saw in these places gave me some sense of, of the depth of emotion. It also prepared me for, for what I would make if, if I was an actor, what I would make if I was a painter. And the search would be to, to, to not be involved with the religion but to be involved with the ability to, to, to experience so deeply, so real, you know, to see people who actually feel. And the, the, that, I had, had really a phenomenal interest to me. And, of course, there were the five cents parties the grind sessions and all of that that you were forbidden to go to, red light, blue light parties and things of that nature.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the church experience, I mean, I, sounds a lot like, you ever read, read James Baldwin where he describes a little church where he was a, he was a, a boy pastor in the church and could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, yes, James--
Speaker 2: He, he could make--
Speaker 1: James was a friend of mine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, I often tell people that James Baldwin is the reason, had something to do with what, with my sitting where I am right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, he--
Speaker 2: Did you meet him before you started dance, you know, dancing professionally, did you?
Speaker 1: Not before.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See I lived in the village, Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. And at that time there used to be these afternoon soirees for the intellectual or the searching mind and whatnot. And I, I first met James at one of these affairs that was given by someone by the name of Lionel Mitchell who, who was a writer. He's written for the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], and the, the black newspapers.
Story_ID: 465871
Speaker 1: We were talking about high school days, you know, now when you were living at 125th Street [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard] and I guess, for grade school and high school.
Speaker 2: The, I, I, when, when it comes to education and educating a black person, I'm been very, very lucky. Number one, I mentioned my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] who would not let anything happen to me educationally in the school system that he was not (laughter) clear what is really happening. And I attended my junior high school, I had fantastic people also. I went to what was then called Cooper Junior High School [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York] which was on the corner of a 120th Street and 5th Avenue, right by Mount Morris Park [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I happened to have been in one of the A classes. And the way they had things divided, actually it was a (laughter) a school to get you ready to get a job I think, you know, because it had all of these shops. And they had a group that was being prepared, a small, for academia, it was like you would end up going to Peter Stuyvesant High School [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] or Bronx School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]. And the grouping I was in, were, I guess, the more literate, literate group. And, for instance I had a teacher who brought in The New York Times every morning. And put it there and we'd discuss what's in The Times, you know, in junior high school in the seventh grade. And once they found out, once they had made a selection of people, they really pushed us because there were just a handful of us and then there were the, the, the roughies, the tough, the ball players and whatnot. And which again kept my academics at a, oh, at the proper plane so to speak. And what happened? Oh, yeah, lots of wonderful things happened there. And I, and the other thing is that, the, the amount of black teachers that I was exposed to, who I wish that type of teacher was still around, you know, who really--
Speaker 1: Now, now did you have a favorite teacher that that you can remember?
Speaker 2: I think most of my teachers were favorite at some point or, or the other. I, I, I had one teacher, Mr. Lieberman [ph.], he is the newspaper guy. We'd, you know, he'd say, "I don't care what newspaper you bring in, read an article, explain it to the class," bring in the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], bring in this, even the Daily Worker have shown up in, in, in there. It was so that, I think, just a wonderful education thing, because thereafter, my math (unclear) was okay while I was in junior high school, I had made a choice not to go to one of the science high schools and whatnot. And I went to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] which was a vocational school with a reputation of an, of an academic school because the intent was to get you into college with a profession under your belt or that if you don't go to college, you're professionally prepared for, for the theater.
Story_ID: 465872
Speaker 1: I think it's in our junior high school that I started being interested in, in theater.
Speaker 2: Okay. This is '49 [1949], '50 [1950], '51 [1951], I guess? Are you, or, or, are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's in that district--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I graduated from high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] in '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Way ahead of (laughter) where I should have been. But my interest in, in, in theater began there at Cooper Junior High School [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York]. And they had a little drama department and tailoring which I did there. The, the, the thing I couldn't do well was woodwork, woodwork shop (laughter). I'd bribe my cousins, who I called my brethren, to building one of those silly pumps, there's the lamp, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 2: I've seen one of 'em, I've, I know what you're talking about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, I had to make one and so it's like, "Look I'll do your homework if you fix (laughter) that thing for me." But the, the most memorable thing I would say about, aside from liking the teachers and what I was doing is, I sort of coerced my shop teacher, woodwork shop teacher to make a kite. And he said, "Well, why do you want to make a kite," you know. So he was convinced then, (unclear) it took glue, it took pieces of wood, it took a certain preciseness. And I said and there's Mount Morris Park [New York, New York] (laughter) across the street, you know, to fly in. And that's the way I passed wood- my woodshop by telling this teacher well, a kite is just as difficult and more difficult to make than a lamp thing. This was ridiculous though (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: I remember, my, my brother made the same lamp with the, you--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --the pump is attached to the switch or something (unclear) chain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, attached to the switch.
Speaker 2: That's right. There's a little trough or something there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 465873
Speaker 1: You went to the high school of- for the performing arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts], right?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In New York [New York]? Okay. And you were, you were ahead, yeah, you were ahead about at least two, two years ahead of your class, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At least.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, what was high school like? What did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, high school, well--
Speaker 1: Well, how did you decide now, you got interested in theater in, in middle school, I mean, in junior high school [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York], but then how did you decide to go to the high school for the performing arts? Had you become convinced then that you wanted to be a performer?
Speaker 2: Yeah. In some ways, in some ways it was rebellion (laughter). I, you know, I had already decided that I was not going to grow up to support anybody's family. And it's, oh, something just came to mind, what really got me started the summer I had, I took the, the, I took the audition, and that was kind of surprising because I, I, I had no idea as to formalized dance training. And for the audition for the High School of Performing Arts, getting back to one of your earlier questions, I did a mambo (laughter). And it was really kind of logical (unclear) people because Dudley Williams took the audition at the same time, [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington, all of us were in that group of--and here was this elegant kid, Dudley Williams who was quick to do all of the ballet turns and everything. Turned out he was studying dance in Harlem [New York, New York]. And my career began doing a mambo. And the, the, and while I waited to go to start school, like I can remember I was skating and making up things on this, as I skated around and a gentleman approached me and told me he was a talent scout and would I like to be a dancer. I said, "Well, of course." And so he had to talk to my aunt. It turned out he was a, a talent search person but it was for a show that was called 'Star Time Revue.' And what they do is they would go around the city and get hundreds of kids and then charge them money for, you know, for lessons. And then they put a thousand kids on stage (laughter) and you have to buy your own costume and the whole thing. But--
Speaker 1: That's kind of a scam in some ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's what that whole thing was.
Speaker 1: You get something out of it but it's--
Speaker 2: But I started taking ballet in the summer and tap in the summer.
Speaker 1: So are these your first dance classes that that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --summer before you started high school?
Speaker 2: The, the summer, the summer before actually starting.
Speaker 1: So this is like, did, now did you go to high school for four years?
Speaker 2: From the seventh, all I know is I graduated in '53 [1953] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-three [1953], okay.
Speaker 2: And I think--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --it's a three year high school.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is about 1950 then, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or so that you started taking dance for the first time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when was your first dance class? Do, do you remember?
Speaker 2: The, the fall of the--
Speaker 1: Of '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what did, who was the teacher and, and what did you take?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was the High School of Performing Arts, had this was, it was just star-studded teachers, these were all, all professionals.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, at the school, I'm, I'm (unclear) at the school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the School of Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: So that's where you started taking formal dance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my serious thing.
Story_ID: 465874
Speaker 1: So did you kind of feel from the beginning that you were probably going to be a dancer?
Speaker 2: I, no, not a dancer, there, there were, the, I was surrounded by such fantastic talents. I mean, that you can just, they're in books, these people are in books and stuff at this time.
Speaker 1: So you mentioned [HistoryMaker] Mercedes Ellington and who else?
Speaker 2: Dudley Williams was one. Oh, right now it, it won't come to me because--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's, I'm trying to locate black names. But like we used to say that we were like flies in a pool of milk (laughter) (unclear) that, where am I?
Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and the beginning of taking dance classes and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Would--
Speaker 2: I, I have, without totally understanding what it was, I, I wanted to make things more so than do things. And, for instance, once I started school, in Harlem [New York, New York] there was a place called the Boys' Athletic League [New York, New York] and they had a little project that was going on. And I would go there in the evening and teach everything I had learned in school during the day. So I was developing a, a, a teacher skill or a leadership kind of skills. Or that's what I mean by making things because when, when you're surrounded by such great talents, if you're small as I am, it, the, the inferiority complex thing that that enters, you know. And again, getting to race. The, the majority of teaching, that you get for the theater, for dance, is based on the Eurocentric sense of beauty and things of that nature and I started realizing that there is a white thing which is gonna be there for the rest of my life. And couldn't see like putting my energy into anything that I had to emulate and still fail (laughter). And so that whole sense of, of what the real world is and that it's a white world, was like, started like very, very early. It was nurtured again by my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare], again, by people that I met or might have, if you've ever heard of a composer called Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, his mother had such great influence on me, Verita Pearson [ph.]. And she used to say, "Just pass with high marks all of the things you're asked to do but is there something else you want to do, be doing that on the side." And she had a little theater group going. So that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what was the name of her group? Do, do you know?
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it didn't have a name, it was like, there, there were so many after school programs. And--
Speaker 1: Now, that was the time of the, was it, was that the time of HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] in--
Speaker 2: HARYOU-ACT came later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was also involved with that. But anyhow, she had this grouping of kids and we'd go there and she taught music. And while I was at the high school, I would teach anything, (laughter) like I said, I, I was at all of these different recreation centers and teaching what I had learned in the daytime, in the evening, different evenings I'd be different, at different places.
Story_ID: 465875
Speaker 1: And started experimenting with my own movements or I would change things. And I still, recently I went to the theater and I met this woman who, a mature woman, and she came up to me and she said, "Aren't you [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare?" And I said, "Yes." And this mature woman, she said, "You used to teach me dance at the Police Athletic League when I was ten years old (laughter)." I said, "What?" And so it happens to me fairly often, especially if I'm in a black neighbor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now that's, that's pretty, that's--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: --that's kind of audacious. Now, you actually, you learned something in school and then go out in the community and teach it in class?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I, I'm a natural teacher. I'm an educator, you know. And--
Speaker 2: Did, did anybody ever say, "Who does he think he is, he, he (laughter) just learned it?"
Speaker 1: I had a lot of it and I've gotten some people fired for--I know at the Boys' Athletic League [New York, New York], there was this post, post-communist dance movement teacher. When I say post-communist there was that whole era in the '30s [1930s] where all of the white dancers were using black spirituals to their advantage. They, they couldn't find their own words of protest and so they used spirituals. And there was one of, this white teacher on 122nd Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], who thought she could save black children (laughter). And so I ventured into the place and it was clear that I was studying some place, and this (gesture) started happening once I started teaching, and the kids went to the head and said, "Well, we don't want her anymore, we want Eleo to teach us (laughter)." And I've had many incidents where I've been blocked from some organizations or some teaching situation because they sort of know once I have gotten in there, they, my, my interest is not, is, is not just getting up and doing some step but it, it takes a, a whole person, you know, to become, to become specific about what it is they're doing.
Story_ID: 465876
Speaker 1: When you were a teenager were you aware of, of Pearl Primus and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and, and had you seen 'em in the movies or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, yeah. In junior high school [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York], again this teacher that I had, that made us read the newspaper, Mr. Lieberman [ph.], during Black History Month [sic. Negro History Week; Black History Month] he'd put up a, a thing. And then your regular school book had pictures of Katherine Dunham and Pearl Primus. And I think Donny McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now, he's an important figure (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you didn't know, you didn't learn anything about them, they were just people who had achieved. The, the, the fact that Katherine Dunham was a great anthropologist, you know. It, they were just dancers, you know. People who were, or more than just dancers, just classified as Negro dancers.
Speaker 1: Okay. So but you had, did you ever see Katherine Dunham's dances in any of the movies like 'Stormy Weather' or any of that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I saw Katherine Dunham's company live once. And, of course, 'Stormy Weather' has influenced every other black dancer or chorographer. I'm sure you might, if you've been doing these interviews you're gonna hear 'Stormy Weather,' 'Stormy Weather,' 'Stormy Weather.' And back to my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] and his politics and whatnot. The most exciting things I saw, I have, I can't even remember it was downtown, it was Pearl Primus and she did a freedom piece, I think it was 'Strange Fruit' or something of that. And that is when I decided, started knowing the difference between what I wanted to do and what an entertainer is.
Story_ID: 465877
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about Pearl Primus and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and, and some of the people that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you saw growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah. The, the, the black white dance thing from the '30s [1930s] it's like, they were very, very intense. And some of these people then, none of these people got the, got the credits that they really should have had.
Speaker 1: Okay. So well, tell us about, I guess, they, towards the end of high, now, now in, in high school, did, were you a part of different clubs in high school and that sort of thing or did you--
Speaker 2: I think the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] meant business. If you were going into the theater, you, you became theater, period in everything you do. And the competition to get into the school was intense. And once you're there, the competition to stay, to be among the best just never let up. It was not, it had a music department, a drama department, and a dance department. I was exposed through acting technique because I'm going into the theater and the theater department had dance at some point so that it was a, a wide exposure.
Speaker 1: So you've got to have, you've gotta have some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --theater, if you're in dancing and vice versa (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is this gonna bother us?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) no.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So it's like becoming an adult (laughter) very quickly. Okay, we're not here to kid around, let's get down to--
Speaker 1: So, so the typical high school stuff doesn't go on there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So nobody worries about the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you know, the pep club or the prom or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you, they would tell you the minute you get in there if your average dropped, your academic average dropped beneath 80 [percent], we're sending you a little pink slip, it means you're in danger. And, which is good, you know.
Story_ID: 465878
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers in high school that really stand out that are important as mentors to you?
Speaker 2: At, at high, the performing arts high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]? That's very, there were, there were teachers, well, for instance, I have had, let's say some lessons with Uta Hagen who is in the drama department. We've had Martha Graham come in and did guest class, a, a guest class. We have had like members of the Limon Dance Company. At the time we were always exposed to people who are doing things. And teachers are so, were so individual but each teacher had something to offer you, something that you could take away with you. I think her name was Mrs. Bergman [ph.] who taught English. We went into, the, the first month of creative writing she said, "Okay, you will all start your autobiography because you will, you will do it twice while, when you're in my presence," she said, "please find some place to put it." And she marked them and wrote let- notes on them and just gave it back and say you're responsible for saving this. "Beginning of your last year," she said, "you will start your autobiography." And you did. And then you had to bring in what you wrote three years ago and compare it with what you have written today. And it's, it's incredible, the sophistication, the, the alertness that can happen in three years.
Speaker 1: Is, is that how you changed in three years, I mean, basically you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could keep trace (laughter). You know, once I said, wow, I was pretty naive (laughter) there or this is a nice quality or this writing is bad or this is good or things of that nature.
Story_ID: 465879
Speaker 1: Now, did you get paid for teaching dance when you were in high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] when you'd go to these centers and, and so forth?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: It's all, all volunteer?
Speaker 2: All volunteer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I have spent my life volunteering (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now was there a time when you, when was your paid dance job?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness. I guess, I started getting paid in Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's a long way off (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, of course, but I know I had been paid in the U.S.A. but it was not a situation where I could say well, I will get paid every week for, for the work I am doing. And, I guess, why I did so much free teaching and choreographing is, I guess, a part of it might be selfish. You know, that it's a chance for me to, to do what I want to do and to, to prove myself. And I have a, a strong sense of, of community.
Story_ID: 465880
Speaker 1: Now did you have to work in, in school, when you were in school?
Speaker 2: When I was in school, yes, I did work. I left home when I was very young. I was still in high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 1: Now, you were living with your aunt and [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] right in, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah. And part of my writing because one of my thrusts is still to finish a book, it's my writing (laughter) that got me in trouble or sex orientation or something, and I had started a notebook, I had a ledger this thick (gesture). And Mrs. Bergman [ph.] had told us write notes about everything, you never know what it might turn in--and I had a book of just notes or incident, today this happened (laughter) or I saw my stepfather [Eustace Lee] do this to Mary Lou [ph.] across the street, all of that kind, it just, material so, you know, it turned, some of it have turned into dances or have led me to dances. And my sister discovered it in my room, she had no business cleaning my room, and I came in from school (makes noise) doom, all hell broke loose, you know, writing this stuff about our family and, "You're filthy, you were dirty," or something, and, "What did, what do you do after school?" What I was doing after school was doing errands. I was, you know, I have been an errand boy. I have cleaned offices and all sorts of things because of my, my wanting to get the hell away from the islandic mentality because by that time I had known that there's a world outside and, and I could create my own definition of, of things and what things I want to be involved with. So by the time I was, by the time they say you have to go, I was ready to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did, did it take you by surprise that that was their reaction or did you, I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, because they were very abusive to me. You know, I've been through anything you can imagine where the word abuse is used. And again, (unclear) that, that harkens back to, to these two family on the island [San Andres, Colombia], the Forbes and the Pomare. Here is a Pomare family taking care of the Forbes child, so it's, I wasn't even a stepchild, you know. I was, I was, it was something that happened in the family that shouldn't have happened.
Story_ID: 465881
Speaker 1: Was your relationship with your [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] still strong?  That was a--it seemed liked that was pretty good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, he's there, but he, but he's back--
Speaker 1: Back and forth.
Speaker 2: --and forth. Very handsome man, very, a very powerful person. If, you know, I always say, if I was anyone else he's who I'd want, want to be. But, you know, once colonized, you stay colonized (laughter). You know, and he, you know, it's, he would belt my behind so that I couldn't sit for days and then turn out and be absolutely friendly. And once that that discipline is over that's a different experience.
Speaker 1: Now, was that typical behavior for, for people, you know, from the islands in those days and, and, or for African Americans in Harlem [New York, New York] in those days?
Speaker 2: You know, you know, I, I don't know, I have some kind of idea that again we imitate our oppressors. And is this the only way we can communicate by hitting. And some, sometimes it's what, it's built into the culture, I think, a lot even here today in the U.S.A., I see the way little boys the way they get yelled at and pushed and screamed at in the streets, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and then, of course, once your sexuality comes into play you are not going to be of any use to this family. Or, or, you are responsible because I have taken care of you, you are responsible to the whole family. You know, that kind--
Speaker 1: So, did they try to change you and was there, do you, do you perceive a constant, I mean, a, a concerted effort to try to change, change your orientation?
Speaker 2: I, I don't think they would know how. They, they might have been pissed off because I was so, so clear in my direction and independent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they said that's not a trait that people from that part of the universe like. And oh, "Why boy, you're talking back to me," or, or, "Why are you speaking above your brother's head." It's not my fault that he won't read (laughter). You know, it's that kind of thing. Or, "You're being evil for doing, for doing that, you're trying to make him look stupid." Of course, I'm trying to make him look stupid (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what brothers usually do to each other (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Story_ID: 465882
Speaker 1: Now where did you go when you moved out? And how old were you, you said, you think when you moved out?
Speaker 2: I was nearly sixteen when I left home.
Speaker 1: Okay. And well, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I, again this begins a whole new theater thing. I moved into a little building on thirty- it's right beside Town Hall [The Town Hall, New York, New York], a narrow little building, and, and it's dilapidated. And it turned out to be a historical building in my mind because the Syvilla Fort dance studio [Syvilla Fort Studio of Theater Dance, New York, New York] was a strange little place where there are these people beating drums and whatnot. Right, what, what street is that? Town Hall. But anyhow, black dance, jazz, and what black people did was not, was not to be found at the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. You know, which is what led me to say anything a white choreographer can do, I can do as well because they couldn't have trained Eliot Feld with me in the same room without my knowing it. But then the things I can do that (laughter) he wouldn't even know where to begin. Anyhow, the, the, it's a beautiful story actually when it's written. That building, the first, my run away, not run away, my get away night was spent, the, the room was about the size of that area. It had a bed, a drawer, and that, that was it, the bathroom was outside, the shower was outside. But coming up the steps was this dance studio and it was the first time I saw a lot of black bodies in one place. You know, except for shows and whatnot, you know. But the intensity of what was happening. It turned out that it was Syvilla Fort's studio. She's one of, and she was teaching Dunham's [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] technique. And I can remember sitting on the stoop and, you know, like, like the studios there and I have to go up to my floor here and I would sit and watch these classes. Nothing like what I had done at the high school, absolutely nothing. But I started noticing a man working on a bench and how the hell he was doing the things that he was doing. Again, and the music, the, I had heard the music at Mount Olivet Baptist Church [New York, New York], 'There is a Balm in Gilead.' And all of these marvelous things on this bench. Years after I found out I was looking at Talley Beatty. Isn't that incredible? And I was, well, when I got to know Talley, I said, "Talley have you any recollection of such and such a thing." And he said, "Oh, you're the ski-, you're the skinny little boy who used to sit in the, (laughter) there."
Story_ID: 465883
Speaker 1: And it turned out that Walter Nicks lived in the same building and I would think, oh, my God who is that strange little guy that, who never talked, never talked. Turned out to be Walter Nicks, one of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's leading dancers (laughter) and the whole thing. So it's almost like kinetically through osmosis or something.
Speaker 2: So, you, you didn't know those people were around there when you moved over there, you just, but--
Speaker 1: I didn't know them. They had, they were on the verge of being names to me but I couldn't attach a body to it. It turns out that the Henry LeTang dance studio, the, one of the famous black tap dancers was there. So I sort of followed the spirits in some strange way and, and so that that was amazing to me, you know, to--
Speaker 2: Now, here's a, Talley Beatty is a, a legend in--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's a, wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Ta- Talley was wonderful (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So you're surrounded by everybody that's (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You're surrounded by a lot of great dancers and choreographers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I, I am, I, I'm from a lucky generation. I really feel that I am from a very lucky generation. It's where so many people were doing like different things. We think of it, my generation is the one that includes Talley Beatty, Alvin Ailey, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson. We don't have, today we can't, we have a lot, we have much more than we had at at that time in terms of amount of dance and dance teachers and the whole thing, but the, the challenges, the daring, the, was so intense in that generation, we had too.
Story_ID: 465884
Speaker 1: Do you have, is there one particular dance teacher that that had the most influence on you or was it just being around so many great dancers and actually seeing their work?
Speaker 2: The, the, when you, when we use the word teacher, I, I, I hardly think physical. I, I think about people who have impacted on me. I might never have taken a lesson, a physical lesson from them but they've affected my brain. And then my brain communicates what I should be doing with my body.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So--
Speaker 2: I, I would say as I've been labeled all sorts of stuff including angry and militant and whatnot, that came about because of seeing Pearl Primus (laughter). And it came about because of knowing my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] who was going to a union meeting of some kind downtown and I was about that big and Pearl Primus danced and one of her pieces was a protest piece. You know, she excited me in a way that Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] couldn't. You know, she impacted differently like I said. The, the, that's why I always said Dunham is a, was a great anthropologist but the material that she presented is something out of my culture, the hip shaking and the shoulders and the drums. And they, they it's natural, it is natural for me to be hearing and seeing the samba and all of that, so when I see it on the stage, either I get a real Carnival or I don't want it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, Katherine Dunham didn't grow up in that culture. Is it, are, are you saying that maybe it's, well, it, she has an academic sense of it, and, and can do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you're saying you don't get the real, I mean, you, you gotta have the real (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, it can, it can no longer be real because it has been transferred from a group of people who live it. So that that kind of work, to have done it and to, to be able to transport and transform it into something else. But it was not the real McCoy (laughter), it, it has been transformed and that's what it is, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've, I hear you, I, I, you know, I--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I get a feeling when I watch modern dance sometimes though and--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's it's, it's maybe a little bit, it's like when you hear the old spirituals sung in a movie, everybody is hitting the right note and it sounds like it's, they're all in a choir and then--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but yet the scene is somebody picking cotton, a bunch of people picking cotton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know they're not (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: They're not into it.
Speaker 1: They're not doing what, this sound that you're hearing, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or, or it's similar but not quite--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Hm, that's interesting, yeah. But, but you saw like Pearl Primus' approach to it was a little bit more real 'cause she was addressing the concerns that she actually had as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't fully, I didn't fully understand what was so exciting about her until I started to understand what responsibility and activism is. The, the difference of making you feel good or shaking up your brain, (laughter) you, you know. And, and I prefer the latter, you know, either, either you feel it or it gets in your head. But the worst thing you can say about my things is, it's nice, (laughter) or it was lovely, or anything like that. Man, come on, you either hate it or you love it or you're confused or something but you have to be something about it, (laughter) you know. I don't care if you say it's a piece of shit. But you have to have, have to have some kind of re- reaction.
Story_ID: 465885
Speaker 1: Since we moved on now, now in the '50s [1950s] [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell becomes a member of the New York City Ballet. [HistoryMaker] Donald McKayle dances in 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents]. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arthur Mitchell went to the same high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] by the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So you get some picture as to, and--
Speaker 1: Now, he followed the track and went on into the ballet?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that wasn't for you, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, well, I would say something off of the record but if we're, if we're on this project let's stay there.
Story_ID: 465886
Speaker 1: In 1958, you, you started your own company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company]; is that true?
Speaker 2: No, I started a company years before that. The, I started my first grouping of people the minute I got into high school. My, the, you know, we called it my dance club, my company. Which was all, and the person strategic to my doing that was Verita Pearson [ph.] and her afterschool workshop. After I started at the high school, we'd go to the recreation center where she taught and was working. And that was the beginning of a company. We'd come from high school and go there and, and would experiment. She would always be doing some kind of project and we'd make up our own dances and actually do little tours. I can remember the first company of mine performed at Fort Dix [New Jersey] and in the churches and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, we're, we're really missing something if we didn't get all that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: We were really missing something if we didn't have that. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You performed in various churches and at Fort Dix, you said (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in schools and--
Speaker 1: Schools.
Speaker 2: --wherever, we performed for, at the UN [United Nations] and things of that--
Speaker 1: This is in, in, in high school or, or, or after you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, these are my afterschool activities we're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but you were, you were still in high school during the time; right?
Speaker 2: I was still in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In some ways I would say I'm a natural leader and that is why at that age I started doing the things I did or getting on with my life.
Speaker 1: So the, the kids that you were teaching you, you actually, were, were those the ones that performed or were they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, they were, some of us were from the high school also. It's just that that is what we did after school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, your training in high school had very little to do with your approach to dance, by the, I mean, in, in some--
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it does. I think everything comes together. It's, I put it to different use. The material I gathered I- in high school, some of the rules about choreographing, how to build a dance, okay. That was very convenient to know all of that stuff because it made me a better craftsman, and to me there's a big difference between an artist and just a craftsman. So my craftsmanship skills from the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], my aesthetic viewpoints differed from, from what I learned in high school.
Speaker 1: That's, that's very well put.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 465887
Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] then what did you do next, did you--
Speaker 2: I went back to being errand boy, working at Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's Inc.] but I had my own apartment in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]. I, and, and became a bohemian for a period of time. And while I choreographed, Macy's and the jobs I did, you know, like working in a fabric house and stuff to make a living. And but at the same time keeping a company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] going. I have never been without a group of dancers who are interested in working with me.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you got a chance to travel. Now, tell me if I'm going too far too fast.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you got a chance to study abroad in 1962?
Speaker 2: I had already done my big major New York City [New York, New York] concert.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about that first then. Let's, let's talk about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What?
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Your first major New York City concert.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm gonna have to get into the politics of the time but that's something else you might have to look into. The wide, the, the Jewish center on 92nd Street is one of the first places that started showing Negro dance. And, for instance, that's where Alvin's 'Revelation' [sic. 'Revelations,' Alvin Ailey] was premiered. And I had people, some influential people who thought I was ready to be seen, so my first two dance concerts were done at the Y [92nd Street Young Men's Hebrew Association; 92nd Street Young Men's and Young Women's Hebrew Association, New York, New York] on 92nd Street, and with, with, very favorable reviews. One of the things that I was going through at the time was knowing that I could go but so far in the U.S.A., white U.S.A. I also was, I also had heard so much about Europe. My question, so I wanted to go to Europe. I realized that we, America, its art and everything is Eurocentric. And maybe I should go to the palace, I should go, this thing that had created or made America, Eurocentric stuff. I wanted to go work with the best teachers there. The other lie that also black people believed is that I would be more accepted in Europe, that Europe would not be as racist as America. (Laughter) One quickly learns that Europe is marvelous to black entertainers, you can charm them, you can make them laugh, but don't you dare think that you could anyway do their art or match their art. You know, they find, you already have Josephine Baker and I don't plan to come here and tap dance, you know.
Story_ID: 465888
Speaker 1: How I got there? I had told you why I wanted to go, I thought I could be educated and I thought I would be appreciated and all of those wonderful, positive things. And a friend who was managing my company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] at the time, Michael Levy, said, "Okay, you have to get out of America and really find out what the world is about." And I was pretty, I was nervy. I went up to the, to John Way- John J. Whitney--John Hay Whitney Foundation [New York, New York], and said, "Well, I'd like a fellowship to go to Europe to study." And I can remember the secretary's thing, she said, "Well, you don't just walk into the office and say you, you think you want to go to Europe, you, maybe you have to be recommended or something or," yeah. And oh, she, I don't know who, I spoke to someone by the name of Jones [ph.]. He called me into the office and really wanting to see how dare anyone just walk in, you know. So he informed me that I had to fill out some applications and it would have to be mailed to me and whatnot, why not give it to me, (laughter) I'm right here in the office, it, it's a formality. So I wrote up a request to go to Europe for further education. But I, by that time I had been reviewed by Dance Magazine and several papers and they'd all say well, he is not an Ailey [Alvin Ailey], he is a something weird that is (laughter) on, on the horizon, you know, but is promising. Because they already started getting the hint that they were not going to mess around or destroy me by saying I am an Ailey derivative. And they did that to a whole lot of black chorographers, anything they did those critics claimed it was influenced by Ailey 'cause they didn't want anything other than Ailey to exist, one of you is enough. Anyhow, I got the money to go to Europe. I was sent to, to Jean Erdman and a group of people that she had at her studio to look at a solo I had choreographed. And that little board would say, "Yes, he should get the money."
Story_ID: 465889
Speaker 1: And I got the funds to go to Europe. And, and there is, the, the, the, I went to the Kurt Jooss school [Folkwang School of Music, Theatre and Dance; Folkwang University of the Arts, Essen, Germany] who you might read every now and then, he was influenced by Kurt Jooss. Kurt Jooss and I it's like, we're like (gesture) here and there. And I have to be asked questions. Actually, I would say I'm not sure whether I left the school deliberately or whether I provoked him into expelling me (laughter) but we both knew that, you know, I didn't belong there.
Speaker 2: Okay. So--
Speaker 1: The marvelous thing, you know, is when I was dismissed, he called me into the office because I had taken some of his students and started choreographing and traveling with them. You know, he called me into the office and the nicest thing he has ever said to me was, "Eleo [HistoryMaker Eleo Pomare], Mr. Pomare, there can be one demigod in a place." And he said, "I was here first, you have to go (laughter)." I had, I had within his, within the university there, I had developed some followers.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was in context that's a compliment, is it not?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That's a compliment in the context of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But he was also a racist.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he was a violent racist. Because one, the one of the reasons I refused to do is, he had Antony Tudor was teaching there and Antony Tudor was what I call a sadist, he was a real sadist. And Antony Tudor had a piece about a little boy and a little girl and they wanted me to do this piece. You know, after I've taken all of the, the, the insults of, it's like complimenting you, you know, like how can you dance on such bad feet, there's always something with the black body that these people cannot put up with, (laughter) you know. All of these underhanded things and Tudor just makes you, made, made anyone feel small, never mind me who's already small. And he cast me in this duet with this blue-eyed, lily white blonde girl, and the way, it, it's a piece called 'Kinder Sein' [ph.], and the way the children play. And the contrast between us, this blonde Teutonic looking thing and me, and me, after being insulted about my whole thing. And I said, "I am not doing this duet, in no way am I doing this duet at, at all." (Speaking German). "No, no, I'm not doing it. Aside from that keep in mind that I'm paying you. I am not on stipendium here, I am not a little German boy who is getting it for free, you're getting mucho American dollars and when I'm sick of you I'll take my money and go." Anyhow that incident, and that incident. At the same time I had met someone in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] who could, who said, "If you come to Amsterdam during the Christmas holidays, you can meet one of the head people in the dance area here." And the performance at the (unclear), at the Jooss school was around that time. And they didn't believe that I'd have the nerve not to leave, not to do it. I felt it, it was terrible, racist, very, you know, it's like trying to use me as a clown is what I felt, you know, this perfect thing and this imperfect thing being, (laughter) you know, that whole German mentality thing. And so after I came back from Holland [the Netherlands] he called me in and that's when he gave me this lecture on who was there first, but it gets, gets very, very convoluted because I had already been appearing for the Amerika Haus in Germany. And just, I guess, not made to take orders, not in Germany.
Story_ID: 465890
Speaker 1: Well, how long did you stay in Europe and, and did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I ended up staying in Europe for nearly three years. I formed a company in Holland [the Netherlands] and that would be my second company as oh, I would say, it's the, it was the European Eleo Pomare Dance Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was made up of students (laughter) that I took with me to Holland from Kurt Jooss' school in Germany [Folkwang School of Music, Theatre and Dance; Folkwang University of the Arts, Essen, Germany]. So you want, you can imagine this, I had formed a nucleus at the school that was impacting and he did not want that to happen.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, so you performed in Holland and, and other places in Europe?
Speaker 2: Yes, I toured, we toured Europe, Norway, Sweden.
Speaker 1: Now, is the business aspect of art, did that come easily for you or--
Speaker 2: We never got into serious big business. But a young lady that I met at the Kurt Jooss school turned out to have been the prime minister's daughter of Australia [sic.]. She had come to the school for the same reason that I did, to look for this great thing. And she's one of the people who ran, who left, who he kicked out, he kicked Elizabeth [Elizabeth Cameron Dalman] out at the same time because she was hanging around with me. And she became the manager of the company. And, and made all of the financial arrangements. And so she was like a manager and a dancer in the company. She has since gone back to Australia and has a well-known company there with material. I go to Australia every now and then to work on things, on repertory and stuff of that nature.
Story_ID: 465891
Speaker 1: Now, did you miss home, or I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did what?
Speaker 1: I guess, you missed home and you came back in '65 [1965], is it '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Did I go where?
Speaker 1: Did you come back home to the U.S. in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I, I, I came back specifically for the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Now, that's '63 [1963], okay, so.
Speaker 2: And earlier I think I had said something that very often what people say or do to me is what makes me a dancer or a person. And I had, I, I had mentioned meeting James Baldwin from the soiree days of, of Greenwich Village [New York, New York]. And we, we were spiritual friends in a way, not I'll call you next week or anything, he would, I am in Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and I would get a call, "I'm going to be in Paris [France], why don't you come to Paris," and, and go shopping or talk or something. But he, he was the kind, became my mentor. The way he wrote his books, the things he covered in his books, I, I often tell people, the people would ask well, "Who is the best chorographer that you know (laughter)?" And I'd just, and some people don't get it, I always said James Baldwin. (Laughter) He was my best teacher. And so we were not on top of one another, we were just like into one another at a, at long distances. And I, like his 'The Fire Next Time' [James Baldwin] feels as if I am the brother he's talking to, his nephew, the way it's addressed. I became his nephew like on one way or the other once I saw the written words. It's nothing, nothing in the book, everything in the book, we had already discussed in some way at Charlie's [Broadway Charlie's, New York, New York] over in, on Broadway. It was always, always a, "Hey, I am at, gonna be at such and such a place, come have a drink." And we'd spend the whole afternoon.
Story_ID: 465892
Speaker 1: And he called me and based on, I was already becoming disillusioned with, with Europe because the experience there is that I was teaching everywhere, like in, in Amsterdam [the Netherlands], the National Ballet [Dutch National Ballet], in, in, in, in some ways I am the person that brought American modern dance strongly into their education system in Holland [the Netherlands]. And, you know, after, you, I could afford my rent. And I, (laughter) I just started feeling that some kind of rape was happening, I was doing all of the giving. You know, the, there was a hunger for something other than, you know, classic ballet, they were trying to break out of it. And so I found it very easy to, to be teaching. And Jimmy [James Baldwin] used to say, "You know, you have to be careful otherwise they'll eat you raw, they'll take everything you have and then they'll throw the bones away. You have to know how to save yourself." And I started going along that line. And he called one night and said, "There is going to be a March on Washington and I am going to be there and you're gonna be there." And so I would say it's the March on Washington and James Baldwin that gave me the terrible reputation I have.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had--
Speaker 2: --you came back--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: So, so you came back for the March on Washington and--
Speaker 1: And went back and decided that I'm never going to be European, I am not gonna be any of those things. And the, I started learning responsibility. You know, I'm a member of a community and if the community is in danger, if the community makes any changes I cannot be outside of it. And if there's any giving I have to do, it's not in Stockholm [Sweden], (laughter) it has to be in America. And based on what is happening, it has to be a specific place. And Harlem [New York, New York] was the place, that's where 'Blues for the Jungle' [Eleo Pomare] happened out of that decision, that facing my, facing my responsibility and in some ways the search for who I am.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, so when you came back to Harlem, now, did, now did you know any of the people engaged in African dance in those days, like I think Dinizulu [Kimati Dinizulu] and--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I took, I took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --lessons with Dinizulu. He, he, he, he's one of those people who encouraged me. We had thought our, like when you mentioned him, we, it was like we are father and son or something, we have sat and laughed. And his whole thing was, "Why are you so difficult?" I, in that period, you know, people like Dinizulu and Pearl [Pearl Primus] and so it was a whole different spirit group of people. And I think I was highly loved.
Story_ID: 465893
Speaker 1: We were talking about the African dance groups, but, but what, what happened when you came back, that was in--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, what happened when I came back was reforming my dance company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] that I had started before I left for Europe. And, and, and choreographing, I think, some of my, well, three of my works classified as masterpieces, was choreographed in that period of time. And I got involved with activism through dance because I did, I didn't need to belong to an organization or anything of that kind. I worked with, when I came back, the three works, of course, which, which--
Speaker 1: Right. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) were 'Blues for the Jungle' [Eleo Pomare].
Speaker 1: Was 'Missa Luba' [Eleo Pomare]?
Speaker 2: 'Missa Luba.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what's the other one?
Speaker 1: I know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And 'Missa Luba,' 'Blues for the Jungle,' and 'Las Desenamoradas' [Eleo Pomare], a piece--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about Garcia Lorca's [Federico Garcia Lorca].
Speaker 1: I'm glad that you pronounced that one instead of me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: I, I'm not trained to pronounce it so that's a, so those three--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and they were produced between '65 [1965] and '67 [1967], I guess; right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. You wanna talk about the first one 'Missa Luba,' first?
Speaker 2: The, the, the, the, which of them, 'Blues for the Jungle'?
Speaker 1: No, 'Missa Luba.' Let, let, let's start with the first one (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, 'Missa Luba.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first one (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Without it, without saying this specifically, it's the black person and the church has always, is a topic that sort of interested me. Again, influence of my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare]. That's one thing. And the, the way missionaries went into Africa and other places and claimed they're bringing God when they're there to get territory and power and control. So it uses the Mass as an example of brainwash and theft. But (laughter) it's beautifully costumed, it's a pageant. It, the, I like choreographing in a way where there's a pro and a con running (laughter) at the same time but if you'd pay attention to the middle, (laughter) you'll find out what I'm really saying.
Speaker 1: Now, that's, that is, that's a political statement that a lot of, the political pundits were, were, were making. People like Malcolm X are talking about it. And here you're cor- you're choreographing a dance about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you see it's, if I couldn't, I couldn't, like the Catholics in my family, I said, "Do you know it's beautiful the Mass, have you ever looked at the costumes? Or could you translate the Latin for me (laughter)?" No, so why are you doing this (gesture) then if you don't understand what he just said to you (laughter) you know. And if I can think that way I try to get that element into, into my, into my choreography.
Story_ID: 465894
Speaker 1: I, when I, we did the, the festival in Lagos, in, in Nigeria (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's in '77 [1977], yeah, the FESTAC [Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture].
Speaker 1: And mucho battle. There's a place called Badagry Bay [sic. Badagry, Nigeria]. And the people who were running the festival decides to take the choreographers to see Badagry Bay. Now, when you get to Badagry Bay the first thing you hear is Christian music coming from this big church. And the other thing is, they have these chains and, you know, neck braces, and they're asking for you to pay money to try them on. And this, so they're telling you this is what the slaves went out in and they want, so (laughter) I just exploded, you know, I just said, "You have some nerves as a black person running a festival to tell me that I should pay you money to feel the weight of those chains which your people, black people, sold other black people into slavery." Now, the, can you imagine. So, we got back and I had to show a board of people what I was presenting on the concert and 'Missa Luba' [Eleo Pomare] was on it. Which is dealing with, with the Badagry Bay experience or blacks that came to America, the church there, and the slavery and the whole thing, all of that was what 'Missa Luba' is, is about. Here you get this beautiful chanting and these beautiful costumes but before you realize, a group of people have been brainwashed and changed by this holy ethereal thing. So they wanted me to take it off of the program.
Speaker 2: Who, who specifically wanted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The people from FESTAC once they--
Speaker 2: They on the--
Speaker 1: Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Don't ever go there.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I, I, I know that, we got two things going on, the American delegation and you got the Nigerian side of it. So the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Nigerian side wanted it off?
Speaker 1: Yes. They wanted, they, they, they, they wanted it off or that it should go on without a program note.
Speaker 2: Now, was that a, did it, was that Dr. Onwuachi?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Was that Dr. Onwuachi who, Dr. Chike Onwuachi [Patrick Chike Onwuachi] who was in charge of the, the Nigerian side of it, I think. He used to be at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Do, do you know who you talked to specifically about it?
Speaker 1: I spoke to a Nigerian.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was Nigerian and, and he and his--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Onwuachi was from Nigeria. He, he was in charge of African studies at Howard and was in charge of FESTAC for the Nigerian side. That's, that's why, that's why I asked you.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, well, maybe I did (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It might not have been him you (unclear)--
Speaker 1: It, it, it was very tricky what happened to me in Nigeria. And so it was a matter of taking it off the program, doing it without program notes, because the program notes did state that the piece was about religion and colonialism, the role that the Catholic church they had played in this, in this country which became abused colonies. (Laughter) And but I have craft on my side. I mean, no one can say it's not well choreographed and that it's not clever choreography, you know, that there, there was that piece. And so that's my fun story about 'Missa Luba' in Africa.
Story_ID: 465895
Speaker 1: 'Missa Luba' [Eleo Pomare] then the second one was, see I got a, I got this long outline, wait, wait a minute.
Speaker 2: 'Blues for the Jungle' [Eleo Pomare]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Blues for the Jungle.' That's '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Blues, 'Blues for the Jungle' is, I would, to me is a, not 'Blues for the Jungle,' I would say that 'Blues,' after seeing Alvin's 'Revelation' [sic. 'Revelations,' Alvin Ailey] it, it, 'Revelations' is a revelation. The, it's just one of the most incredibly, beautiful, most beautiful things I have ever seen. And politically it had achieved something because it's one of the pieces that broke the barrier between what they call Negro bodies and, and Negro dance. It was, I'm going back way now into the, the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], you know, where they expected black people to, to do things on their knees, you, you know, whatever there was it went back to praying to God, you know. If there's a grandmother, there's always someone in that play, or something that, who's responsibility is to hold things together by going (gesture) like that. And in some ways Alvin used a lot of their language, the white language, the white aesthetics, and fused it with some of this and came out with a whole other taste, a whole other thing. And, and but one thing it makes sure that one thing that does not happen, it does not have the white viewers sit and say, "Oh, my God, that's what I've done." They can sit back and say, it's, it's beautiful, you know, but they don't look at it and say see what my people have done, (laughter) you know. And so I decided I wanted the other side of the coin. You know, a snake is as beautiful as a rose, you know, they're both living things, you have to know what you're looking at. And I said ugly, some people are gonna say this is ugly but if you look at it, it's quite beautiful. So I, I could do a lecture, let's say in 'Blues for the Jungle,' I took, instead of, "I've been scorned and I had been 'buked" [sic. "I've been 'buked and I've been scorned"], it's I've been sold, (laughter) resold, repackaged, and sold. So it begins with an auction and people are auctioned off right through time. The, the, the, all of the figures in 'Blues for the Jungle' came from real people in the street. And it, when I say real people in the street, it's not that we read about it in the book, we did our field work. There's an, an older woman in, in the book, in the ballet that she's talking about wigs and false hair and how to place your napkin and whatnot. Shaniqua [ph.] brought that information to me and she said, "Listen to what I heard on the subway." Who, what did the woman look like, all of that. We went detail for detail to, to, to deglamorize 'Revelations' but the real revelation is that woman who look at you and say, "What are you looking at?" And one dancer does look at someone in the audience and just keep on repeating it, (laughter) you know, until boom that's, it dawns on you something real is happening here.
Story_ID: 465896
Speaker 1: I, for instance, when I started doing "Junkie" ['Blues for the Jungle,' Eleo Pomare], Judy Dearing said to me, "You will never be convincing because first of all, you're holding the joint improperly, no one holds a joint like that." You know, where I learned how to do "Junkie"? In back of the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. It was a place called the Bucket of Blood [ph.] (laughter). A bar, and for several nights John Parks, a whole group of us, would do field work, until I learned from those guys who hung out in back of the Apollo, they got so they would do this to me (gesture) they would say hello. But I learned that you don't nod as if you've had many dance classes. Everything you learned about form and structure have to go out of the window because you're creating a different reality. And this thing was accurate. I can remember the premier of that, it was like all hell broke loose in the theater, (laughter) you know, it's like that (gesture). And when the dancers for the first time used the word it was like brand new, no one, no one, you know, come at you down the aisle going, "Hey, man, you, you wanna buy a joint (makes noise)?" And you realize someone is dying down there in the aisle. That's the theater I am in to. Along with the other craftsman type things that I've done. So what was interesting about that to me is, is the audience. You, you know, it's interesting to see an integrated audience look at it, and watch, it looks like mixture of people where everyone is going like (gesture). And then the middle class blacks, especially the ones out of the, not in the East, the southern middle class, "Why did you bring that dance to our theater? Why did you do this? That is only pushing us back decades. You should have, you, you know." What is pushing you back decades is your phoniness. And so it's, it is, it could have caused me great angst, great pain, you know, but you don't do something you believe and then apologize for it. So that was that.
Story_ID: 465897
Speaker 1: And, of course, I told you about my [maternal] grandmother [Jessiett Pomare] having all of those children, thirteen kids, women, and the, the Garcia Lorca [Federico Garcia Lorca] piece, 'The House of Bernarda Alba,' is about the controlling woman and keeping her, her five daughters in control. Garcia Lorca was murdered for that piece and because with close analysis you realize that the mother is symbolic of Portugal and the daughters are her colonies and she has to keep them in control. And so I got into, in, in to it. My family came to see the premier of the 'Bernarda Alba' piece, the Garcia Lorca piece, and my mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] and two of her sisters got up and walked out of the theater, "How dare you?" (Laughter) It's from a classic writer but they felt this is hitting close to what my grandmother and her controlling attitude was. Those things come out of life and--
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, the la- the last one is 'Las Desenamoradas' [Eleo Pomare] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's, that's the one based on Lorca's piece.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Okay.
Speaker 1: The funniest story about that one is the company were, we were in Spain when, is it Franco, was either dying as the president.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was, he was dying for years. They, they always had something on that he was sick and he was gonna die and then he would get well again.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: General Francisco Franco (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't know if he was dead. And this piece dealt with 'Bernarda Alba' which I choreographed (unclear) was forbidden in Spain for the, (laughter) the longest time. And I did not know that, that it, the piece was on the don't do in Spain thing otherwise you're in trouble.
Speaker 2: So it was actually banned in Spain but--
Speaker 1: It was banned. And here, here we are and one hour they say he's alive, another he's dead.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: The hotel is surrounded by policemen. The theater is, we got into the theater and there were almost more policemen in the theater, in the lobby of the theater than audience. And this is the night we're doing the 'Bernarda Alba.' And somehow, somehow it had gotten out via newspaper or something that there was gonna be a production of this piece. And what I had told the newspaper is that it's a ballet inspired by this piece. Well, anyhow what went down is we did it, it was a fantastic response but we was in my dressing room and there was a knock at the door and three people came, three or four people came, one woman was crying and she said, "Oh, we're members of the Alba family," and she said, "you're a very brave person, you're a very, very, brave person and we've come to thank you for showing, (laughter) showing the piece." It's like saying, you know, if some people chose to have made your life uncomfortable they could have done it based on that, (laughter) you know. Now, that's, that's one of the stories about that particular thing. We have, touring around the U.S.A and whatnot is so revealing, you know, what goes on here in people's head, you know, and--
Story_ID: 465898
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the, the your, your craft and like what is it? Do you have a philosophy of dance and what are you, what kind of movement do you, well, I, I know some, something about it already, but I want you to tell us what, (laughter) what kind of movement you, you construct on a stage or produce on a stage.
Speaker 2: I, use a method approach is, I have my dancers improvise. I have them read, I, and out of that I pull shapes and emotions, like during improvisations someone will do something that is so off of the wall but so pertinent, then is where my craftsmanship comes in to know, to have seen that thing happen, to go back and to bring it more or closer to the performer. And so each work I do in some ways have its own language, its own body language. And that's why I think very often I've heard, reviewers used to like saying the word, the work is formless or it's raw, things of that nature because it's not using the alphabet that they are accustomed to seeing. You know, it has gone into a different place.
Story_ID: 465899
Speaker 1: Well, you formed in 1968, you formed the (cough), the Association of Black Choreographers, right, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that was a group of us, the, I, I guess everyone, black Americans were in the throes of reviewing their identities and the white dance world had given the black dance community its name. In other words, Negro dance is a word, a, a thing that came out of the white dance community. It's a thing that only blacks could do until came the time that they wanted to lift (laughter) material. And Negro dance could find no place to dance, there were no theater, there weren't enough theaters, the funding available was mainly towards white dance.
Speaker 1: Now, that, that's an important point too because I think that the '60s [1960s] saw the, the creation of the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with money for what they call the majors, major dance, major music, major theaters.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this did not include any black or Latino (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time it didn't.
Speaker 1: --stuff whatsoever.
Speaker 2: And, and at the time black is beautiful is coming into view. And since the group of us had got together mainly about those things, it was Rod Rodgers, Gus Solomons [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare, Pearl Reynolds, Carole Johnson. But we were concerned that we had no place for dance, we were not being funded, and the funding sources were saying, "Well, what's so different about you," you know. In other, "What's so different about Negro dance?" And we decided we didn't want the label Negro. And if black is beautiful there has to be a black dance. And they, so black dance came out, is a political term, we weren't using it for any aesthetic reason, they said we don't, that we're not doing anything different than the Negro dance. Well, here this grouping and this generation has decided to call it black dance.
Story_ID: 465900
Speaker 1: We were talking about the black chorographers group [Association of Black Choreographers], association. What, what, the formation of that with Rod Rodgers and the others.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. And, and there's something called a Dancemobile, Harlem's Dancemobile [Harlem Cultural Council Dancemobile] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that, that, that's a bit later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, the, the Dancemobile came after our decision as to what to call ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a group of us started performing at Pearl Reynolds' studio which was on 6th Avenue and twenty-four- 24th Street. And we instituted a performance series of what this new black dance is. The participants were, again, Rod, Gus Solomons [HistoryMaker Gus Solomons jr], myself, Pearl Reynolds, a few of us. And the interesting thing was, is that we had many of our talents who are still alive today, who did not identify or did not want to be identified with Negro dance. You know, the Judson set [Judson Dance Theater] had black people. We had, Rod Rodgers did not start out to be a black choreographer. Gus Solomon (laughter) was not a black choreographer, he was our choreographer, it was the dream, you know.
Story_ID: 465901
Speaker 1: And we had the mentality, I think, you've heard, you, choreographers say things like they didn't know that they were black.
Speaker 2: Or just they happened to--
Speaker 1: They didn't know that they were black. They grew up in the white community, a white world. They didn't know until, I don't know what happened but something must have happened but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is, did, I, do you, do you think there's any credibility to that kind of statement--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --that they just didn't know they were black in America?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't know. It's just something that I wouldn't want on me (laughter) because, you know, as a, as a person born in a foreign country, it took me a while before I started, and again, back to my [maternal] uncle [Barsabas Anab Pomare] who would say to me, "You are black, you are of African descent, so don't you have me hear you say, like American Negroes, American this, we are better because we haven't been through the slave experience, unh-uh," he would say. "We were slaves too, it happened in a different part of the world. And the same people who continued killing people, hanging people down south are the same ones who messed up Haiti (laughter)." And so that business of thinking I'm something else, you know, there was a time in the U.S.A. where white people loved to tell you that, "You're not, you're not a Negro, you're Latin American." Even, even some Africans that would say, "You're, you're not a Negro, you're African." And that gave you a certain privilege, (laughter) you know, a certain above it allness. And I, I loved, you know, being a black American, it wasn't said that way at the time. What was exciting about a 117th Street in Harlem [New York, New York] was they were doing something, they were doing what they had to do, they were, they were living, you know. In South America where I was, there, there was no life, there was a veranda, tea at seven, but there was, it, it, it gave me something, it filled a space. And knowing the white mentality, having been to the High School of Performing Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], or the way you structure a dance is an A, B, A form or A, B, C form. And when you start saying how about A, Z, A, T, back to A, return the theme back to here and do that. One of the thing that I had happen to me is, a, a teacher told me in a composition class that what I was doing was wrong, Norman Walker, and several months after on his concert, the material appeared. Do we call it lifting, plagiarism, borrowing? (Laughter) You know, and that's it. And there's a lot of that that has gone on, you know, in dance. And even with Negro dance, the idea of black music spirituals being danced by white communist dancers or protest dancers to black, while black singers sing, (laughter) you know, and suddenly it's white dance. Black music, what would be minstrel like type things. And but still the separation, you know, the our bodies are not right, our this is not right.
Story_ID: 465902
Speaker 1: Do you draw from all the different cultural influences in black dance, or do you, I mean, or how many, I mean, is that your, your goal to do that?
Speaker 2: I've grown to believe that some of my works happen to be black works. In some of these works I would never have a white company do it because it's my turn to say their bodies are just wrong. And but more than that their complexion, their attitudes, it's so intrinsic to the life of the piece that I can't see a white company doing it. And I've had pieces in my work when I worked with an integrated company where some black, I didn't put certain black dancer in the piece, you know, because it would be damaging to the dancer or damaging to the piece, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, what's a, give me an example of a story, I mean, you know, of that.
Speaker 2: For instance, for instance, I've had white dancers who want to do 'Blues for the Jungle' [Eleo Pomare]. I can't see it. I was just in Taiwan a few years ago to do some, to mount a work, they did like three of my works, and the ballet, the work they want to do is 'Blues for the Jungle.' And they said, "We'll pay you," you know, and, and I said, "I cannot imagine Chinese dancers doing 'Blues for the Jungle.'" And maybe it's just a refusal to universalize that piece but I can't see universalize to do this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you, you think it kind of weakens a piece to, you know, in theater they, they're, they're popularizing something called nontraditional casting where you have a play--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you just hire actors, you might have a black mother and her son's white or that type of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes it weakens what is being done.
Story_ID: 465903
Speaker 1: We were talking about Dancemobile before.
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: There were several mobile type things. Dancemobile is an outgrowth of the Harlem Cultural Council [New York, New York], and it, it, it followed the black arts mobile. And the black arts, what is it you want to know about Dancemobile?
Speaker 1: Well, I--
Speaker 2: Dance, oh--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Dance, Dancemobile traveled a great deal around the different boroughs. The repertory for it was not as, no, what, at its earliest state was not as politically loaded as the black arts mobile.
Speaker 1: 'Cause both of them, both of them were created, I guess, around the time of the Black Arts Movement and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it was hard to find a black playwright that wasn't politically loaded.
Speaker 2: With a, a black what?
Speaker 1: Playwright or a poet.
Speaker 2: To find them?
Speaker 1: It was a hard to find a black playwright or a poet that was not politically loaded in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, in that period. If you stayed away from what's happening that was a political statement as far as I'm concerned. So you may as well jump in, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so Dancemobile, I suppose, and correct me if I'm wrong, probably exposed more Harlem [New York, New York] people to the different varieties of black dance than ever before I would guess, you know, than before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I would say that black, that the, the Dancemobile reached a, a wider audience. And the material itself while in planning is very pointed, was nothing as overtly what it is as let's say the black arts mobile. It received the, the, the, I think, the black arts thing came out of HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York]. And the, the, the dance element was run by Sandra Jones [Kimako Baraka] who is, who was LeRoi Jones' [Amiri Baraka] sister. And that was a heartache. But it was the people, the controllers of the balck arts mobile knew that they wanted to use the art as a weapon so to speak. Even if the performers didn't know it, they knew the value of the artists to, you know, for propaganda.
Story_ID: 465904
Speaker 1: Now, I don't wanna skip through anything but now in 1972 you received a Guggenheim fellowship?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, what, what was that about? What, what was it for?
Speaker 2: The, well, it, the Guggenheim [John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, New York, New York], we all know what they do. They, they give funding for, to young artists who they feel is going somewhere or is presenting provocative arts or is, you know, something about the person is supposed to, at some point impact in whatever area they're involved with, you know. And I, the, I think, there's still some snob appeal thing to, to the Guggenheim fellow because you, though you put in an application mainly, secretly I think it's about asking you to be a fellow, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you, how did your fellowship come, come, come about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did my fellowship--
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --come about? It came, I don't know, someone might have suggested my name, some other Guggenheim person. You know, the way sometimes they say do you know anyone else who should be, might have put me on that. And then I, I was invited for interviews and stuff of that nature. And, "Please go home, Mr. Pomare [HistoryMaker Eleo Pomare], we'll tell you what will happen later." And I was given one, I won one and--
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was it to do a specific thing or, or could, could you use it anyway you wanted then?
Speaker 2: I could use it anyway that I want to that would further my career. But I've been, you know, for, personally, I've been like not treated badly when it comes to fellowships or NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] grants because I couldn't get money, I couldn't get funding for my company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] but I've been given many fellowships where the money is given to me. And I, I would be say at least five fellowships from, from the NE grant, NEA.
Story_ID: 465905
Speaker 1: The pool of money I know in the old days was severely restricted. They had the Expansion Arts program [of the National Endowment for the Arts]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where you could get, if you were a black artist or a Latino or American Indian, you, you could get like a smaller--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --grant, you know, with the assumption, I mean, I guess, the operating assumption is that your organization is just starting--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you need this expansion--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --money. And but, but one complaint I know in the '80s [1980s] was that they never let the black groups grow up, I mean, in terms of they never gave the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --money as if they were--
Speaker 2: --well--
Speaker 1: --full groups.
Speaker 2: I, I couldn't grow as a foundation or as a company from government funds.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what, what was your alternative?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What's your alternative or alternative (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My alternative?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was your alternative to--
Speaker 2: Well, close shop. And the other thing which was discovered is my '60s [1960s] affiliation, what- whatever that means, got me on, what was it? The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] list, the, I was on the list.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And until the person who was managing my company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] and myself went to Washington [D.C.]. There was an announcement that you could have your name removed from it but you had to go to Washington to do that. And so I had my name removed from it. The way my name got on to it, I think, is because of my work, I would say more so than my affiliations. And, and also the list came out and, of people who reported you for different things. And I am very unhappy to say that a black woman (laughter) who I absolute- absolutely trusted, you know, when she was on the panel sort of suggested that I'm not the person to give government monies to because I was to anti-oriented, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, when did you resolve this? And you, you went to Washington, D.C., was this in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I can't remember which year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What around nineteen- I believe, it was--
Speaker 2: --but there was an existing list and there was a period of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe, it was during the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I believe it was during the Carter administration, don't, don't you think?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: During the Jimmy Carter administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, and someone that telephoned me from Washington and said do you realize that you're on some kind of list, they billed as subversive. And it turned out to be true. And it no longer exists they say.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: They say.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I know that in, in, in the '80s [1980s] there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of people were--I know Carter issued an amnesty to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people who had, you know, left the country because they disagreed with the Vietnam War--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and other things. And I think that's when they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --started opening up the FBI files.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the, the Vietnam War thing is something I was very outspoken about in my choreography and interviews and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 465906
Speaker 1: Let's see now what happened in 1983? It says here that you, your dance company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] began a weeklong celebration of twenty-five years in dance in '83 [1983] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that was my twenty-fifth anniversary. And the, lots of people, lots of people don't know about me because for one thing I was not allowed to become a business. And there was a time when you, if you had a dance company, you spoke of people, of, who want to dance the way you choreograph, people with the same aspirations, the political viewpoint or whatnot. And so your strength is, was that you had your disciples so to speak there. It, it gradually became that a company is a business. And one of the things that's horrible about me is that I have no business sense. And also not able to form one because the, our establishment will have but so much. And of that, of that black thing or whatever, however, we want to label it. Up until today there are hundreds of, not hundreds but quite a large amount of talentless white companies who are getting huge fundings, you know, so that they can afford a studio, afford a place to work. And on the other hand you can count what, to do the same thing, you can count a few, let's say in New York City [New York, New York], the people, the black people in dance in let's say Dayton [Ohio], they get funded because they're the only one there. You know, and another company in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is the only one that's there. And on the big, on the bigger sense is that, is let's say that any power structure and is, is, is not to be tampered with and there is to be no competition for it.
Speaker 1: Okay. So in New York though there are quite a few and so a lot of competition for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the money?
Speaker 2: But they're, they're white places. And so it's the earlier white institution. You know, it has, I think, I think they have a frontal thing going but where, where the, where the money really coming from and who is making sure that that aesthetics or, or whatever it is stays secure.
Story_ID: 465907
Speaker 1: Tell us about, now you, you developed a piece on the theme of Nelson Mandela in 1986.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a piece called 'Morning Without Sunrise' [Eleo Pomare]. And it, it's, it, it's, it's, it's about the imprisonment of, of a spirit. And, and is abstract, funny word to use but some critics have put their finger on it, is that one of my ability is to take highly charged situations and emotions but make, give it an abstract look. You, you know, it's, it's, I, I don't lean towards gestures, it's like how do you feel sitting the way you are now, you're telling me something, let's keep that moment and where can you take just that and that will be enough for it. So there's no written language for it. It becomes abstract. The, the, the emotion, the intellect, and everything is built into this familiar, unfamiliar shape, you know, someone else might use an, an attitude to make that statement. I tried to work for what is not expected or what is raw or what is, what will take some more time to understand or be wherever. And interesting thing about 'Morning Without Sunrise' is people from Brazil, had seen it here in the U.S.A. I'm very lucky with, once I'm not encumbered with this American thing, they seen it and they invited me to Brazil to do it as a celebration of the emancipation of slavery (laughter) in Brazil (laughter).
Story_ID: 465908
Speaker 1: Sir, we were discussing 'Morning Without Sunrise' [Eleo Pomare] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Morning Without Sunrise.'
Speaker 1: Yes. And we were talking about the reception of it but what, what was the content of it, and, you know, and how did it relate to Nelson Mandela--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --who was still in captivity then, he was still in prison then.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Most of my works are not describable like this happened and then this happened and then this happened. Again, it's, it's, it's about people meeting to move and can't move, it's, it's about the, there, there's a, a duet and here again it's kind of interesting that I casted two white dancers who are very blonde in the segment called the "Diamond Eaters" [ph.]. And the diamond eaters are there to take whatever they have. In order to get the diamonds you have to have control. And they dance with this rifle that, that, that's there. And you get the, the, the figure, you get just this, just this black hand that keeps on reaching for it but the diamonds eaters are the only one who picks it up and constantly points (laughter) and, and that's what I mean by abstract. That's what, I mean, by some people's mind getting messed with and they're not aware of what is upsetting them. They afterward go home and said, "Well, if you knew who the Boers were in terms of South Africa, if you knew what they did to control diamonds, if you knew about the mines, you would understand the symbol." And so, I, I, I can be very cerebral. It looks real and then the, it, it, it goes, it's cerebral actually. And that kind of mindset in a cerebral type work, it's, it's, for a long period of time it was a no-no for Negro dance. You tell a story, you get on your knees and you clap your hands and you make everyone feel good when they leave, leave the theater. You're really not capable of any deep psychological thing happening within the human psyche, you know. And there's where I go.
Story_ID: 465909
Speaker 1: Now how long did you dance professionally yourself or, 'cause '83 [1983] is twenty-five years having a company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company].
Speaker 2: I, I danced because I had to dance. Like I said earlier it's the power of, of creating that excites me, the making of things. And the times that I have danced have been when I've put something on a dancer or had a specific dancer in mind and they would refuse to do it. (Laughter) I'm not going to do that. And it has turned out that many of my, of material that I have, I've got known for as, as soloist, it's material where I said, "Okay, if you won't do it, I'll dare to do it." And most of my solo materials was, was intended for other people. And, of course, once I got over my inferiority complex (laughter) then, then it was a strange thing. Once I said, "Okay, you are who you are, you are what you are," lots of reviewers in, in many of my material that said that, "Well, after [HistoryMaker] Eleo Pomare no one is, else can do this. Or this would be hell for another dancer to walk into that role." Because in some ways I believe in a kind of divine insanity that there's a certain level that you have to go to where you are willing to penetrate, you know, the, I don't know, the, to, to, to, to just admit that insanity is a part of the reality of art.
Story_ID: 465910
Speaker 1: I know one person that danced with you.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I know one person that danced with you, yeah, you know, years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --ago in the '80s [1980s]. She said that it's really intense. She said you really work people and it's a very intense experience being part of the Eleo Pomare Dance Company.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And do, do you, you really work your dancers hard?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That's why I, I, I, I, I've had dancers who couldn't work with me because it, it took too much or they thought it took too much out of them. I also have the reputation of making dancers, people who in another company look like nothing and they dance with me and they look fantastic. And I, because I believe we should all know why we are up on the stage and you should know what you have to give, and sometimes you don't know it, what that thing is. And I believe in finding out what that thing is because I don't want you to go on stage like a machine, I don't want you to go on stage looking like someone else. You know, I want you to go on that stage secure in having found out who you are and how, and that will determine how you handle the material that you're given. And it will also affect your range, how I see you, the, the many things you're willing to discover and know how to, it's like method acting, and have it at your fingertips, use when you want to.
Story_ID: 465911
Speaker 1: Who are some of the dancers that have been with your company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] that you are, oh, that would be noted or that you're the proudest of, I don't wanna get you in trouble by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, a whole lot. One person there that is well known that Dyane Harvey [Dyane Harvey-Salaam], Marsha Romaine [ph.]. I, it's, it's kind of difficult for me because so many have passed. The, what has happened, one of the reasons I don't have a company now is because of the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic. Like I had great support from the men who worked with me. And that is because the men were, they're torchbearers, they were, you know, interested in the style, in the techniques, they would be, would have been my next generation. These were the people who when we toured, taught at, at the universities, they would be my assistants, Charles Grant for instance. The, the, I lost like ten dancers in a short span of time who were the men of my company. And, and you don't find that texture, you don't find that sociopolitical socio- everything environment anymore. You don't find it in your dancers anymore. Dancers are very mechanical, the, the dancers are tricksters, they are all sorts of things but don't, just don't tamper with their willingness to go beyond the steps. And the dancers I have worked with and still do whenever I find them, were great risk takers. A person like Diana Ramos for instance. I like her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you spell the last name, I'm sorry, how do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry. How do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: R-A-M-O-S.
Speaker 1: R-A-M-O-S, okay.
Story_ID: 465912
Speaker 1: And I would say the, Elizabeth Dalman [Elizabeth Cameron Dalman] in Australia who, oh, you need a, you need a week to interview me, there are a whole lot of very excited things are popping up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Elizabeth Dalman, for instance, when I, my company [Eleo Pomare Dance Company] went to Australia, she brought us there and I sort of made the newspaper for about two weeks before we went on stage because they tried some kind of colonialistic trick on me and a stage like about this much and we're doing like, things like 'Missa Luba' [Eleo Pomare] where the capes are half of the size (laughter) of that space, you know, you're in the theater. And it, they had to build a theater for us. And, and they said nasty things like, "Oh, the Brazilians did it." Well, this is not a samba we're about to (laughter) to see, you know, it's not standing one spot and, and shaking it. And it, the fact that I refused to accept a theater brought the, and in the meantime they brought other dance companies to the Adelaide Festival, Festival, and they were all in this big marvelous theater, in the amphitheater outside but they were white companies. And I pointed that out and I said, "I want that or a new theater built." And they had to refurbish an old movie house that had been closed for a decade, put in new seats, rebuild a stage and everything before I allowed my company to go there. The other thing is I, I am backstage one night and someone came and said there are some people outside who want to see you because they can't come in, it turned out that Aborigines who were not allowed in the theater. And I, so I just said, "Look, they'll be no performances, they'll be no performance tonight."
Speaker 2: Now, what, what year is this in Australia?
Speaker 1: That's the year of the Guggenheim [fellowship] because--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's 1972.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I just said, "Well, these are friends of mine and the curtain is not going to go up." And I was like the orchestra seats and (laughter) that was the first time Aborigines got into theaters in that district of Adelaide [Australia]. You know, after sundown you don't see them and that whole thing. And as a result of that, some, the first black aboriginal company [Bangarra Dance Theatre] got formed in Australia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How they must have felt.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: How they must have felt.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm considered like a grandfather when I, when I go back, and I have been back and forth of that. And this is, it's all dance to me, you know, or, or it's creating the right to dance, so to speak.
Story_ID: 465913
Speaker 1: Now, are there any, who are the young dancers at dance companies now that you, do you--
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: Yeah, like the most today?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know the young companies, I go to see them but there, there is a gap, there is a big space. The, the, I feel like for this generation the, the Civil Rights Movement has (laughter), has no significance whatsoever with, you know, it's the generation that have, they're seeing more of themselves on television but how? You, you know, they have no interest in their own, their own history. And when I hear kids say, "Oh, that was hundreds of years ago," you know, I just have to say, "But do you know how many people are in the hospital, hospital today because of a hundred year, or a hundred years ago?" You know, how it has gotten into people's blood and it's here and, and we are seeing it, you know. I recently talked to some kids and about themes for dance and oh, there's nothing to dance but I just said, "Well, let's say in my composition class I do not want you to hip hop, you have enough time when you leave this room to do that, you know, because that's your, that's your fun. But I want you to use this and see how it applies," you know. And, "Oh, man we don't (makes sounds)." "Well, fine, do you realize why so many Latinos and how many blacks, men, are imprisoned? And how, how can you use that material to show that," you know. If you must use hip hop, there's a way to, you, you can use it, you can. And so it's, it's very, it's very difficult to teach, to, to, to teach this generation. You know, it's either show me, "Show it to me, I'll do it, don't bother me about what it means, how it means or whatnot." It's, I can recall the days let's say of 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey]. And 'Revelations' was a revelation. And you had different bodies, different, represented on stage. And there was a life about it and which has been brought to the level of how high your leg goes and how many turns, you know. I hope and I know there will be something interesting and groundbreaking that will come out at some point, there has to be, things can't stay the way they are. You know, it's like incredible these kids can jump from one building to the other, you know, and then you, well, "Why did you do that?" (Laughter) You know. "I can do it. I, I'm hot," you know. "I'm hot."
Story_ID: 465914
Speaker 1: What are your, now, now, today you don't have a company but you, you still, are you still doing choreography now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. This call that I'm waiting on is, is to be a reconstruction at, at Kansas State University [Manhattan, Kansas] or someplace like that on a residency. I, I did, two years ago I was invited to Taiwan to do some choreography on them. And the piece revolved around, around their leader, the, their freedom person that liberated Taiwan. Strange experience because I asked them I said, "Why do you bring a black person to dance about your liberator?" And they said, "We study, we research." And they could tell me, they said, "You did work for Malcolm [Malcolm X], you did work for King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  That means you know about leadership and so we're bringing you to, to help us make this celebration thing. It was, you know, similar to the liberation of slaves in Brazil." So they have invited me back this year because the Martha Graham of modern dance in their country has died and they want to commission a work from me to honor her with, so I'm doing that. And I could have done something with the West Indian community in Canada. So I'm doing things but they're not magazine worthy to put it that way, they're--
Speaker 1: Well, they could be, I mean, they, they sound like they, they probably are, you know.
Speaker 2: No, when I say magazine worthy it's, everything I do I'm feeling, yes, you, you want to do this, you have to do it, and the people who you're working with and for know why you're doing it. I worked with PHILADANCO [Philadelphia Dance Company] a few year ago. And the gap between the generations just made me say, I will only do things which I definitely want to do and with people who allow me to do what should be done and what I want to do.
Story_ID: 465915
Speaker 1: Tell me now, we always ask this question, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the--
Speaker 2: My what?
Speaker 1: Some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I, I think what, one of the things I, I just say to myself or, or to other people is when are we going to really come to grips with the fact that we have to take our reality, our power, and everything into our own hands, not waiting for things to happen. It's like we have to, to make it happen. It's, we have to be aware of the need to build, to build more. And let's say even things like the reparation movement, it's something that every black person should know about and here's a chance to make a demand, you, you know. I am sorry is not enough. I am sorry is not enough. And you get these guys on television they're sorry for what, they're sorry that they got caught (laughter) and that's about all. And so, I, I'm sort of hoping for more honesty with ourselves.
Story_ID: 465916
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I'm afraid to list that. Well, I did what I did when I did it because I had to do it and wanted to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know. And then I don't think I have any act to clean up, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me this, at this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, my legacy is a, is about knowing who you are, respecting who you are, and learning how to use it, how to, how to make it sort of empower you. And that's what I try to teach, even if you're in my company and you're doing one thing across the stage, I have to, you have to be empowered to do that moment, you have to be in control to, to do that crossing. And we are involved with a crossing still.
Story_ID: 465917
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your family today. Who, who do you consider to be your, your family?
Speaker 2: The way I really think about family, I, it's like family is like at this time, no, my general feeling about family in all honesty is like some kind of web, like a spider web and a whole lot of people caught in this spider web pulling in different directions. I have tried to get out of that whole mentality, once you've gotten out, if there's someone out there, in there you might be able to help that person. But I, I especially being expected to do things because you are family. As a race we're guilty of that too. If we all learn how to swim, then we can get out of this web or whatever it is. I would say that even the very negative things done to me by (gesture) so called family has contributed to my growth. So I, there, there, there is, there is no bitterness or (laughter) angry, I could be terribly angry at my mother [Mildred Pomare Lee] and at times it does explode but then look at what I've done with that anger. You know, that, that's the way, you know. And when it comes to that I think it's easier to love them at a distance or from a distance than to be caught in this thing with 'em.
Story_ID: 465918
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to talk about or haven't discussed yet before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, are you satisfied is, is one thing. Well, no because this is something that is happening to me, you know. I might think of a thousand things--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after you have left but this has, this is what has happened.
Speaker 1: Well, as the tape is rolling out here, we're--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --(laughter) the question is, the last question I ask is always, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think, I would like to be remembered as a person who has made a contribution, that some people might never realize what the contribution is, but I have made it. I think that I would like to be remembered as a person who introduced into our dance, another way of looking at ourselves, another way of freeing up creative force, whatever it is, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Merci, sir.
