Story_ID: 395240
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden at the Players Tournament Club [sic. Tournament Players Club] at the Professional Golf Association's Tour headquarters [sic. Professional Golfers' Association Tour] in Ponte Vedra, Florida [Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida].  The videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns, and the date is October 20th, 2006.  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Calvin Peete.  Calvin, C-A-L-V-I-N, Peete, capital P-E-E-T-E.
Speaker 1: Mr. Peete, what was your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is July the 18th, 1943.  I was born in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what has been your, your occupation, your career?  What have you been doing most of your life as major professional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, that's a--that's a--that's a real loaded question (laughter).  I started out doing a lot of things; end up playing professional golf on the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many years were you on the PGA Tour?
Speaker 2: Well, twenty-six in all.  I did the--I played on the regular tour for eight- for eighteen years, and played the senior tour for eight years.  So in all about twenty-six years.
Speaker 1: Twenty-six years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very good.
Story_ID: 395241
Speaker 1: Before we begin to look at your early life and the roots, your family roots, we have a few warm-up questions, like People magazine type questions, which will also give the viewers of your interview over time, another slant on your personality, in addition, which will come from your interview, and my first question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I would have to say collard greens, black-eyed peas, candied yams, potato salad, cornbread (laughter).  Soul food.
Speaker 1: You got the whole plate right there.  That's fantastic.
Speaker 2: Need I say more (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well.  That's one of mine too.  You have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say summer.  Summer is probably my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Why do you like summer?
Speaker 2: Because it's hot.  You know, I was born in Detroit [Michigan], man, but I don't want to brave any more of those winters up there.  And, you know, being in Florida, you know, most of my--all of my adult life, you know, I've just gotten used to this hot weather.  I remember the tournaments that I won, they were basically in hot weather, and all the guys were sweating and I was just as cool as a cucumber (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Good.  You have a favorite time--I'm sorry.  We asked that one.  Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, probably be black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination.  I would have to say Hawaii.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the last warm-up question, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, something philosophical that you like to use from time to time with your daughters or friends or colleagues?
Speaker 2: Let me see.  There's so many.  In order to change, you first must make a difference.
Story_ID: 395242
Speaker 1: Before we look at your career as a professional golfer and some of the organizations, golf organizations that you founded, enterprises and so on, we want to go back to the beginning of your life and to your roots so that we will have a clear understanding of how you came to be the person that you are and what you've accomplished.  And so, we're going to talk about your family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And would you--we'll start with your mother.  Will you give me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Irenna Peete.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean Irenna Bridgeford Peete.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And you didn't recall exactly where she was born?
Speaker 2: No.  Not exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she share with you any stories about her growing up years as a child?
Speaker 2: Not really as far as her growing up years were concerned.  But, you know, she talked about, you know, the other kids and, you know, how close-knit the family is and, you know, gave us all our blessings, you know.  And she told me some stories that we just can't, you know, tell on national TV or record (laughter), you know, but--no, she made me laugh.  She was a real--she had a great sense of humor.
Speaker 1: How else do you remember her, had a sense of humor and what else was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, she was a strict disciplinarian when you get out of line, you know.  And one thing that I really appreciated before, you know, especially in my--in my adult life was, you know, church on Sunday was not an option.  Now, you know, being sick on the stomach might get you out of school along with a big dose of castor oil, but, no, it's hard, we'll just let the pastor preach for you.  You going to church, so, that foundation that she laid for me, you know, I feel like that was really paramount.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you first went to church with your mother?
Speaker 2: My first recollection, I guess, around five.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what church was that?
Speaker 2: That was a Baptist church in Detroit, Michigan.  I don't know the name of it.
Story_ID: 395243
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name and where he was born and when, if you remember the, the year what--your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Dennis Peete.  Okay.  And he's like my mother [Irenna Bridgeford Peete].  I think they all was born somewhere in Tennessee, but I don't know the towns, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he got to Detroit [Michigan]?  Why he came to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was like most blacks who lived in the South at that time; (laughter) they were trying to get a better job and somebody might have told him about Detroit and, you know, that's what they ended up at (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know how old he was when he migrated to Detroit?
Speaker 2: No.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And his work there was with the Ford Motor Company (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the Dodge Main [Hamtramck Assembly Plant, Hamtramck, Michigan] they called it.  You know, Dodge company, and he worked there you know as long as I can remember in Detroit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he share with you any stories about his growing up years before he got to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the story that he shared with me was when his father, just before his father died, you know, he told him that he wanted him to take care of his family, even though he had three, four older sisters.  He was like the baby of the--baby boy of the family.  But it was like his father had made him a man at nine years old, you know.  So he just, you know, all of a sudden just took on another role and, you know, he was like being as young as he was he was still like the head of the house, you know.
Speaker 1: I see, yeah.  Okay. Do you know what his father did, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No.  I have no idea.  All I could really say was they probably all were farmers, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Tennessee?
Speaker 2: In Tennessee, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tennessee, okay.
Story_ID: 395244
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your mother's [Irenna Bridgeford Peete] mother.  Your mother's mother and father.  Give me your grandmother's name and tell me a little about her.
Speaker 2: Her name is Itaster Peters [Itaster Peterson].
Speaker 1: Would you spell Itaster for us?
Speaker 2: I can't.  I-T-A-S-T-E-R, or something like that.  That's what it sounds like.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?  Do you have any idea where she was born?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  When I met her, it was in a little small town called Hayti, Missouri.  And when we were kids, you know, when school was out, our mother used to take us to Hayti.  Even though I was too young to do it, but my older brothers and sisters, they would pick cotton in the summer trying to make money, you know, for their school and so forth.  So that's basically what Hayti was like, just a little cotton belt really.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell Hayti?
Speaker 2: H-A-Y-T-I.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you, and your mother, and your brothers and sisters went there over the summers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And what was your grandmother doing when you got there?
Speaker 2: Well, she was basically disabled, you know.  She wasn't working or anything so, you know, she had bad legs; could barely walk and, you know, had to have a cane and so forth, so she really wasn't what you would call active at all.
Speaker 1: And what about her husband, was he living; your grandfather (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I never met him.
Speaker 1: You never met him?  Okay.  So how many of your brothers and sisters went with you to Hayti to visit your grandmother in the summers?
Speaker 2: It was like one brother--two brothers and a sister and then myself.
Story_ID: 395245
Speaker 1: So about f- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were one of nine children, is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Could you give me the names of your other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: Well my oldest sister is Iris; next is Rachel; next is Irene; next is Ennis and Dennis; and Margaret; and Olivia [ph.], who passed, you know, at a very young age; and Aaron, and myself.
Speaker 2: And they were all born in what, the 1930s?  Is that correct?
Speaker 1: Well, the older--my older brothers and sisters was born in the 1930s, and the brother that's a couple years older than me, Aaron, that's when the '40s [1940s] came about.  He was born in probably 1940, and I was born in 1943.
Story_ID: 395246
Speaker 1: Where were you living in Detroit [Michigan]--when you were born and you had these older brothers and sisters, where were you living in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Well, the first house that I remember as a kid was 2000 Saint Albertus [Place] on the east side.  I never will forget it because that--that was like home to me.
Speaker 1: Saint Albertus?
Speaker 2: Saint Albertus, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And how do you remember the neighborhood?  What was it like?  Who lived around you--
Speaker 2: It was a very--it was basically, as Lou Rawls would say, a dead-end street.  It started at Saint Albertus and it ended at the railroad.  So it was probably just a street that was probably a block and a half long, I guess.  But I remember the friends that--that I had in that neighborhood, you know.  And I remember the Bells [ph.] that lived next door, and the Wrights [ph.] that lived down the street.  So it was a lot of kids in that--in that--just that little strip there.
Speaker 1: What was the work and occupations of the adults of the parents of your friends there in this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what their parents did, you know, but my mother [Irenna Bridgeford Peete], she worked domestic and she also worked in factories, you know, when they got a chance.  My father [Dennis Peete], as I said, he worked at one of the automobile factories, Dodge Main [Hamtramck Assembly Plant, Hamtramck, Michigan] at that time, so.  And, you know, I guess there was, you know, there was various backgrounds and ethnics, you know.  There was some Hungarians, you know, living right down the street from us you know, so.  It was a nice neighborhood (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Good.
Story_ID: 395247
Speaker 1: What did you and your brothers and sisters around your age and friends do outside of school?  What kind of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, we played marbles a lot (laughter), hopscotch, mumbly peg.  But, you know, I wasn't very athletic, you know, and none of my friends, you know.  Tried to play a little baseball but, you know, I just, you know, I was scared I was going to get hit (laughter) so I didn't mess with that.  So it wasn't a whole lot of activities.  We'd go to the park, swing and, you know, I mean, just what--mainly what kids do, you know.
Speaker 1: What are some of the special family events that you remember living in Detroit [Michigan] as a youngster?  Are any holidays that stick out in your mind that your family celebrated more than others (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, we--we as kids, you know, we got excited about Christmas and Halloween but, you know, I guess before I was ten years old, you know, that really didn't bother me, you know, that I couldn't see Santa Claus coming down my chimney because we didn't have a chimney (laughter).  We had a furnace, you know (laughter.)  Said maybe he'll come through the window or something, so.  You know, I--we really didn't really didn't get excited about holidays.  Yeah, Fourth of July, we'd go on picnic or something like that.
Speaker 1: Where did you go on the picnics?
Speaker 2: Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Belle Isle in--Belle Island in Detroit, you know, right--just right over the Detroit River there.  So it's really in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like a little island, so that's where you know we all go.
Story_ID: 395248
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your growing up in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say the squirrels, the birds; we had a lot of birds in our neighborhood, a lot of trees; and sometime I could smell what we call the bumblebee field, where all the bees come to the flower, we go out there and catch them and put them in the jar.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever get stung?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Did you ever get stung?
Speaker 2: Oh, several times (laughter).  And believe me, it hurts.  So that's basically, you know, I would say what stands out most was, like I say, the bumblebee field was just a vacant lot right across the street from my house.  So, you know, that's where we would hang out in the summertime and catch grasshoppers and so forth.
Story_ID: 395249
Speaker 1: How far back can you remember in your childhood [in Detroit, Michigan], what's the earliest memory you have as a child, even before kindergarten or grade one; how far back do you remember?  Are there any incidents that you still remember?
Speaker 2: I'm really not sure of the age; my sister said I was probably about three, but I used to get up in the morning, go outside; and we used to get to get milk until we couldn't afford it anymore.  The milkman come by, and there was no milk, and it's like I just walked down the street checking out the neighbors to see where the milk was at.  And there was a lady, which, you know, kids about my age; I'd sit right on her porch (laughter) and just probably drink a whole quart of milk and just put the bottle down and go back home.  Well, she finally caught me one morning (laughter).  But, you know, that was about as early, I think.  You know, my sister said I was about three.
Speaker 1: Many of your brothers and sisters were born before you were?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You had at least, let's see; one, two, three, four, five, six born before you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in what ways did they help you to go grow up?  They were quite a bit older, so.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was, you know, the baby of the family for about ten years and, you know, in our family that was like royalty.  So whatever I wanted, I got.  And they took good care of me, you know, babysatted me, you know; made sure that I was clean and, you know.  They were just great, and they still are (laughter).  They still think of me as the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You still like milk by the way?
Speaker 2: I love milk (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you?
Speaker 2: Does a body good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Even at this very young age, you were born in '43 [1943], you started school probably in 1948 or so--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at five or six--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --had you--were you conscious of the game of golf even at that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I remember--I don't know what age it was, but I remember finding a golf ball in the alley, you know, next to us where kids, especially boys, hung out in the allies.  And I was just amazed at when you throw it on the ground how high it bounced (laughter), you know.  And so, that was as close as I got (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you find this ball, this golf ball?
Speaker 2: In the alley, you know--
Speaker 1: Near--in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: In the neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did it get there, do you know?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.  No idea.  I just assumed that it was somebody played golf but I couldn't even, you know, even fathom what golf was like.  It just, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I had the same curiosity as a youngster--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess, maybe before I started caddying--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so, being--I was a scientist.  I majored in sciences--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so I wanted to know how this thing worked.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I remember--a knife, chiseled--I took the cover off, went right down to the--did you ever take it apart?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But not that one--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but later, you know.  And I guess I was planning.  I just wanted to see what was inside (laughter); how they wrapped it up, you know.
Speaker 1: That's good.  Before we talk about your entry into elementary school, and your formal education, are there any other childhood memories that stand out in your mind that you wanted to share with me?  Either--
Speaker 2: Not anything that stood out, you know, because I felt like, you know, you know, all of my childhood was just like a normal childhood.  It wasn't that there were any horror stories, you know.  But all of my family, we were very close, you know, and friends and I were very close, but no, I don't have any.
Speaker 1: All right.  Who were some of your closest friends in the neighborhood?  Who do you recall?  They're still--are you still in touch with any of them?
Speaker 2: No.  I have no idea.  There was Butch [ph.], Spider [ph.], Red [ph.], and Cooter [ph.] (laughter) you know so.
Story_ID: 395250
Speaker 1: Describe your house for me.  What was your house like where you and your brothers and sisters lived [in Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: It was--I didn't realize how--it was big when I was a kid growing up in it.  But, you know, I've gone back there and that house is still standing there.
Speaker 1: It is?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And as a matter of fact, I knocked on the door, and there was a gentleman that answered and I gave him my card and told him, say, "This is the house that I grew up in" (laughter).  But, you know, when I saw it, you know, after so many years, it just looked so small.  I said, "God, how did all of us fit up in here" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well how many rooms did it have actually?
Speaker 2: I really don't know; probably about five bedrooms or so.
Speaker 1: Had to be with this large number.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 395251
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your, your entry into school.  How old were you when you first started school?
Speaker 2: I was six, but my sisters, you know, thought that I should have--I was smart enough to be in school, so they took me to school but they wouldn't enroll me because I was too young.  So, that was my first introduction to school, and I was disappointed because I really wanted to go to school.  So naturally I couldn't go until the next year or something, or my birthday hadn't come up.  I don't know what the--what the legal ramifications were, but I was six, you know, when I first started school.  I remember my sister, you know, one of my older sisters--
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Irene, the one that's--
Speaker 1: Irene?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, you know, taking me to school, enrolling me, and you know, started kindergarten; really wasn't that interesting, you know, but, you know--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school again?
Speaker 2: The Campbell, Campbell Elementary [ph.].
Speaker 1: And it was in--right in your neighborhood?  Was it close to your home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It was just five or six blocks from where I lived, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many years were you at the Campbell, roughly?
Speaker 2: Probably--I don't even think that we even finished out that year before we were transferred to another school.  I don't know what happened at that school; maybe it was overcrowded, but we transferred to the s- Joseph Campau Elementary [Joseph Campau School, Detroit, Michigan], which was a little further walk (laughter) you know, probably about ten, twelve blocks or so.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Compau?  That's Compau?
Speaker 2: Right, Compau.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was what, first grade, second grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that was like going into the first grade.  Yeah, I think I did first, second and third there.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers at that young age at all?  Any?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Not there.  You know, it wasn't until--I moved to Missouri where I, you know, and naturally to Florida when I started really remembering, you know, teachers' names (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when did you move from Detroit to Missouri?
Speaker 2: I would say about 1954.  I was eleven years old.
Speaker 1: Eleven years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went where to live?
Speaker 2: To Hayti, Missouri, to live with my [maternal] grandmother [Itaster Peterson].
Speaker 1: To live with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you continued your school then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there other brothers and sisters that went to Missouri also at that time?
Speaker 2: Just my two sisters, Irene and Margaret, which was the baby at that time.
Speaker 1: Now why did you go to Missouri?  Why did they--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Irenna Bridgeford Peete] and father [Dennis Peete] separated, and like most mothers, there's nowhere else to go, you know, but back to mommy, you know, so that's why we moved to Missouri.  And, you know, naturally trying to get herself established, and she left us there with Grandma and she went to Chicago [Illinois] to, you know, looking for work with--because she had a sister there, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you grew up there in Hayti--Hayti-
Speaker 2: Right, for about a couple years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you went to school there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what school did you attend there?
Speaker 2: Hayti High School [Hayti, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to middle school there also?
Speaker 2: Well, not--yeah--right up into middle school, yeah.  So, like I said, I was probably in the, what, fourth or fifth, I guess when I moved there, and I was like in the seventh--or sixth or something; so it really wasn't that long a time.
Speaker 1: And then you went on to--on to high school?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I never did go to high school.  I moved--my father came to Hayti, Missouri, after about a couple years and I moved to Florida with him.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how old were you then when you moved?
Speaker 2: I was probably about thirteen, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that's where I went.  Couple of years there [at East Lake Middle School, Pahokee, Florida], maybe three, and dropped out of school in the eighth grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: In the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were how old then, about--
Speaker 2: I was actually fifteen, but, you know, I told them I was sixteen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 395252
Speaker 1: When you first arrived in Florida with your father [Dennis Peete], you went to school, what was life like for you there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it wasn't as much of a culture shock as it was to--first moved to Hayti [Missouri].  You know, I saw all of this white stuff out in these fields and I asked my mother [Irenna Bridgeford Peete], "What is that?" She said, "That's cotton."  I didn't even know cotton grew, man, you know, I thought it was manufactured into a shirt from the factory.  So that--and to then have to work in it, now that was a real culture shock, you know.
Speaker 1: This is back in Missouri now?  The cotton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in Missouri now.  You know, moving to Hayti was a big step up because at least they had running water, you know, in Missouri.
Speaker 1: Did you pick cotton or were you involved--
Speaker 2: Yes, I picked cotton.
Speaker 1: You did, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and chopped it.
Speaker 1: Did you get paid for it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We got four cent a pound.
Speaker 1: Four cents a pound.
Speaker 2: Right.  But you had to work like mad to make eight dollars.  And, you know, when I first got there I was trying to get that hundred pounds, you know.  But after I met some guys who were very competitive as far as work was concerned, and I wanted to be competitive, it was long before I was picking over two hundred, so.  You know, back in that time in the '50s [1950s], you know, eight dollars a day wasn't too bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: In addition to the change of environment and place from Detroit [Michigan] to a place like Hayti in Missouri, what other adjustments did you have to make in that move?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, trying to get adjusted to outdoor toilets, and pump water and, you know, chopping wood, you know, I mean, I just couldn't even phantom [sic. fathom] that.  So, you know, to me it was like, you know, it's like another world.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's like why am I even this place, you know, so.  It was--it was really depressing.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Very depressing.
Speaker 1: So then your father brings you to Florida?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that move wasn't as traumatic for you--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--like I say, it was a step up from Missouri, you know, even though I still had to work on the farm, you know, the bean fields, corn fields; just about everything--every vegetable you've eaten (laughter) I've probably worked in it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 395253
Speaker 1: What was your father [Dennis Peete] doing when you moved with him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he was farming.
Speaker 1: He was farming?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And what town or city did we mention that?
Speaker 2: That--Pahokee, P-A-H-O-K-E-E.  Pahokee, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was that near?  What major city?
Speaker 2: It's probably about forty-five miles west of West Palm Beach [Florida].
Speaker 1: West of West Palm Beach.
Speaker 2: Due west of West Palm Beach, right on what they call the Lake, Lake Okeechobee.  Right on the southernest tip of the lake, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he went from automobile work--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --to farming.
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: What kind of things was he growing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, you know, I mean, he wasn't growing, but he was working--
Speaker 1: Oh, on the farm.
Speaker 2: --the farm, right.  Farming, yeah, farm work; farm labor.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And basically, you know, corn, beans, you know, you probably make more money in corn than you would picking beans.  But, you know, that was--that was really the--that was it.  Then naturally after a while, then that's when the cane, you know sugarcane start taking over.  I think it was after the Cuban embargo, and the United States stopped buying sugar from Cuba, so that mean they had to grow it themselves.  So it really turned into a just basically a cane area now.  And my father and, you know, my half-brothers, they all worked in the sugar mills, so that was--that was it.
Speaker 1: So you had half-brothers in Florida (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Your father had remarried?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how many children did he have when you went to live with him?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to live with him, I think he only had two.  But I think they ended up having about ten before I left (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the oldest then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right; so naturally I had to babysit; pick them up from the babysitter, come home, start dinner, start washing (laughter), cleaning up the house.
Speaker 1: Did you enter school when you went to Florida?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: You did.  At what level then did you enter when you moved?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Into the seventh grade.  And what was that school again?
Speaker 2: That was East Lake Middle School--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Pahokee, Florida, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what you remember about that school?
Speaker 2: I remember that there was only one nice teacher as far as I was concerned; that was our homeroom teacher, Mr. Harren- Mr. Harris [ph.].  But the rest of them was pretty strict, pretty strict.
Speaker 1: What you like about Mr. Harris then?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he would sit down and talk to you and take the time to try to explain things.  The rest of the teachers, you get it if you can and, you know, I ain't got time, and boom, they're gone, you know.  So wasn't used to that kind of teaching, you know, growing up in Detroit [Michigan].  Even in Missouri, the teachers there would take a little time to try to explain things to you, but they didn't care.
Speaker 1: Now, these are all black schools you attended (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Black schools, yeah.
Story_ID: 394845
Speaker 1: You were saying that Mr. Harris [ph.] was, was a favorite educator of yours (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --when you, when you went to Florida.  What other memories do you have of the grades seven and eight in Florida, middle school [East Lake Middle School, Pahokee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: There really wasn't what I would call pleasurable moments or memories.  I just saw a bunch teachers that really didn't really care about the education or the quality of education that the kids was getting, you know, and it really wasn't what I was used to, you know because the teachers I had, you know, in grade school coming up, they seemed to be very concerned, you know, about your learning, about your grammar and so forth.  But, you know, as a matter of fact, you know, when I dropped out of school, I wanted to go back but my attendance wasn't enough for me to pass with my class.  So I went to speak with the principal and, you know, at that age, you know, it took a lot of courage just to go in his office without being ordered there, you know.  So I sit down, explain to him, and let him know that, you know, I know I hadn't been, you know, coming to school but, you know, my grades--he says, "Yeah, your grades, you know, is something."  And I say, "I would like to pass with my class and if I don't keep up with my class, I would be willing to go back and take that eighth grade all over again."  He said, "I'm sorry, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete].  There is no exceptions."  You know, there's no exception.  You got to think about those teachers, they got theirs, and you got to get yours.  And that was really like a low blow to me, you know.  So I say, "Well, Mr. Morrell [ph.], I won't be coming back to school."  But--
Speaker 1: You were fifteen now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And you were allowed to leave school at that age?
Speaker 2: Well, they didn't care (laughter).
Speaker 1: They didn't care.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You don't go to school, you just--it wasn't like growing up in Detroit [Michigan] where they got truant officers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --riding around looking for kids, you know, playing hooky.  So you--they didn't care whether you came to school or not.
Speaker 1: What did your father [Dennis Peete] have to say about this?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my father knew how I felt about school.  And, as a matter of fact, my, my coach, you know, came to the house to talk to my father to try to get me to go back to school.  But, you know, my father said, "Well, if he don't want to go to school, I can't make him."
Speaker 1: Who was the coach; your coach?
Speaker 2: His name was Artus Davis [ph.]; he a top basketball coach.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you played basketball?
Speaker 2: So I played basketball, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were pretty good at that?
Speaker 2: I was pretty good, good enough for him to try to get me to go back to school (laughter).  I was, you know, like--you know, the high school there, well middle school doesn't go any further than the ninth grade.  So, you know, all of the older, bigger kids, you know, they would leave and go into Belle Glade [Florida], which was the next town where they had the high school.  So, I was, you know, probably going to be one of the, you know, one of the stars, I would say, you know, as far as the basketball team was concerned.  But, no, Mr. Davis was a very nice man, very nice man.
Story_ID: 394846
Speaker 1: What did you do that summer or what did you do once you left school [East Lake Middle School, Pahokee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I would have to say I was a pretty good pool player at that age.  So I just played pool.  That's what I did for a living for a long time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you stayed in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: For how long?  Did you work in addition to playing pool?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Well, depending on, you know, the circumstances.  Yes, I worked at times, you know.  When things were slow in the poolroom, so you got to make a living.  And I was still staying with my father [Dennis Peete].  Naturally I got to try to help out with the expenses, so I had to try to have something to give him, you know, so.  Had to earn my keep still.  But you know at that time, I had nowhere to go, and it was a migrant town which mean that, you know, in the season, you know, which would probably run from November to maybe May, you know, as far as the vegetables were concerned, and after that, people would leave Pahokee [Florida] and they would catch the buses, you know, or contractors would take them up the Eastern Shore to work in the potatoes and so forth.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And I tried that a couple of times and I didn't like living on camps.  So I didn't do that anymore.
Speaker 1: These migrant workers, what was their home base; where were they from?
Speaker 2: They were basically from the Pahokee area, okay.  But there were migrant workers and, you know, all over Florida, you know, right.
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay there after you dropped out, did you (unclear) to leave?
Speaker 2: I think I stayed in Pahokee for maybe about three years, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Til what, you're about eighteen?
Speaker 2: About eighteen, yeah.  That's when I--that's when the cane [sugarcane] was really becoming really popular as far as, you know, growth is concerned.  And they used to bring a lot of Jamaicans and Barbadians and Antiguans over from the islands and--to work the cane because Americans didn't want to cut the cane, you know.  So they would bring them over, and I used to see--and they were all out on camps, and I used to ride by and see peddlers from Miami [Florida], Fort Lauderdale [Florida], West Palm Beach [Florida], that would have their station wagons or their little vans full of wares, and they were selling them to the Jamaicans or the cane cutters.
Speaker 1: To the migrants.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to the migrants.
Speaker 1: What were they selling; what were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, different clothes, you know, basically; suitcases, you know; different little, you know, odds and ends that they might want; mostly clothes.  So I say, you know, that might be something that I wouldn't mind doing.  So I went to the county, the county courthouse and bought--and got a peddler's license so I'd be able to go into the wholesale houses in Miami and buy my wares and go back and do the same thing that they were doing, and it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you finance the purchasing of the wares that you were going to sell?  You got them wholesale, but how did you finance that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that was, you know, from money that I had already had saved, you know.  And, you know, I mean, you start out with what, a couple hundred dollars' worth of stuff, and you sell that, and you go back and get four hundred dollars' worth.  So, you know, it took time to build up--
Speaker 1: So you had to travel quite a ways to get your goods then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to Miami.  That's like eighty miles from Belle Glade [Florida].
Speaker 1: How did you get there?
Speaker 2: I had a car.
Speaker 1: Oh, you had a car?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it your father's car or your car?
Speaker 2: No, it was my car.  So I was, you know, not to say I was happy about it, but I was pretty resourceful as a young man as far being able to make money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then you went into selling to migrant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, to migrant workers, and that's really what I was doing when I ended up in Rochester [New York] when I first, you know, picked up golf club, I just--
Speaker 1: How much were you able to make a week or a month selling your--
Speaker 2: My wares?  You know, I could probably make 250 [dollars]; a good week, 300 [dollars] a week, yeah, right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you sold clothes, maybe suitcases; what else?
Speaker 2: Suitcases, radios, you know, hotplates; whatever they wanted, you know.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So it's like you go and take the order, and then you go pick it up, and then you bring it back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you sold these out of your car, out of the trunk of your car?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I had an old Plymouth station wagon, 1956 (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 394847
Speaker 1: So you did that as a business--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then you moved on, did you, from there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, well, I, I was a young man that had no habits growing up.  So, you know, other than eating, paying rent, you know, I just--my money was under the mattress or in a pillowcase somewhere (laughter) you know.  So, you know, I saved my money so, therefore, when an opportunity did present itself to me as far as getting into real estate apartments, I had, you know, something to at least get started with.  And the guy was very generous of me, meaning that I didn't have to put a whole lot of money down, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Well, did you get--where did you move to once you left Florida?  Did you leave Florida?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I grew up in Florida.  You know, I just moved from Pahokee [Florida] to Fort Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, you know, no, I grew--I never stayed anywhere other than Florida, except, you know, when my first wife [Christine Sears] and I was going through a divorce, I moved out to Phoenix [Arizona].  And that's where I met my second wife [Elaine Pepper Peete].  But, no, I was--Florida's home.
Speaker 1: Well, so you went to Fort Lauderdale next?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did you do there?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when I was into golf.  I just practiced golf at that time.  And I was still selling my wares, but that was mainly in the evenings when people were off from work or on the weekend when they get paid, you know.  So I pretty much had my weeks pretty free (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, when did you--when did you start playing golf?
Speaker 2: Start?
Speaker 1: Start, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, 1966.  I was twenty-three years old.
Speaker 1: And where were you when you picked up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: Oh. So what were you doing in Rochester?
Speaker 2: I was on one of what I call my selling expeditions.  You know, selling wares to migrant workers, right--
Speaker 1: In Rochester?
Speaker 2: --so I was following them.  See, that's where they were--basically start in North Carolina, okay; and then they moved to the Eastern Shore: Virginia, Maryland, New Jersey; and then from there, they'll move up to New York.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of work were they doing in Rochester?
Speaker 2: Potatoes basically, digging potatoes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were these Caribbean peoples in Rochester or were they other ethnics?
Speaker 2: No, they were basically black people.
Speaker 1: Blacks?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Rochester--
Speaker 2: Predominantly, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you continued to sell--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Rochester?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes, so they had various camps around the Rochester area as well, so, you know, I just make my rounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how old were you when you were--first arrived in Rochester?
Speaker 2: I was--the first year I went to Rochester was--I was twenty-two--that was the year before I picked up the golf club because I didn't know the, the guys that I met the following year.  So, right.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I as twenty-three, naturally the next year, 1966 when I first picked up the club (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, how did you happen to pick up a golf club in Rochester?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I met some friends there, black from Alabama, and obviously they probably caddied when they was kids and just, you know, took a liking to the game, even though they were street people; but they had enough class to want to go out and play golf, you know.  So naturally by me hanging around with them, you know, we'd go out and play basketball, though we might even go play softball, had a lot parties in the park, and so forth; so by me hanging around with them, they said, "Hey, man, why don't you come and play golf with us?"  I was like most peoples, especially blacks, you know, on golf, but, said, "I didn't even know black people played golf."  (Laughter) Said, "Yeah, man, it's going to be fun.  You're going to like it."  I said, "Okay, I'll give it a try."  Just went out there and fell in love with it.  Just fell in love.
Story_ID: 394848
Speaker 1: What course did you, did you play on out there?
Speaker 2: It was called Genesee Valley Park Golf Course [Genesee Valley Golf Course, Rochester, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And there was no issue around blacks coming to play at this course (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No discrimination?
Speaker 2: No.  That was what we called a be- a public golf course, so, you know, they don't--there was no problem; no racial problem.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you first learn to hit the ball?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, watching basically.  You know, the only--when I was first introduced to the game, the only thing I wanted to know was the objective of the game.  See, I didn't know what the objective was.  And they explained to me, "Okay, the objective is to try to hit the ball into that hole--see that flag way down there--in as fewest strokes as you can."  I said, "Oh. Okay."  So right away that let me know that, hey, you got to know how to hit the ball to kind of--you know, it's not like basketball where you're trying to get as many strokes as you can; you're trying to get as less as you can, so.  You know, once I got the concept of it, then I realized what had to be done; got to learn how to hit the ball, and after you learn how to hit the ball, now you got to learn how to control the ball.
Speaker 1: Did your friends give you quote any lessons or instructions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, just--basically just the grip.  You know, just how to grip the club, you know.  And the rest I'm just watching, you know, I could do that.  I see him doing it, you know.  Didn't do as well--
Speaker 1: Tell me about the grip that you adopted when you first started playing--
Speaker 2: Well, when I first introduced to the game, it was like the--you know, locking group.  That's when the little finger of the right hand interlocks with the index finger on the left hand.  Now, this is how I started.  It never felt comfortable to me, but I had what we called at that time, little half-finger gloves, not the whole glove; and what was happening was, since my grip was so loose, I was rubbing a blister (laughter) in my fingers, and I went to a pro shop and I said, "You know, I want to get a glove with all--the full-fingered glove, you know, because, see I'm rubbing this blister."  He said, "Well, let me see your grip."  He said, "Oh, that's why you rubbing that blister because that's the way you should be gripping."  And as soon as he really showed me that, I mean, it felt more comfortable than the interlocking grip.  I said, oh, so that's it.  And it wasn't until later that I found out that that was a grip that was really invented by Vardon, Henry Vardon, I think it was.  That's why they call it the Vardon Trophy--I mean the grip, Vardon grip (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell Vardon?
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laugher).
Speaker 1: V-A-R-D-O-N.
Speaker 2: Vardon, yeah.  Right, something like that.
Speaker 1: So, how much golf did you play in Rochester [New York] then?
Speaker 2: I only played nine holes.
Speaker 1: That's all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all.  Just nine holes.
Speaker 1: You just played nine holes?
Speaker 2: And after that they took me back to my motel, I got in my car and I went to the driving range and hit balls because--
Speaker 1: In Rochester?
Speaker 2: --yeah, because what my objective was at that time was, learn how to get the ball off the ground because I was like everybody (unclear), I'm topping everything.  I said, no, you got to get this ball up now in order to be able to get it to go somewhere.  But before I left that range, just, you know, I don't know if it was just a knack or whatever, but I was lofting that seven iron pretty good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where did you get your clubs from?
Speaker 2: I--as a matter of fact I bought them at the pro shop, you know, because I knew then--no, I went back; I didn't play anymore, but I went back.  I knew then that I was going to play golf, so I got a beginner's set, used beginner's set.  I think I might have paid a hundred dollars for them or something.  So just something to get started.
Story_ID: 394849
Speaker 1: So then you left Rochester [New York] and went where from there?
Speaker 2: Went to Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Speaker 1: Fort Lauderdale.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you went back and started, of course, continuing to practice and, and play golf?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Definitely.  I mean, that was a daily routine to me.  As a matter of fact, I remember several times just sitting out in the park, waiting on day to break so I could hit balls (laughter) you know.  And I remember, and this was after I was in the game for a little while.  I remember waking up and, you know, it was like I had a dream about something that I should be doing in my game, and I'd just get up, get dressed, get in my car, and go out to the park.  And, you know, they had a little ballpark there, on Sunrise Boulevard where they had softball games, and a lot of times they run late and they leave the lights on.  So I'd go out there, throw out my shag bag and I just start hit the balls (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you take any lessons in Fort Lauderdale?
Speaker 2: Never had a golf--an official golf lesson.  I went to see one teacher; name is Bob Toski, and I was really having a problem that I really couldn't, you know, I couldn't cipher out myself.  And I think he spent maybe three minutes with me.  And, you know, what I was doing was what we call reverse pivoting.  I wasn't turning.  So what he did was, he just gave me a little tilt to make sure that I stay behind the ball, now.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Bob Toski.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard of him.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you play golf with him by any chance or just had the lesson?
Speaker 2: No, no.  We didn't play.  He just--like I said, he was very busy.  As a matter of fact, he was just working me in.  And like--and once he gave me that little tip and he saw me hit about three shots, he said, "Okay.  That's all you got to do" because they were going dead straight.
Speaker 1: What was the best part of your game at that point?  You're just beginning, you're practicing; what was the best part of your game?
Speaker 2: Always been driving the ball, tee shot, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a skill that, you know, after the slices and the hook start, you know, start coming up a little bit more together, that was the best part of my game.
Speaker 1: What was the most difficult part of the game for you to, to master and learn as you were moving yourself into golf?
Speaker 2: I would say putting.
Speaker 1: Putting?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were the problems that you had in putting?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, putting is--is probably two or threefold.  You know, you got to have the speed; you got to have the line; and you got to have the confidence, the rhythm.  So there's so many variables, you know.  It's, you know, it's not like a tee shot, where the wind just blowing one way, say, all I got to do is just hit it out there, let the wind bring it back.  But a putt, you might have two or three (laughter) breaks in it before it gets to the cup, you know.  And I was one of those people that never saw--early in my career, never saw a straight putt.  I mean, it's got to break some kind of way, you know (laughter) so.  Therefore, now you're looking at the fact that it might go three different ways.  It might go right, it might go left, or it might go straight.  So, you know, it was kind of hard for me to get any confidence--
Story_ID: 394850
Speaker 1: So we're going to have to backtrack because we left out something very important that happened to you when you were living with your [maternal] grandmother [Itaster Peterson].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we need to go back to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You had an accident when you were living in Missouri.  Tell us about that because I want to bring that now into your golf swing.  What happened when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well--
Speaker 1: --you were about twelve or thirteen?
Speaker 2: --when I was twelve years old, there was a crew leader, and naturally this is summertime and the cotton wasn't high yet, so now we still got to find something to do.  And so, this guy came by and, you know, talked my grandmother--as a matter of fact, my father's [Dennis Peete] sister also went on the trip, to go to Suttons Bay, Michigan, to pick cherries.  Okay.  And it was like a four--three or four-day drive on the back of a truck, you know.  So you can imagine how that was.  So we get there and, I don't know, I was there probably a couple of weeks picking cherries up in the tree, and you got your ladder but, you know, there was some cherries and they want you to get all the cherries, you know.  So there were some cherries sort of hanging out, and I'm reaching and not sure about the limb, but, boop, the limb broke, and there I go with it.  Obviously, I must have fell right on the elbow, you know, to break it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which elbow?
Speaker 2: --the left elbow.  To break the elbow in three places.
Speaker 1: And so, then you went to the hospital--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I went to the hospital, they operated, and actually the results of it was that I didn't--I don't have the full extent of range of the left elbow--
Speaker 1: Even now?
Speaker 2: --even now, right.
Speaker 1: So how did that affect your golf swing now?  Now, you're twenty-three years old, ten years later; how did that affect your golf swing?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it affected it at all because it's not like I had a golf swing before it happened, you know.  So it's like the elbow and the golf swing and I grew up together, so, you know.  I had no problem with the elbow; and, as a matter of fact, I had the elbow--because it used to hurt every now and then when I first started and had it X-rayed by, you know, one leading orthopedic surgeon in Fort Lauderdale [Florida]; he says, "It's a perfectly good elbow if it doesn't bother you, we can always give you the cortisone" and all this.  I said, "No, that's all right."  It's a perfectly good elbow.  If it doesn't bother you, leave it alone.
Story_ID: 394851
Speaker 1: Continuing to master the game now in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] with lots and lots and lots of practice.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think you said earlier, did you study golf in books?  Did you read golf books?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, I was naturally trying to get the basic fundamentals, you know.  And that's, you know, once you get the basic fundamental, now it's how you adapt them, you know, to your game.  So, you know naturally the grip and, you know, the stance, you know, and, you know, the hip turn, and weight shift.  You know, I didn't read books just to get a golf swing, you know, just, you know, really trying to get the basic, you know, the chipping and pitching.
Speaker 1: You recall which books you used, any--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Bob Toski's book.  I think it was the basic fundamentals of golf, or something like that, yeah.  I remember reading Doug Ford, 'The Wedge Book,' you know.  I didn't--I didn't get into the Hogan [Ben Hogan] and Nicklaus [Jack Nicklaus] books, you know, 'Golf My Way' [Jack Nicklaus and Ken Bowden] because to me that was like, you know, them trying to teach me their game, and I didn't want their game.  I had to develop my own.
Story_ID: 394852
Speaker 1: Now, in order for you to develop as you did, and eventually turn pro, which we'll get to in a minute, you had to be challenged on the course.  You had to have some good competition.  So who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were your competitors?  Who were you playing against?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean, I started out, you know, I mean, it's hard to remember all those guys' names, but we had some pretty good players in Hollywood [Florida], you know, just right, a little south of Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  And we used to play a golf course called Orangebrook [Orangebrook Golf Course; Orangebrook Golf and Country Club, Hollywood, Florida].  They had thirty-six holes out there, and you know, they were probably the best, I would say, ranking golfers in our area, you know, guys that when I first started playing, I knew I couldn't beat them.  But I'd say, I'm going to learn something from them.  So I always play with better players, you know, to get a better concept and, yes, I lost a lot of Nassaus, but (laughter) it wasn't long before they started coming back.
Speaker 1: What was your score?  What were you scoring for eighteen holes when you were in Fort Lauderdale practicing, really getting in--what was your--what were you--what were you scoring?
Speaker 2: You know, Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], you know, I never--I didn't go to the golf course until I was able to feel like I could hit the ball and have some kind of idea where it's going.  So when I first went to the golf course, you know, I think my fir- my highest score was probably maybe eighty-three or eighty-four.  And it wasn't, you know, a month later before I was really breaking eighty.  You know, within six months I had broken eighty, which was my first golf tournament was the North and South [North and South Open], in Miami [Florida] at Miami Springs [Miami Springs Golf Course; Miami Springs Golf and Country Club, Miami Springs, Florida], and I entered into my first golf tournament, and I shot seventy-six the first round; you know, when I shot my (laughter) eighty-two and eighty-three thereafter, but I was just so happy, you know, to have that kind of score.
Story_ID: 394853
Speaker 1: I understand that yo- you turned professional in what year?
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], I think it was, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what does that mean to turn pro?  How do you turn pro, and how did you do it so quickly?  What does it mean to become a professional golfer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I--well, that's when you started--really basically when you start entering golf tournaments and accepting prize money, then you're already a pro.  You don't have to announce it to anybody.  But once you accept prize money, then that means that you are playing professional golf; whether you have any scores or not, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your first prize?  What was your first prize?
Speaker 2: My first professional win, I think it might have been when I was playing the Florida winter tour.  You know, I don't even know if the first four or five tournaments I played in that I even finished in the money or not, you know.  I mean that's the kind scores I had.
Speaker 1: But you're playing for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I was entered--
Speaker 1: --the cash prize--
Speaker 2: --as a pro, yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: --that you--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Did you have any other kind of paper credentials to become a pro--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.
Speaker 1: --or did (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --The only thing that you need for that now, when become--when you want to become a PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] professional, now you got to go through the apprentice program and, you know, the training, and the schools and classes, and so forth.
Speaker 1: So when did you begin to begin that preparation?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was probably about after I turned pro, you know.  Now, I knew I had to join the local chapter and start out as an apprentice, and it had some merits, you know, because, you know, once you tell a pro at a club that you're in the apprentice program, they usually comp you a round, meaning that you don't have to pay anything, right, so.
Speaker 1: How many prizes did you win during that time between 1971 and the time that you entered the PGA qualifying--
Speaker 2: Well, let me--I think I can tell you my first win, and my first real check was the Larry Little golf tournament at Doral Country Club [Trump National Doral Miami, Doral, Florida], the Blue Monster--Larry Little used to play for the Dolphins [Miami Dolphins].  Okay.  I think he was like a linesman or something, but he was a--good ball player, but he had a golf tournament at Doral.  And, see, I knew Doral because I had had a membership at Doral, summer membership where you pay four thousand [dollars], and you play for six months or something like that.  So I knew the golf course, but I wasn't expected to win because they had an ex-PGA Tour pro, Sam Harvey, you know.  So naturally he was the favorite, you know.  And I think after the first round, he was leading the tournament.  But I walked him down (laughter).  That was my first win.
Speaker 1: There were four rounds?  Four (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  Just two.
Speaker 1: Just two?
Speaker 2: Thirty-six holes.
Speaker 1: And what was the prize; do you remember?
Speaker 2: I think it was twelve hundred dollars, first place.
Speaker 1: Twelve hundred dollars.  So that was your first prize?
Speaker 2: That was my first check, right, that I remember.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the second one?
Speaker 2: The second one--let's see.  I think my next win might have been in Panama City [Florida].  Another Florida winter tour, it was a tournament called the Billy Bowlegs.  And I think that was my next win, was probably, maybe, I don't know, a few months later or something like that.
Speaker 1: How much was that prize; do you recall?
Speaker 2: I think it was a thousand [dollars] or something like that, yeah.  They're all very small tournaments.  But I just wanted the competition and the experience, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 394854
Speaker 1: Now addition to playing golf and being a pro, and playing in these prize tournaments, how else were you supporting yourself at this point?  Were you doing--
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, you know, probably once my career got started, you know, I owned about 250- close to $300,000 worth of apartment units in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  So that was really what was supporting me.
Speaker 1: The real estate--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (unclear).  Well, how did you get into the real estate business?
Speaker 2: Well, through golf basically.  I played golf--well, met a lawyer whose father owned a lot of property in the inner city in Fort Lauderdale, so he, his father, and I, we got together and played golf and, you know, he was telling me about the fact that he was getting ready to retire, you know, I seemed to be a nice young man; he would like to know if I was interested in buying some of the properties, so.
Speaker 1: I see.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Benjamin Widoff.
Speaker 1: Could you spell the last name?
Speaker 2: W-I-D-D-O-F-F [sic.].  Widoff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were able to purchase--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this property?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 395254
Speaker 1: Certainly a turning point in developing your profession in golf was attending the PGA Tour Qualifying school [PGA Tour Qualifying Tournament].  Tell me what you have to do to qualify?  What is that process?  I've always been interested in it, and it also I think is something we want to talk about in relation to the fact that we don't have more black African American men and women, men particularly, in golf.  Tell me about the qualifying processes?  Where did you do that, what was it about?
Speaker 2: Well, the pro- qualifying process is naturally what you have to complete in order to get what we call your PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association] card, where it would enable you to play the tour.  So in order to be part of the qualifying school, you must have a two handicap or less, okay, in order to even be accepted.  And you must have a letter of recommendation from three Class A pros that'll know you and know your game so attest to your playability.  And the rest is, you know, I think it was like four hundred dollars for the--and that was just for the sectional qualifying.  Now you got to go through two qualifying before you got to the school at that time, okay.  So the sectional qualifying mean that you qualified in your section to let you know where the regional, meaning that they only take so many players, you know, some sectional qualifying.  I think my sectional qualifying, they only took like six, you know, the low six players or seven or so.  So you have to be one of them to go to the regional. And from there, there's still another process of elimination as to how many players that's going to go to the school.  So, you know, you have to go through those two processes just to get to the school.
Speaker 1: Well, if you don't make the first region of the local then--the regional, if you don't get through that, can you still come back again?
Speaker 2: Oh, the next time, the next year, you know.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So, there is no limit to how many times.  You know, as a matter of fact, I went, well, three times before I got my card, you know.  And I heard of guys that's been going ten, twelve, thirteen times (laughter).
Speaker 1: Three times at the local or the regional?
Speaker 2: Well, the school, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, three times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the--I think the second time I didn't make it through the regionals.  So, okay, I didn't get to the schools.  So it was two schools I went through.  The first one and the last one.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you make it through the regionals?
Speaker 2: I didn't play well enough.  I didn't finish in that--whatever that number was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In prize tournaments, is that--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was just the regional--I mean, the sectional qualifying--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --to see if you get to the regionals.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So I missed the sectionals, so I--
Speaker 1: What does it cost you to go through this process?  This is--
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, it was like 350 [dollars], four hundred dollars.  I think it's two or three thousand [dollars] or something now.  I don't know.-
Story_ID: 395255
Speaker 1: I always thought it was much more (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: --for some reason.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about--now, once you entered the school [PGA Tour Qualifying Tournament], what was that like--
Speaker 2: Well, the school was basically like the rest of it, it's all competition basically.  And they just really try to narrow it down to, you know--I think in the school that I went through in Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] in '75 [1975], I think they gave out--think there was only thirteen cards.  So you just have to be in that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the qualifying is really just low scores?
Speaker 2: That's basically right.  It's competition, right.  And naturally you gets--once you make it through the school, you'll get some orientation; no specific classroom.  It's just, you know, a speaker comes in and try to give you some kind of, you know, feel as to how to conduct yourself as a professional golfer, and being courteous and so forth.
Speaker 1: Well, was the field of those who made the school and got the tour card--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was that field smaller in the '70s [1970s] than it is today?  Are there more people on the tour today?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes, you know, because now, I think they--there's no telling.  I think they give out like, maybe fifteen cards, twenty cards.  I don't think that there's--ever been school back in the '70s [1970s] when I was qualifying when they gave out that many cards, you know.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you need a sponsor to get to the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Well who was your--
Speaker 2: You know, I would say once you get through the school, then you need a sponsor naturally, because, you know, back in those days, it wasn't that expensive, you know, a couple thousand [dollars] a week or something like that.  But now, you know, it's astronomical as to what it costs, you know.
Speaker 1: You mean to be a member?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  To play the tour.  You got to take care of your own expenses, okay.  Meaning, that you got airfare, hotel, caddy, food, you know.  So that was probably around, you know, right at two thousand [dollars] a week at that time.  You know, like I says, it depends on how you're going now, you know.  I mean, that two thousand a week, you know, after I started getting better hotels and flying first class, that was like three, four thousand [dollars].
Speaker 1: Did you have a sponsor?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a sponsor, fortunately.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, his name is Lowell Biggs, B-I-G-G-S [sic. Lowell L. Beggs], out of Amboy, Illinois.  Now, what's so ironic about this story is, I never met the guy, okay, six months later before I met him.  But he watched me at the Quad Cities Open [John Deere Classic], which my first tournament was the Milwaukee Open [Greater Milwaukee Open].  He watched me play, and I had no idea who he was.  And he asked Lee Elder, "Does he have a sponsor?"  I think Lee obviously told him, "No, I don't think so."  By the time I got home, called my father [Dennis Peete], he told me that this gentleman had called and asked about me, and ga- left his number for me to call him.  And that was our first contact, just a telephone call.  He say, "Well, I'd like to sponsor you."  It was six months later before I met him, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he sponsored you and that met what?  That he helped--
Speaker 2: That meant that he took care of all of my expenses.
Speaker 1: Invested in your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --career as a professional golfer, okay.
Speaker 2: Which was at that time, like I say, was about two thousand a month.  Now, yeah, so, almost two thousand a week, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is he still living?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's still living.
Speaker 1: You still in touch with him?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we haven't been touch in quite a while, but, you know, we hear about each other through somebody else, you know.
Speaker 1: What was his business; did you mention it?
Speaker 2: He was a--he had a supermarket and a package store [Beggs' Foods] in Amboy, Illinois, and plus he had a farm, you know, where he was planting corn and so forth, right.
Speaker 1: So how long did he sponsor you?
Speaker 2: For about, I'd say almost ten years.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 395256
Speaker 1: When you get your tour, tour card, and you finished the qualifying school [PGA Tour Qualifying Tournament], did you still have your real estate--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) enterprise?
Speaker 2: --no, no.  At that time I had sold it and I mean everything was in golf now.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you got out of the real estate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got out of there, you know, because, you know, I knew I was going to have to be traveling a lot, and it was going to be kind of hard to get some, you know, some agency to collect the rent because they want 10 percent, and when you got through with it, you ain't going to have nothing anyway, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your first major win on the tour?
Speaker 2: Funny enough, first tournament that I entered was my first win, the Milwaukee Open [Greater Milwaukee Open] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was 1979.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that, that tournament (unclear).  What was your final score?  Was it a four round, did you have four eighteen holes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, four eighteen holes (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You remember what your final was?
Speaker 2: Oh, my final score was, for the tournament, was nineteen under.
Speaker 1: Nineteen under?
Speaker 2: And at that time, that was tournament record, you know, as far as the lowest score.
Speaker 1: For the Milwaukee Open?
Speaker 2: For the Milwaukee Open.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that were competing with you those four days?
Speaker 2: Jim Colbert, Andy North; just to name, you know, probably some of the top players; Dave Eichelberger, Dave Stockton, you know.  Those were, you know, it wasn't the type of tournament for a Nicklaus [Jack Nicklaus] or a Palmer [Arnold Palmer], or something, you know, but they were probably the top players, you know, in the field at that time.
Story_ID: 395257
Speaker 1: Between 1971 when you first turned pro and this first major win in 1979 [at the Greater Milwaukee Open], what contact had you had with the other black golfers, like Charlie Sifford and Lee Elder?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I met most of those guys before I even came to the tour [Professional Golfers' Association].  There was a big tournament in honor of one of our real pioneers, Ted Rhodes, that's held in Nashville, Tennessee.  So naturally, all of the black golfers goes to that golf tournament so, therefore, I had gotten a chance to meet, you know, Charlie Sifford and Lee Elder casually, not, you know, professionally at that time.  And Jim Dent, you know, James Black, another prominent black golfer, you know.  All those guys, you know, Jimmy Wesley and, you know, just to name a few, got Nate Starks, you know, was, you know Bobby Stroble, you know.  I mean just some of the black golfers, you know that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Am I correct on this that, in 1966 [sic. 1969] when you first picked up a golf club, Charlie Sifford had won the L.A. Open [Los Angeles, Open], is that right?
Speaker 2: I would think so at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think, yeah--were you aware of that?
Speaker 2: No, no--I--
Speaker 1: I mean you were twenty-three years old, just, your friends took you--
Speaker 2: I had no idea.
Speaker 1: --you had never heard, probably hadn't even heard of Charlie Sifford.
Speaker 2: I hadn't even heard of Charlie Sifford.
Speaker 1: Well, according to my readings he won that same year that you picked up a golf club.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  Oh, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1966, if I have it right.  Tell me about your times with Ted Rhodes and these p- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never met Ted Rhodes.  This was a memorial basically--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --you know, in memories of Ted Rhodes, you know.  But I've heard a lot of talk from black and whites about Ted, how much of a gentleman he was, and how good a game he had.  And it was, you know, and, you know, there's another black that was right along with him, Bill Spiller, you know they--
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you compete with any of these golfers, black golfers, as you were moving toward the qualifying school [PGA Tour Qualifying Tournament] and after, did you--any of you play in the same tournaments?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the blacks that were on the tour, yeah, we played practice rounds together, played in tournaments together, yeah; just about every other week or so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you played with Charles Sifford?
Speaker 2: Charlie Sifford?  Yeah.  It was in Hartford [Connecticut].  As a matter of fact, he won Hartford [Greater Hartford Open Golf Tournament] one year, too.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We played together I think for the first time in Hartford and he got disqualified.
Speaker 1: He got disqualified?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For what reason?
Speaker 2: Because of the scorer, John Schroeder was his scorer, put down the wrong score on eighteen for Charlie.  And, naturally, I think, he put down a five--a four for Charlie, and Charlie made a five; meaning that if the score is higher than your original score, fine; but if it's lower, then you're disqualified.  So Charlie said he didn't even know about it because, you know, I mean, Charlie just sign his card, assuming the guy put the score down right, you know.  And he looked in the paper and they had him that one score when he know he shot another, so.  Naturally, he had to call out and tell them to disqualify him.
Speaker 1: Charlie Sifford and some of the golfers before your time--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --faced tremendous types of discrimination--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --prejudice and so on.  Did you face any discrimination in the '70s [1970s] as you were moving through this process?
Speaker 2: Bob [HistoryMaker Robert C. Hayden], none whatsoever.  When I came to the tour, I kind of feel like a lot of those younger players I had already competed with them on the mini-tour, because most of those guys, you know, Jim Simons, they was getting out of college, getting ready for the qualifying school, and they were trying to get, you know, as much competition as they can, so they would play the mini-tour.  And, you know, that's how I got a chance to know most of those guys.  So when I, you know, when I did come to the tour, it's like, you know, we already heard about how straight you hit the ball (laughter), so.  No, but they were all great.  I had no problem.  No fan--no problem with no fans or anybody.
Story_ID: 395258
Speaker 1: After the Greater Milwaukee Open, 1979, what was your next major victory, major win?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't win again.  You know, at that time, you know, I was really--they had what they called the top sixty money winners for the year.  Okay, that's like the top 125 on the tour [Professional Golfers' Association] now, meaning that they will be able to play next year and not have to qualify.  Okay.  So that to me at that time was my goal, just try to make enough money where I would be in the top sixty.  So it wasn't until '82 [1982] when things really came together for me.  That year I won four tournaments, including the Milwaukee Open again.  So, you know, that was when things really came together for me as far as my game was concerned.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you won four tournaments in 1982.  How do you remember the second victory other than Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I felt like Milwaukee owed me something because that was the first tournament I entered, and I was only like two shots out of the league after about twenty-six holes, and I missed the cut; meaning that I went crazy on my--on the eighteenth hole, which was my ninth hole.  Took a nine and it's just all downhill from there on.  So I missed the cut by a shot (laughter).  So I say Milwaukee owe me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Mr. Biggs [sic. Lowell L. Beggs] there that day?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Mr. Biggs, your sponsor; was he there that day, do you recall?
Speaker 2: I don't know about Milwaukee, but I know he was at Quad Cities [Quad Cities Open; John Deere Classic], yeah.
Speaker 1: He was where?
Speaker 2: At Quad Cities--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was the next tournament, you know, which is only a couple of hours drive from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the Anheuser-Busch tournament that you won, the Classic [Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic]?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your memories of that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the first year I won the Anheuser-Busch--I won it two years in a row.  But the first year I won it, you know, I was like six shots back of Hal Sutton and winning wasn't even on my mind.  You know, I was just happy because I think somebody else was tied with me, you know, so.  I'm just trying to get him off of me and maybe I can take up second by myself.  I'm not even thinking about winning.  But by the time we made the turn, I had a one-shot lead, so I said, hey, wait a minute.  This is not Hal Sutton's tournament.  This is my tournament now (laughter). So I end up--but, you know, I would have to feel sorry for Hal because, you know, you don't catch a player that's a good player, you know, six shots on him, you know, and basically at nine holes, you know.  So he really had a bad day.  And nobody else really, you know, made no charge.
Story_ID: 395259
Speaker 1: You won what is referred to here as the B.C. Open.  What was that?  That was just the fourth, the third one that you won in ei- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  That was in--
Speaker 1: --what was the B.C.?
Speaker 2: --that's in Endicott, New York.  Yes, I spent a whole week in Endicott, New York, one Friday night (laughter).  But it's outside of Binghamton [New York].  And it's--really the B.C. is the Boone County Open [sic. Broome County Open]--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So they just call it the B.C. Open.  So that was--as a matter of fact, I set a tournament record there.  I think it might still be standing now.
Speaker 1: What was the score (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I shot nineteen under there.
Speaker 1: Nineteen under again?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Lot of birdies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a lot of birdies.
Speaker 1: Any eagles?
Speaker 2: No eagles.  I have not--
Speaker 1: How many holes-in-one have you had?
Speaker 2: Four in my career.
Speaker 1: Four?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  We'll come back to that in a minute because I want to stay with these four wins in one year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then you went on to win the Pensacola Open.
Speaker 2: Pensacola Open, yeah.
Speaker 1: And who were your major challengers in that tournament?
Speaker 2: Again, you know, I'll say my closest rival was probably Jim Colbert and Steve Melnick was playing good at that time, Andy North, you know; basically the same, you know, four or five guys, you know.  At that time, I would say going into Sunday's round, you probably only had, you know, maybe three or four guys to beat, you know.  In any given tournament back at that time, in those days, it was probably only ten guys to beat, you know.
Speaker 1: In this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But now, you know, you got to beat everybody (laughter).
Speaker 1: In this tremendous string of four wins in one year--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was the strongest part of your gain this year?  This year when you won these tournaments--
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that there were two very strong parts, but, you know, I'm not even worried about driving.  But I was hitting my irons very accurate, and naturally putting well.  But I was hitting my irons very close, you know.  So I had a lot of birdie opportunities, yeah.  As a matter of fact, that was my best ball-striking year was '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Was '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: You know, I've won a couple of tournaments thereafter that year, but that was my best ball-striking year.
Speaker 1: How long were you driving the ball that year, you recall?
Speaker 2: I would say roughly around 250 [yard] average, yeah.
Speaker 1: 250?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's- so that's short.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's--well, that's definitely short nowadays, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But your accuracy--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --which was very, very important.
Speaker 2: It made me look like a 280 yard drive (laughter).
Story_ID: 395260
Speaker 1: Some of the people who an- professionals, members of the tour [Professional Golfers' Association] that you knew had analyzed, I guess, your swing and so on and talked about how squarely you, you hit the ball (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Did you agree with an analysis that perhaps the fact that you were unable to completely straighten up your left arm, that it gave you a swing that brought you right back to--to impact?  Do you think that is (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would have to agree with that to it to that extent, you know, which mean--which really meant that I was able to stay, I would say, in a much tighter position in my swing than most players.  I never got out of position.  And to me, you know, once a player reached a certain level, especially when you start talking about professional golfers, you know, there's--it's not their swing that gets them in trouble; it's just their position.  They get out of position.  Now, they're fighting, trying to get back into position, and most of the time you can't do that.  It's way right or way left, you know.  So they get out of position.  So I was just one of those players that I would say that was able to, to stay in position better, you know, than my rivals, you know.
Speaker 1: And part of that related to your arm (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very possible.  I'm not sure, you know, if it had been straight, I don't think--I don't think anybody would have taken anything from my ability (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you feel that you have a lot of natural rhythm and tempo?  Now you played basketball--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --do you think that you--
Speaker 2: --yeah, so I was--
Speaker 1: --do you think that you've got some natural rhythm and tempo too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was well coordinated, you know.  So that--that's very important, is being coordinated, and, you know, I've always thought of myself as creative.  And see, as far as golf is concerned, you've got to have that creativity.  You just can't go up with one shot and expect to play well.  You know, you've got to win a lot of shots.  You may end up having, and you never had before, but now you've got to be able to create how that shot should be played, even though you never had it, you know.
Story_ID: 395261
Speaker 1: Most of the blacks in golf, professionals, amateurs, started out as caddies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Caddies, yeah.
Speaker 1: --just as your friends in Rochester [New York]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --had caddied and so on.  But you never caddied?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But who was caddying for you in 1982?  Who was your caddy?
Speaker 2: Well, my caddy was, and still is my best friend.  His name is Bobby Morgan.
Speaker 1: Morgan?
Speaker 2: Morgan, yeah, right.  As a matter of fact, his daughter is in the [U.S.] Navy.  He was in the Navy.  So she is in the Navy, and she lives here in Jacksonville [Florida], and her daughter plays on the golf team, and played the little summer junior leagues along with my daughter, Aisha [Aisha Peete], so, you know.  And Bobby, he comes down and we both go out and follow them around, so.
Speaker 1: How did he become your caddy?  Who was he at the time you met him?
Speaker 2: Well, I met--well, he's always been a caddy I guess ever since he's been out of the Navy.  But I met him in Pebble Beach [California].  That's when--this was like '77 [1977] sometime, '78 [1978], when--that's when he first started caddying for me, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did he continue to be your caddy--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) through the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: --as a matter of fact, he was living in Los Angeles [California] at that time, and I told him that I wanted him to come to the East Coast, you know, and to caddy for me.  So that's when our relationship began.
Story_ID: 395262
Speaker 1: Four big wins in '82 [1982], 1983 what--was another win.  What was that tournament?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Golf Classic] for the second time, right.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  You won that two consecutive years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Who were your competitors in that one?
Speaker 2: The Anheuser-Busch--well, Bruce Lietzke  was probably, you know, one of the players that was heading the field, and the usual guys, Jim Colbert, he played a lot of golf, you know.  And, you know, I would say that they were probably the only notables, you know, right.
Speaker 1: What about the Georgia Pacific-Atlanta Golf Classic (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Again, Jim Colbert, I remember, have to be shooting sixty-three on Sunday.  And the announcer, the TV was on Jim and I remember him saying, "[HistoryMaker] Calvin Peete ain't no friend of mine anymore" (laughter).  And I done beat him out of about three or four tournaments (laughter) (unclear) The sucker (laughter).
Speaker 1: What were the sizes of the prizes in those days, dollar-wise?  What were the (unclear) you recall, general range (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they really weren't that much, you know, but I think my first win in Milwaukee [at the Greater Milwaukee Open] was first place, was like 30,000 [dollars].  And naturally, you know, the Anheuser-Busch and the Atlanta, I think, we was up to 80 or 90,000 [dollars], you know, for first place.  Our biggest tournament win naturally was the TPC [Tournament Players Championship; The Players Championship] at 162,000 [dollars]; so that was a big tournament, you know.
Story_ID: 395263
Speaker 1: Okay, 1984, the, was the Texas Open [Valero Texas Open].
Speaker 2: Texas Open.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What do you remember about that one?
Speaker 2: That was a great memory.  Probably the best memory of my career.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: Because of the fact that Charlie Sifford and I, on that Sunday morning, I had a two-shot lead, had breakfast together.  He was there doing an exhibition on Monday, you know, so we was at the same motel, and we sit down and he talked about his same old horror stories, you know, about the '60s [1960s], and--but he ended up saying, "Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], I hope you win this tournament.  I know you ain't got nothing to do with it, but this is the only tournament that would not allow myself and Pete Brown in the game.  The only tournament on tour [Professional Golfers' Association]."  He said, "Man, I hope you win this."  And when I won it, I just said to myself, "This is for Charlie."
Speaker 1: That's a great story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  "This is for Charlie" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you win it by?  You remember your score?
Speaker 2: I think two or three shots, about that--
Speaker 1: Two or three shots?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a matter of fact, I had the record probably over my closest rival, probably about three strokes or so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 395264
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five [1985], two big tournaments.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about those.
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, man, winning the Tournament Players Championship [The Players Championship], it's got to be, you know, the epitome of all my wins, you know.  Because, you know, going into Sunday's found, you know, and, as a matter fact, going into the tournament, I didn't think I had no chance to make the cut, let alone to be tied for the lead, you know, going into the last round.  But I went to bed, you know, about 10:00, 10:30 that Saturday night; woke up about one, and just started thinking, you know, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], this might be your only chance to win what you might call a major championship.  Got up, got dressed, got in my courtesy car and just drove up and down A1A [State Road A1A]; turned the rearview mirror, turned my s- interior light on, mirror to my face, and looked myself in the eyes, and trying to get my eyes on the road, say, you know what Calvin, when you at your best, they can't beat you.  They can't beat you.  And that was the attitude I went out with Sunday.  Never had that kind of attitude before that said, they can't beat me.  They cannot beat me.  And by the time we made the turn, I had a four-shot lead (laughter).
Speaker 1: Over who?  Who was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: D.A. Weibring was my closest rival.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: D.A. Weibring.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who else was playing in that tournament?
Speaker 2: Hale Irwin--well, every--all the best players played in it, but these were my playing par- partners.  D.A. Weibring and Hale Irwin, we played together.  We were all tied for the lead, eight under going into the last round, yeah.
Story_ID: 395265
Speaker 1: And you won the Phoenix Open?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That was a--that was a good experience for me because it was a golf course [TPC Scottsdale, Scottsdale, Arizona] that was just tailor-made for me; tight, small greens, you know.  And I had had some good tournaments there, but I just felt like that was a golf tournament that I couldn't miss, especially on that golf course, so.  You know, and I had a real bad experience on Saturday.  You know, I'm leading the tournament, I think, by a shot or so and woke up that Saturday morning and my right eye was in such pain; just bloodshot, running.  I'm saying to myself, I'm going to have to withdraw.  I mean, really, like needles were being stuck in my eye.  Say, I'm going to have to withdraw now.  But I say, no, you can't do that.  You got to go out and play.  And at that time, you know, Golf Ball [Dolphus Hall] was my caddy.  And naturally he was, "Hey, man, what's wrong?"  I say, "Man, Golf Ball, I can't even--I don't even think I can see out of my right eye."  And he just kept encouraging me, "Man, come on, man.  Just do the best you can."  And I made it through the round with all that pain, and thanks to Golf Ball, he really encouraged me because I really wanted to quit.  Went to the, you know, optometrist right after the round; looked in the eye, "I don't see nothing."  Gave me some drops, next morning it was like it had never been there.  And incidentally, that day I only shot one over par with one eye (laughter).  So now, it was Doug Tewell leading the tournament at that time.
Speaker 1: Who was?  Doug (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Doug Tewell, yeah. But I still felt like it was my tournament though.  I think I was like one shot back or something like that.  And just went out again and just played so good.
Story_ID: 395266
Speaker 1: I think we're up to about 1986, and there were two more wins that year.  The MONY Tournament of Champions.  Where was that played?
Speaker 2: That was played at La Costa [La Costa Resort and Spa], near Carlsbad [California], you know, just a little north of San Diego [California], right.  Good golf course.  As a matter of fact, I shot twenty-one under.  I mean, I had never even dreamed of having that kind of score before (laughter).  Won the tournament by six shots over Mark O'Meara.  He shot sixty-eight the last round and--
Speaker 1: Mark O'Meara?
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: He's still playing, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he's still playing.  He's still playing on the--he's still on the regular tour, or he might be playing both.  But anyway, I know he had to feel bad.  He set the--he tied the tournament record, that fifteen under.  And naturally I set a new one at twenty-one under.  So the man's, you know, playing great golf, but he's not even close (laughter), so I know he had to be dejected (laughter).
Speaker 1: And in '86 [1986] you also won the USF&G Classic [Zurich Classic of New Orleans].  What was that--what's the full name of that classic?
Speaker 2: It's--I don't know.  That was some kind of insurance company.  But that was like the New Orleans open, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 395267
Speaker 1: During all this time from '82 [1982] to '86 [1986], and you won eleven tournaments, what was the toughest course that you played?
Speaker 2: The toughest course?
Speaker 1: The one that was most challenging?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean like--I mean regular tour or we want to talk about U.S. Opens [United States Open Championship] and PGAs [PGA Championship]?  But, you know, I would say, well, the Atlanta Athletic Club [Johns Creek, Georgia] was my first U.S. Open, and guess who I'm paired with in the last round.  Jack Nicklaus (laughter).  The last day (laughter).  But that was a very tough golf course, you know.  Then I could think of some other, you know--Oakmont [Oakmont Country Club], you know, in Pennsylvania [Oakmont, Pennsylvania], you know, where we played the PGA one year, Oakland Hills [Oakland Hills Country Club, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The time that you played with Jack, the last round, who won that tournament?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  La- Larry Nelson, I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did Jack come in?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  Jerry Pate.  Jerry Pate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Jerry's last name?
Speaker 2: Pate.
Speaker 1: Pate?
Speaker 2: P-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: Where did you come in on that tournament?  Do you remember?  What about Nicklaus?
Speaker 2: Oh, way back.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: What about Nicklaus?
Speaker 2: Jack--Jack and I both were struggling, you know.  So we were way back.
Story_ID: 395268
Speaker 1: You won all these tournaments, of course, between '82 [1982] and '86 [1986].  What were some of the other big tournaments that you played in during that time?
Speaker 2: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where you may have come in, you know, you made the cut, you may have come in second, third with any--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, oh.  I see.  During that time, the Hawaii Open [Hawaiian Open; Sony Open in Hawaii], the first tournament I led; going into the last round and didn't win, you know.  So that was a good tournament for me, but I just didn't play well the last round, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you play in the U.S. Opens [United States Open Championship]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played in ten U.S. Opens, probably.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your--
Speaker 2: Maybe more.
Speaker 1: What is your--
Speaker 2: I never missed a cut, so, you know.  Couple of them I was in the top ten, you know.  But never really no threat.  Couple of PGAs [PGA Championship] I was in the top ten.  As a matter of fact, the last round, again, at Pebble Beach [California], and I think, what '82 [1982] somewhere, Nicklaus [Jack Nicklaus] and I again was in the last round.  But this time we were both in contention.  That's when John Watson chipped that (unclear) with a short hand on seventeen, you know, take a one-shot lead; otherwise, you know, Nicklaus would have been right there.  But that was one memorable tournament because all of my fans say, we know you played you played with Jack Nicklaus, and, you know, when I called whatever the station was, I was saying to them, who is that phantom golfer they got Nicklaus playing with because we didn't see him (laughter).  They did not show one shot.
Speaker 1: As a result of winning the Tournament Players Championship [The Players Championship], you earned a ten-year exemption on the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association]; is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, ten-year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, that means that you don't have to be--you don't have to qualify or your performance is not going to be reviewed; meaning that, you know, you automatically exempt next year for ten years, right.  And it also gives you a lifetime membership to the Tournament Players Clubs.  Right.  Which is great (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great little benefit.
Story_ID: 395269
Speaker 1: Another major achievement in your--professional golf, you played on two Ryder Cup teams--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighty-three [1983], 1985 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-five [1985], yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you get selected to be on the Ryder Cup team the first time around?  How, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's not really what you call a selection.  It's just that you have to earn so many points.  And what they do is they take the players with the twelve most points, and those are the ones that automatically are on the Ryder Cup team.  But also, the captain has what he would call a pick, or choice, that he could also, just say, select.  But the rest of the players, they have to qualify, after gaining so many points, and you get so many points from where you finish at golf tournaments, wins, and second places, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.  And who was the captain of the team when you played in--in eighty--
Speaker 2: In '83 [1983], Jack Nicklaus.
Speaker 1: Jack Nicklaus.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  And in '85 [1985], Lee Trevino.
Speaker 1: Lee Trevino.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the '83 [1983].  Where was that played?
Speaker 2: That was played in Palm Beach Garden [Palm Beach Gardens, Florida].  I think it was the PGA National [PGA National Resort and Spa] in Palm Beach Garden; Palm Beach, Florida.  And my first experience on the Ryder Cup team, so you know, I was very nervous, but I had some good partners, you know, and altered in shots, especially Tom Kite and I.  And nobody could beat Tom Kite and I in alternate shots (laughter).  So we laugh about that, you know.  As a matter of fact, I saw him at the Hall of Fame induction the year Charlie [Charlie Sifford] got inducted and we talked about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who won that--who won the Ryder Cup that year?
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Just barely.
Speaker 1: And how'd you do?
Speaker 2: I did very well, I think.  I was undefeated, you know, as far as all of my matches.  As a matter of fact, even in my singles match, they paired me with what they would consider as their straight ball hitter, and from Europe.  His name was Brian Waites.
Speaker 1: Brian Wakes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--Waites.
Speaker 1: Waites?
Speaker 2: Right.  And we were paired together.  It was kind of nip and tuck there, you know, halfway through the round until I broke--broke out and made a couple of birdies.  And, I, you know, come in, and I think had in two down and I think I bogeyed sixteen.  So now, I only got him one down.  Made a good par on seventeen; come in eighteen, still only got him one down.  Pretty good--whole wind was really blowing.
Speaker 1: How did you feel with that accomplishment to be on the team?  You remember how you felt?
Speaker 2: Oh I fel- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said you were a little nervous when you were playing.
Speaker 2: Oh, got nervous because naturally, you know, you're not just playing for yourself, you're playing for your teammates, and also you playing for the prestige, this is your country, you know, so.  And it was something that I never experienced anymore, and naturally, I was a little apprehensive about how am I going to be playing, you know.  I hope I don't--that bad game don't come out here now.  So, you know, I--but you know, then as Raymond Floyd and so many of the top players say, you always want to feel a little nervous, you know.  You don't ever want to be too relaxed, yeah.  So, you know.  So that was expected.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the 1985 Ryder Cup team that you played on.  Who was the captain?
Speaker 2: Lee Trevino was the captain, and we played in Europe--I mean in England at the Belfry [Belfry Hotel and Resort], golf club there [Wishaw, England], and we got trumped.  Yeah, they really whipped us bad you know.
Speaker 1: Who did you play against in that tournament?
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know--Seve Ballesteros, Ian Woosnam; you know, just to name, you know, the top players at that time.  They were all good players, you know.  They played--they just outplayed us, you know.
Speaker 1: Even though you lost that tournament, how did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I won my singles again, and Tom Kite and I, we also won (laughter) our--our alternate shots.  So, you know, I think I only lost one match, and that was with Fuzzy and I.  I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fuzzy Zoeller?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Fuzzy and I against Seve Ballesteros and Ian Woosnam.  Yeah.  They, they beat us, yeah.
Story_ID: 395270
Speaker 1: You mentioned Vardon [Harry Vardon] before, the Vardon grip, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  You won a lot of trophies, but I think one that distinguishes your, your achievements was the Vardon Trophy.
Speaker 2: Vardon Trophy, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that given for?
Speaker 2: Well, that was given for the player with the lowest stroke average for the year.  And I think my stroke average was seventy point something [70.56] at that time.  So that's, you know, that's really an honor.  You know, that's, you know, that's like winning the golf tournaments, you know, to have the lowest stroke average, you know, of all those great players, you know, so.  That's, you know, to me that's like being the top money winner or something, you know.  That, that's really, you know, coming from where I came from, you know.  And to be able to, you know, achieve that, that's quite an achievement.
Speaker 1: I asked you earlier about how many holes in one you've had; you said you had four?
Speaker 2: Four, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where were they?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Now, one was in Silverado, California; one was in Miami [Florida] at a golf club of Miami; one was in Key Biscayne [Florida].  As a matter of fact, I was playing with Lee Tre- I mean Gary Player that last round when I had that hole in one.  And the other, I can't remember exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Did you save the balls?  You still have the balls?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: No, don't keep that stuff?
Speaker 2: I got the memories, though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 395271
Speaker 1: Tell me about the years after 1986.  You didn't win any major tournaments, I guess, after that time?
Speaker 2: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you continue to play after '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I continued to play, but not at the level I played at, up until '86 [1986].  You know, I--really after winning the Tournament Players Championship [The Players Championship], to me it was like, you know, I'd been to my mountaintop, you know.  It ain't going to get no better than this, just, sort to speak, you know.  But I was really surprised that I had the good year that I did have at '86 [1986], you know, but I knew then that, you know, I just didn't think I could just rise to that occasion again, you know, the pressure and the, you know, the working, and you know.  It's--people look at it and say, "Oh, man, he's doing so well."  But they don't what really goes into that, man.  That's, that's a real mental strain, especially when you're at the top.
Speaker 1: During the--well, throughout your professional career, but particularly in the '80s [1980s] what other things did you do besides practice to stay in shape?  Did you work out?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, well, I jogged, you know, every--when I was at home and even when I was on the road, you know, I would just, you know, jog.  I didn't want to go out in the neighborhood, but just jog around the hotel that I'm staying in.  But, no, I would jog at least three miles a day when I'm at home, you know.  And I would lift light weights, you know, nothing no more than a hundred pounds.  I wasn't trying to build up no bulk.  I was just trying to, you know, stay in shape and, you know, stay strong, so.
Speaker 1: When you played in all these tournaments we've just reviewed, all eleven of them plus the Milwaukee Open [Greater Milwaukee Open]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what time would you rise in the morning?  How early would you get up?
Speaker 2: Well, I tried not to get up, depending on the tee time, no earlier than two hours before I play.  So I'd say, well, that take me forty-five minutes, shower, shave, get dressed and, you know, fifteen minutes to the golf course, then I got at least an hour to practice.  What I didn't want to do is get up three, four hours before I played; now I got to sit around and anticipate what I'm going to do, so--
Speaker 1: That's why I asked you the question (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I just--right.  So--right.
Speaker 1: I watch golf every Sunday when it's on.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I play also.  I was wondering what, what would you do before--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --how early you're out there, and how much practice--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I guess each player has his own routine.  There's some players--Lee Trevino, he might be out there two hours before he plays because he's in the locker room talking to the guys, you know.  But, no, I never wanted to get to the golf course no earlier than an hour before my tee time.  So I just want to go through my routines so I can keep everything in the flow and not have to go out and practice and then go back in the clubhouse and sit around and wait on my tee time you know.  So when I went to the tee, I wanted to feel like I was fresh and I was ready to go.
Story_ID: 395272
Speaker 1: During this time in the '80s [1980s], and particularly after '86 [1986], did you have any injuries or illnesses?  I mean you played a long time--that interfered with your playing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't have any, I would say, illnesses that I probably already didn't have.  But I discovered not, you know, right then, but several years later that I had a disease called Tourette's syndrome.  I had no idea, but I noticed that, you know, things were really changing, I would say, going into the '87 [1987] season.  You know, not that I was really interested in it, but you know, some of the shots that I used to be able to hit, they just wasn't happening the way that they should have been, you know.  So I knew something was wrong, but I didn't know what.  And when I moved Phoenix [Arizona], you know, it's really when things really started changing.  You know, the values that I thought I had, the things that I wanted to do; it's like I couldn't think of them anymore.  It's like I really thought I was having a nervous breakdown or something, you know.  I mean, everything just changed.  Not that I was violent or anything but, you know, my whole thought pattern.  You know, it's like I couldn't even put my arms together.  It's just like something that could completely take control of my muscles.  And, you know, naturally with Tourette's, and they call it tics for short, and they say that that's what it basically is; involuntary movement of muscle groups.  And I knew that something seriously was wrong, but I'm, you know, felt like I always had a strong mind, that maybe I could just outthink this.  But it didn't happen.  It just got worse and to the place where I was just jumping, and shoulders was moving, and it was noticeable.  People could really see that.  And it wasn't until, I don't know, maybe '93 [1993] that, you know, when I--after I had met my second wife [Elaine Pepper Peete], you know, that she told me that, "Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], I think you need to get some help.  This is just not happening" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 395273
Speaker 1: Give me your wife's name, please.
Speaker 2: Her name is Elaine Pepper Peete.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when were you married to Elaine (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were married in '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay.  And tell me about your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have, you know, not to mention the second family.  My first family was great, you know.  I really have to thank--thank God, naturally and golf, you know, to be able to send five kids to college and, you know, have four of them that at least graduate, you know; and, you know, having a lawyer among them.  My youngest daughter from my first family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, give me the names of the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --five children.
Speaker 2: Well, Calvin Jr. [Calvin Peete, Jr.], the oldest; and then Dennis II [Dennis Peete], then Ricky [Ricky Peete]--
Speaker 1: What is Dennis doing today?  And Calvin?  Calvin, let's start with Calvin.
Speaker 2: Calvin is in real estate in Baltimore, Maryland.  He used to work for Callaway [Callaway Golf Company].  He worked for Callaway for several years before he just decided he want to go another way, so he turned real estate in Baltimore.  And Dennis is in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and, you know, between odd jobs, and I have no idea what Dennis is doing right now.  And Ricky, he's in computers, and he's in, in B- Washington [D.C.].  My oldest daughter is a--she's a school teacher, and she lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  My youngest daughter who just graduated from Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] in law, she's in Washington with her brother Ricky, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's good.  That's good.  And you have two children with Elaine?
Speaker 2: And two children with Elaine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Their name and ages?
Speaker 2: Their names are Aisha [Aisha Peete], and she's twelve; be thirteen in November.  And Aleya [Aleya Peete], she's ten; just turned ten in August.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are any of your children playing golf?
Speaker 2: Hey, that's like going to church, man; that's mandatory (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.  They're playing.  They play The First Tee program, you know, every Saturday.  And Aisha, the oldest, she plays in a junior summer league, you know, maybe, I think it's about five--five tournaments or something--six tournaments, just to give her some competition.  As a matter of fact, maybe about the middle of the summer she broke a hundred for the first time.  Shot a ninety-two and she was very excited.
Speaker 1: That's great.  That's great.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what does your wife, Elaine, do?
Speaker 2: She's the--she's the director of The First Tee of Jacksonville, Florida, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 395274
Speaker 1: And tell us, what is The First Tee, and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, The First Tee is an organization that was put together, you know, through the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association] to give more inner city and other underprivileged kids access to golf, you know, because that's something that we've been lacking, you know.  And as you mentioned before, you know, most of the introduction that blacks had to golf was through the caddy links and, you know--the caddy ranks and, you know, the caddy is, you know, he's really an endangered species, you know.  I mean, the carts, you know.  Golf is a big revenue generating sport, you know, and they try to get as many people on the golf course as they want--or as they can, and the carts is just taking over, you know.  So you know through The First Tee program, it's giving more of our black kids more access to golf, which is one of the greatest spor- character-building sports there is.  And I just feel like, you know, every kid should at least be exposed to the game, whether you--wherever you want to take it.  But just the exposure of it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What moved the PGA to invest and sponsor The First Tee program?  How did that--
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to feel like that it was my concept, you know.  Not my name but, you know, I was talking to our commissioner at that time, Deane Beman.  As a matter of fact, we were right here at the TPC [Tournament Players Club, Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida] on the practice tee, and I was expressing to him my feelings, you know, about, you know, how much, you know, of an asset golf could be to inner city kids--underprivileged kids and, you know, and going through my little song and dance about the character, and so forth and so on.  And Deane say, "Well, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], let me tell you one thing."  Say, "The only person that's going to help those kids is Tiger Woods."  I say, "Now what kind of help could he give them (laughter)--is he going to give them some money or what?"  I say, "Well, Deane, why do you think that?"  "Well, I know, I feel like the kids are going to rally around him and so forth."  I say, "But, you know, what do we do now, Deane?  There's kids out there--you know, Tiger Woods might be five years away, you know, coming to the tour, you know."  So we ended the conversation.  I went through my little thing about, you know, (unclear) it's cheaper to put that kid on the golf course than to take care of him for twenty or thirty years of his life in prison, and that's coming out of our pockets also.  So I left him with that, and maybe a couple of months later that's when I heard about The First Tee program.  I said, well, maybe I did get to him (laughter).
Speaker 1: The First Tee was organized in what year then?  When did the--how old is it?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  It was probably early '90s [sic. 1997] or something like that.  I don't know the exact year.
Speaker 1: You know how many young people are being influenced by that program each year?
Speaker 2: Oh, thousands.  Maybe hundreds, you know.  We probably got four or five hundred kids in our program right here in Jacksonville [Florida].  And I think that, you know, there are programs that's got fifteen hundred, you know; two--almost two thousand kids, so.  And out of--I don't know, 130, 140, you know, of First Tees around the country, you know, that's got those kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's one in Boston [Massachusetts], I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that's--the numbers are big.  Numbers are big.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 395275
Speaker 1: Your wife [Elaine Pepper Peete] is away today or has been away for a few days in connection with The First Tee program?
Speaker 2: With The First Tee.  As a matter of fact, you know, those who operate The First Tee program, they has to go through a training program, you know, to certify them as far as being, you know, a First Tee coach.  So this is her third school that she's going through, and she'll get her certificate after this, you know.  She's out in Pebble Beach [California] and the weather's perfect out there (laughter).  And I'm always freezing every time I used play the Bing Crosby [Bing Crosby National Pro-Amateur] and the AT&T [AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am] (laughter) in January.  But she said the weather is perfect.
Speaker 1: Was she playing golf when you met her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was.  As a matter of fact, she was introduced to golf at a very early age and a great story that I have to share with you--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --is that we both met the same person, Joe Louis.  She has a picture with Joe Louis when she was about seven years old (laughter) because her father, avid golfer, and Joe Louis was good friends, and every time he'd come to Denver [Colorado] they'd get together, they play golf.
Speaker 1: In Denver?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Denver.  Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And you said you both met the same person?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I met him at ten--
Speaker 1: I see.  Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --okay, in Detroit [Michigan], then she met him at seven, you know.
Speaker 1: What was the occasion you met Joe Louis in Detroit?  What was he--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he was doing a promotional thing for one of tho- the grocery store, supermarkets in our area.  So I just assumed that they brought him in just to hand out autographed pictures, you know, of Joe Louis.  So naturally every black kid I know in the neighborhood was there (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you didn't know about his golf involvement at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  Not at all.  Not at all.  I didn't learn about that until, you know, really I was probably on the tour when I heard it from Bill Spillers.  As a matter of fact, he gave me a lot of clippings of when he was struggling, you know, trying to play the tour.
Speaker 1: When was Bill Spiller playing golf?  What was his peak--peak time--I don't--
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, you know, '50s [1950s], '60 [1960s], you know--well, '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], yeah.  But, you know, as you know, they had a Caucasian-only clause in the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] bylaws forbidding blacks from being a member of the PGA, and that's just the only way you could, you know, play in tournaments.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 395276
Speaker 1: Did you join the senior tour [PGA Tour Champions]?
Speaker 2: Yes, in 1993 when I turned fifty, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you turned fifty?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  How much did you play in the senior tour, did you--
Speaker 2: Well, I played eight years, but not competitively.  I think I had maybe one good tournament where I finished in the top five.  I think it was the tour championship; I think I finished fourth, you know, but other than that, with my problem with Tourette's, you know, I had no chance of ever, you know, being able to play to any kind of level, you know, as far as competitiveness is concerned.  So, I knew that, but naturally I had to play for contractual reasons, you know, and they give you those multi-year contracts, and you got to play in so many tournaments, you know, in order to be able to, to meet that criteria.  But that was the only reason why I was playing, not to be competitive.
Story_ID: 395277
Speaker 1: As I think you said earlier, and rightfully, you were probably the instigator of The First Tee program--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I think there are some other enterprises and organizational things that you've done.  You mentioned earlier the Calvin Peete National Golf Foundation [Calvin Peete National Minority Golf Foundation].  What was that and when was that started?
Speaker 2: Well, that was started probably around about '87 [1987], '88 [1988], you know, just to really, you know, open up some of those avenues for those kids to raise money for scholarships and so forth, you know.  And that was something that I was trying to do, but I didn't have no money, unfortunately.  Had a great board, but nobody wanted to do no work, we couldn't put no golf tournaments together, couldn't get no money in.  Money started running out and, you know, there was, you know, even though we had us a 501(c), but there are some tax you got to pay, you know.  And I just couldn't keep--as a matter fact, our executive director, you know, young lady, I was paying her out of my pocket, her salary, you know.  So I just didn't get the support, so I closed it down.
Speaker 1: The Calvin Peete Recreation center [Calvin Peete Recreation Complex; Collier-Blocker-Puryear Park Complex], that's here in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in St. Augustine [Florida], right; park, right, named after me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Augustine---yeah--that was named after you?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 395278
Speaker 1: When were you inducted into the golf hall of fame?
Speaker 2: The golf hall of fame?  Which one?
Speaker 1: Here in Florida [sic. African-American Ethnic Sports Hall of Fame; Multi-Ethnic Sports Hall of Fame, Oakland, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh.  That came about--let me see.  That must have been about '97 [1997], '96 [1996], somewhere along in there, yeah.  But that was--that was a great honor which was--other than being inducted into the West Palm Beach [Florida], you know, of Black Athletes Hall of Fame, but, you know, that was the first great honor, you know, that I was really, really presented with, and that was like a surprise to me, you know.  Those are the kind of things you don't expect to get, you know, living.  You know, they get give that to you when you're dead (laughter); name streets after you (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right.  Very good.
Speaker 2: --parks, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 395279
Speaker 1: How much teaching, formal teaching have you done of golf and coaching?
Speaker 2: Well, you know--well, teaching is when I first retired, and naturally I wanted to have something to do.  So I started teaching at the World Golf Village, the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association] golf academy that's at--also it's in St. Augustine [Florida] at the World Golf Village.  So I started teaching there; did that '91 [1991]--for a couple of years until things slowed down and, you know, then my Tourette's situation was getting to where I felt that I needed to pay more attention to it, you know, because it was like getting out of hand.  At that time, I was on medication, which did nothing.  You know, to me it's like my problem was feeding off the medication, you know.  And so, eventually I stopped taking the medication period.  I don't take anything now.  And when I did, you know, start working at the academy, a lot of things, you know, I would say remarkable things really happened to me, you know.  I was sitting up in the house--I think we were having dinner, and just something dawned on me that our kids are not going to church here.  And I told my wife, I say, "You know what, we got to start taking those kids to church."  No argument.  That Sunday, got up, found the church down on Jacksonville Beach [Florida], you know, it was a small church; went there, but it really wasn't what she liked, you know.  I went there one or two times, I wasn't impressed.  But we have our neighbor across the street who belongs to a beautiful church, Faith Christian Center [Impact Church], (unclear), right here in Jacksonville [Florida], and she told Pepper [Elaine Pepper Peete] about that, and Pepper would go, take the kids, and naturally every Sunday she'd come back, I'd ask her, I say, "What was the sermon about today?"  And she would--I could see her face light up and hear her voice and it got to that stage where I'd say, "No, I don't think I want you to tell me.  I'm going to hear what this bishop has to say."  Really turned my--you know, bringing God back into my life which I had gotten away from, you know.  That was my foundation, you know, where, but I'd gotten away from it.  So I say, hey, wait a minute, you know.  I remember all those things that my daddy [Dennis Peete] used to tell me about Jesus, you know, how wonderful he is.
Story_ID: 394800
Speaker 1: You were telling me about finding religion and bringing religion back into your life.  I want to continue on that with you.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, after my wife [Elaine Pepper Peete] basically, you know, introduced me to the church, Faith Christian Center [Impact Church, Jacksonville, Florida], I, you know, really started thinking about a lot of those things that my father [Dennis Peete] had told me as a kid growing up, you know, and naturally the first is honoring thy mother and thy father, and one stood out.  As a matter of fact, he bought me the book on it, "As a man thinketh, so is he" [Proverbs 23:7].  That really--that really stood out in my mind, you know.  And I don't think that--I think that I was always a born again Christian, you know--you know, through my background and, you know, as a kid growing up, but it was like I had fallen out of fellowship with God, you know.  It's like, oh, I'm a do it myself-er, you know, I don't need no help, you know, so, you know going to church and listening to the bishop, I found out that I do need some help here.  You know, I got to bring God back into my life and let him guide me as he always have, that he's never did me wrong.  So, you know, that's when I really started meditating and I started praying, and believe me, it helps.  I'm better than I've ever been.  You know, a lot of people look at me and say, "Oh, you got Tourette's?  I didn't know that" (laughter) you know.  So I thank God for that, you know.  It's just basically the same as I do in golf and throughout my whole life, you know.  It's like God has always looked out for me.  My father told me, "You know, God's got a gift for you, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete]."  My mother [Irenna Bridgeford Peete] told me, "God's going to bless you."  And those are the things that, you know, I guess kept me going.  Even during my success, you know, my father used to tell me, said, "Well, Calvin, you making all this money, you getting all this notoriety, but don't ever forget to give God the glory."  So I, you know, I don't know if I had ever even started, you know, but I know that was something because my father's never told me anything--never lied to me about anything.  So that was something that I really started thinking about.
Story_ID: 394801
Speaker 1: You came back to something else in the, in the '80s [1980s] that you had dropped out on when you were fourteen, fifteen, and that is education.  And you came back and you finished what?  What did you get?
Speaker 2: I got my GED [General Educational Development] but, you know, I have to go back, you know, further than that.  You know, right after--it's like right after I walked out of the principal's office [at East Lake Middle School, Pahokee, Florida], which, you know, turned out to be disastrous, I said to myself then, I said, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], you quit school, but you can't quit learning.  So it wasn't like I was ever really out of the classroom, you know.  It's just that I wasn't in school.  But, you know, I've read books and, you know, I would do something that Mr. Herren- Harris [ph.] said when he was, you know, a young man growing up, you know, to kind of have at least a decent vocabulary.  He said he would try to learn at least three or four words a week and use them in a sentence.  And naturally, once I started gaining a little notoriety as far as my golf was concerned, I knew that, you know, the mice was going to start coming in the (unclear) (laughter) so.  I just had to, you know, I had to continue to learn.
Speaker 1: And so, you prepared and got your high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --equivalency.  Was that a difficult process to take those exams?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It really wasn't.  I mean, I didn't go through the whole rigmarole because of the fact that, you know, with my experience, my world travel, the geometry, and so forth, you know, some of--even some physics, mathematics, you know, because it takes all that to play golf.  You know, the rest of it was just basically questions and answers, where, you know, I had no problem, yeah (laughter).  So you know, I mean, all the other--the reading, the math, you know, stuff, you know, I didn't have--that wasn't even an, even an issue.
Story_ID: 394802
Speaker 1: You are doing some teaching today and coaching, you have a First Tee [The First Tee] program, of course, but any other teaching or coaching that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm coaching the Edward Waters College golf team, you know, here in Jacksonville [Florida].  As a matter of fact, it's a historical black college [HBCU].  And my wife [Elaine Pepper Peete] started out coaching at, you know, I don't know four or five years ago and--but, you know, her working The First Tee--at that time she wasn't the executive director so, you know, her--really her role was very miniscule.  But as, you know, her position changed and she's got more responsibility, so it's kind of hard for her to travel with the kids off on golf tournaments for two or three days, and then come back and try to get caught up.  So she asked me if I would take over, maybe a year ago, and I said, "No."  But after seeing how hard she's really working and how long and how much she's done for me, I said, "Okay, darling, I'll take over your golf team for you."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else?  So you're doing a lot of things, of course; fathering two daughters [Aisha Peete and Aleya Peete], coaching at Edward Waters, other (unclear); what else are you doing when--in retirement (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I'd really love to have the opportunity to really speak to important people to let them know, which I feel like they said, but I don't think they really grasped it, the importance of our kids.  I don't think we're doing enough to really secure, you know, their place, you know.  It's just, you know, I'm just thinking of here in Jacksonville alone, the drive-by shootings.  It's two kids that've gotten killed in some random shooting.  It's just--it's just too much going on, you know, which was my question in the beginning.  You know, I mean, you know, growing up in the inner cities and, you know, and the parks and, you know--golf is the only other avenue.  And I tell kids all the time, you're all not going to grow up to be 6'8" or 6'9" or 7' tall.  You're not all going to be 220 pounds, running a hundred yard dash in ten [seconds] flat or less, but get that education.  Golf is another avenue to education.  It definitely lets you out of those--that hustle and bustle of the street life, you know out there on the golf course.  So you think about, you have a chance to meet the most important people in your community on the golf course.  Probably the same people you're going to be looking for a job from once you graduate college.  But he already know you.  Oh, yeah, he used to play golf with my son.  Oh, yeah, I saw him out at The First Tee, so.  It's like giving them a head start, you know.
Speaker 1: All those black youngsters, male and female who say they want to be a professional golfer, they want to be a top golfer, and many of them will.  I'm going to talk about that in a minute, but what advice--specific advice do you have for them at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, really, I don't even start out talking to kids about golf.  I start out talking to them about education, okay.  And I start out talking to them about minding their parents.  It's that honoring their mother and their father.  That's where I start out.  I may end up on golf, but that's the initial message, you know, is getting that education.  That's paramount.
Story_ID: 394803
Speaker 1: What have been your experiences, interactions with Tiger Woods?
Speaker 2: I never met Tiger Woods.
Speaker 1: You never met him?
Speaker 2: But by the same token, Tiger Woods has never met me (laughter).  Hopefully we'll meet (laughter).  But our paths just really hasn't crossed.
Speaker 1: Have not crossed?
Speaker 2: We came close last year at the Tour Championship [PGA Tour Championship].  I was doing a clinic, speaking to some kids again, and Tiger Woods was on the practice team practicing.  He heard my name being announced.  When he got through hitting balls, he didn't even wave or anything, he just walked right on down, so.  That's as close as we ever got to each other.
Speaker 1: What is it going to take--what do we have to do to have more black golfers to be on the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association]?  Right now there's Tiger.  Are there any others out there right now?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, no.  There really aren't.  And what we have to think about is that we just can't plant golfers and watch them grow up, you know.  It's a very individual sport, very lonely sport, you know.  And naturally you got to start that kid out young.  It doesn't matter what our aspirations may be for even his.  The only thing that's going get him there is that ability.  He just got to get that right.  Just like me, you know, the first year I went to qualifying school [PGA Tour Qualifying Tournament], those scores that I'm shooting, that wasn't going to get me anywhere.  I had to get better just to make enough money to keep my card on the tour, you know, which I never lost, but I got to get better.  And that's got to be that burning desire within that individual, that kid.  So you can't give this.  See, that you don't teach, you know.  That's like trying to teach Dr. J the things he did in basketball--Julius Erving and, you know, guys like--I mean, you know, Michael Jordan, you know, Magic Johnson, you don't teach that.  And that's their individuality that each person's got to put in golf, and, you know, I really don't know why.  I mean, there are more blacks playing golf and even kids.  But it takes a long time to really develop, you know, that caliber of player.  You know, I did it with less than ten years, but it doesn't happen like that, you know.  And there's other players didn't start until they was (unclear) on the tour, but you can count them on one hand that's really done that.  They say it takes anywhere from fifteen to twenty years to learn to play the game at that kind of level that those guys are playing when out on that tour.  And that's a lot of dedication, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I think I'll put my faith right now initially in The First Tee program.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's the only place it's going to really come from.  And really The First Tee can only take them so far.  So now he needs to get, you know, I mean, good, professional lessons, you know.  He needs to be able to play on good country club type of golf courses, you know, and that costs money, you know.  So it's going to be hard for him.  It's going to be hard for him.  Most of those, you know, are my counterparts, you know, that didn't start playing, well they played when they were seven, but their parents was members of country clubs.  And they knew all the top teachers; they was able to send them to schools for a week or something to get all that expertise, you know.  And, you know, from blacks that I met, you know, coming up, you know, they never really played good golf courses.  You know, even the best black players.  They were always playing public golf courses.  And when you go to the tour, that's an altogether different arena.  You've got to have that kind of country club experience.
Story_ID: 394804
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add that we've not discussed during this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview to your presentation?
Speaker 2: I may not really like to add, you know.  It's just the--you know, it's some things I'd like to, you know, go back over, you know.  And that is, you know, we've got to, we've got to put more into our kids if we're going to get more out of them.  And we have to do that collectively.  We can't say, "Oh, that's their problem."  It's all of our problem.  It's all of our problem.  You know, it's like the reverend and the reference, you know.  The mother and father is the reverend, but she--they got to have some reference.  You know, it's like when I came out of school, nobody was home.  I knew where to go.  I went down to Miss Bell's [ph.] house, you know.  Or I went over to Miss Jones' [ph.] house.  Now kids are home by themselves and doing nothing, you know.  We got to keep them busy, you know.  I remember when I was a kid, you know, that old cliche, idle mind is the devil's workshop (laughter).  You know that, that happens (laughter).  So you got to keep 'em busy.
Story_ID: 394805
Speaker 1: Mr. Peete [HistoryMaker Calvin Peete], how do you feel about the way that you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say for the way that I lived my life, I have no regrets.  You know, what I had to do to live; gambling, pool hustling, you know, working on the farms, you know.  But the way I did it, you know, I don't have no regrets, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done, even beyond the world of golf that you're still a part of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I guess that would probably boil down to what it's always been, that I wanted to do that I haven't done, and that's to become a better man.
Story_ID: 394806
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How do I want to be remembered?  I guess that depends on who's doing the memorizing, you know (laughter) okay.  I would like for my kids to remember me as a good father.  My wife [Elaine Pepper Peete] to remember me as a good husband.  My friends to remember me as a good friend, and my, you know, my fellow competitors to remember me as a good competitor.  My fans to remember me as a, oh, he was a good golfer.  I mean, people will remember me for all kinds of different things.  I have ne- I just want to take care of my family, be a good person and, you know, they look at it the way they want to.
Story_ID: 394807
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: The straightest driver of all times (laughter).  That's my legacy as far as, you know, my public and competitors are concerned.  But, you know, as far as my loved ones and friends, just being the best I could be, just being a good person.
Speaker 1: The greatest driver of all times.  That was perfect.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't need to be modest.
Speaker 2: No way (laughter).
