Story_ID: 278495
Speaker 1: Alright, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Margaret Evelyn Peters, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, E-V-E-L-Y-N, P-E-T-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 12th, 1936, Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And author and historian and community volunteer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the March 20th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're now at the Dayton Cultural and RTA [Transit] Center [Dayton, Ohio] which is housed in what was Zion Baptist Church.
Story_ID: 278496
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions that I am compelled by management to ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like purple.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we have a purple background--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Which is good.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really. I like a lot of foods.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I enjoy going back to my mother's home which is Rural Retreat, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 278497
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first and then your father's side of the family.  So we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Mary Margaret Smith Peters.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born May 3rd, 1907 in Rural Retreat, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my maternal great-grandmother.  Her--my mother's parents were Adam Smith and Eva Smith and then his mother was a Mrs. Jackson, Mrs. Smith, sorry.  So we do have back that far.  And Papa, Grandpa Smith, worked on the railroad--was often working in Bluefield [Virginia] when we would go down during the summer.  And he often referred to his home as, "back in the sticks," which always upset Grandma Smith because she did not like that phrase, but he was a hard-working man.  We have a lot of photographs of him at home, and we would drive down every summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that the families pass down about--
Speaker 2: Well my mother--
Speaker 1: About the railroad, or about--
Speaker 2: Well with the--they lived in the, back in the sticks and so town was several miles away and my uncle, my mother's youngest brother would often walk to town and by the food and bring it back.  And at one particular point he had bought a watermelon and carried it all the way from town and got into the kitchen and dropped it.  So that was one story that we remembered and of course when we went to town we would visit the people Mama had known when she was a child there.  And very close. Some of my, her cousins on her side of the family lived right up the hill from us and those were the Jacksons.  And they had children who were the same age that we were, so we were very close during the summer.  And there was of course, you know, no indoor toilet facilities and that was something new to us. To get water you would walk down the hill to the spring and get the water and carry it back up, for food was in the garden and so you would go out and dig up potatoes and corn because there was no store anywhere near so breakfast was always totally homemade, you know, like homemade biscuits every morning for breakfast.  And it was just a beautiful place to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any particular significance to the name Rural Retreat?
Speaker 2: Simply because it was so far, you know, from anything urban.  And it really was actually a retreat.  When we were there we were just totally cut off from everything else that we were so familiar with coming from Dayton [Ohio].  Church, we would get together and walk up the hill and then go to the church together.  My maternal aunt, great aunt, Gertrude Elliot [ph.] who was my father's [Joseph Andrew Peters] sister had come here and had married a police officer, Floyd Elliot [ph.].  So when my mother finished the seventh grade, because that was as far as the separate but equal schools for black kids went, she wanted to go to high school, but her parents didn't have enough money to send her immediately so they worked for five years and saved enough money to send her to Dayton where she lived with aunt Gertrude and uncle Floyd who lived on College Street at that point and went to Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio].  So when she graduated in 1930, she was five years older than everybody else.
Story_ID: 278498
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] have any stories about growing up in Rural Retreat [Virginia] or about going to Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] and?
Speaker 2: Quite a few because one of her teachers was also still teaching when I began to go to Roosevelt, and that was Mrs. Angela Linsley [ph.] who lived to be one hundred years old and who said that she had always wanted to live in three centuries and who did exactly that.  And she was a marvelous teacher and active in the community right up to the end but because we had a little controversy with the Board of Education when Dr. Jerrie [Bascome] McGill had stepped in to serve as interim superintendent and then they passed her over and they were getting ready to name the superintendent which upset numerous people in the community so we went down to the Board for a meeting and Mrs. Linsley went.  And at that point, she had to have been in her nineties.  So she addressed the Board just like the teacher she had always been and talked about what a wonderful person Jerrie McGill was and what she had done to the community.  And after she finished talking, the Board went out for an executive session and came back in and not only added Jerrie to the list, but they named her as the superintendent.  And she was passionately fond of Roosevelt.  She was at every class reunion.  She remembered everybody's name, and she was passionate about the building remaining and about one of the rooms being the alumni room.  When she was dying, she talked to Jean Booker [ph.] who was my gym teacher and later a member of the Board, and Mrs. Booker said that one of the last things she said was be sure you build that alumni room at Roosevelt.  So she had very fond memories of Roosevelt. There were a lot of problems there.  There was of course a lot of segregation with the separate pools.
Speaker 1: So they actually--I know they had two swimming pools, but they segregated them in terms of--
Speaker 2: One black and one white, yes.
Speaker 1: One black and one white?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now see that was my mother's case.  When I went there that wasn't so. It had changed by that point because the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got after them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think when--by the time I was there in '63 [1963], there was a girls and boys rather than--
Speaker 2: Girls and boys, yes (nodding).
Speaker 1: --Black and white.
Speaker 2: But see some people want to pretend that it was never black and white.  One of the things that I did, well, I guess it was in the late 1980s, early '90s [1990s]. I worked with a group that was doing the history of the schools and I mentioned the separate swimming pools at Roosevelt.  And one of the people said, "Well that was just for boys and girls. It wasn't black and white."  And I said, "No it wasn't. That may have been what it was at first, but when you had those black students there then it became for black and white students."  And I had, you know, stories of people who had actually been there at that time to back that up.  So we have found that it's necessary quite often to correct people's memories you know, because it's--they want to kind of gloss over what really happened.
Speaker 1: Okay so your mother went to Roosevelt and she, now what did she do after graduation?
Speaker 2: She did some day work for a couple families in Dayton View [Ohio] which at that time was, you know, totally white.  She worked for the family of the Earl Kohler [ph.] and his wife, and for the Hilkys [ph.] who were three maiden ladies who had never married.  They had been teachers and they traveled a great deal and they would often give her books and things that they had brought with them and she would bring them home.  So we always had a house full of books and things.  And the Kohlers remained very close. When she was ill they visited her.  Then she worked later for the County [Montgomery County, Ohio]. She was an excellent writer. She did, she wrote poetry. She loved to read, and she worked in the auditor's office downtown.
Story_ID: 278499
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask you about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Joseph, J-O-S-E-P-H, Andrew, A-N-D-R-E-W, Peters.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born April the 18th, 1894.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Okay, well his mother was Laura-
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  Where was he born?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Oh, he was born in Ronceverte, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: R-O-N-C-E-V-E-R-T-E.  But grew up mainly in Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the oldest of twelve children.  We thought there were eleven, but we were doing some research for our family reunion and found that there had been another child who had died at a very early age.  But his mother was Laura Bell Patterson.  Her mother had been a slave, Dorinda Patterson.  And his father was Thomas Grant Peters who was a coal miner.  And his daddy was the oldest of thirteen.  He worked his way through West Virginia Collegiate Institute [now West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] as a coal miner. He was captain of the football team, an honor student.  He was promised a job here in Dayton [Ohio] as a contractor, but when he got here and they realized he was black the job disappeared, so he became an independent contractor.  He did some work at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. He designed and built a lot of the homes in the Dayton area. He built, designed and built a beautiful stone house on Route 741.  And when he came here in '22 [1922], there was no basement at Zion Baptist Church [Dayton, Ohio] which he joined and became a church schoolteacher and later a trustee.  So he and Mr. James [A.] Dunn who was the first black county engineer, Mr. Dunn and he worked on the drawings for the basement.  They actually dug out the basement and completed the rooms in that area.  He was also President of the Dayton NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Okay, so is James Dunn related to the James Dunn that taught at Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio]?  Jim Dunn.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  This James Dunn was a member of Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  He designed the Alpha shield and his daughter is Mrs. Dorothy Whiteside [ph.] who is the music director and his wife was one of the first blacks to graduate from Antioch with a degree in music.
Speaker 1: Yes cause there is a Jim Dunn that taught at Antioch for many years. He'd be older than me.  He'd be maybe in his seventies now.
Speaker 2: Okay well no, he'd be much older because Mrs. Whiteside, his daughter, was my mother's age so it must be another.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was wondering if he had a son or something that taught there, you know.
Speaker 2: It could be. I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 278500
Speaker 1: So your father [Joseph Andrew Peters] was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here [Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he was one of those who--
Speaker 1: When was he president?  Can you remember?
Speaker 2: Must have been the early--like the 1930s and early '40s [1940s].  Because he was involved when they had the problem with the black students at one of the schools being in a little separate room at the back and that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute now, let's go back to this.  Now what was the issue now?  Is it with the Dayton [Ohio] Public Schools?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yes.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well the black students instead of being in the classroom with the other students were in a separate wooden building and the Board's [Dayton Board of Education] explanation of course was that they were, you know, backwards. They were special-ed type students.  And so they had--
Speaker 1: So in the Dayton Public Schools you're saying--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --That the black students couldn't sit in the classroom with the white students.  They had to sit in a separate building?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now we're gonna be clear about that.  Now this is a deterioration of a situation that existed when [Paul Laurence] Dunbar was in high school but he went to Central [High School, Dayton, Ohio]. He actually was in class with people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: But is this like the syndrome the, you know, how [Bishop] Richard Allen founded the A.M.E. Church [African Methodist Episcopal Church]?  I mean when he was, it was just him he could sit in the congregation but--
Speaker 2: But when you have a large number.
Speaker 1: --Then when more came they started pushing him further back--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --And pushing him up in the balcony.
Speaker 2: --Initially when Ohio became a state and they passed the black laws, okay black children were not allowed to go to the public schools.  When that law was changed in 1847, they could go to the schools but not with the white students.  They went to school in the basement of First Wesleyan Church [Dayton, Ohio]. Alright?  Eventually they built some other schools for them.
Speaker 1: That's here in Dayton?  The First Wesleyan?  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's here in Dayton, right.  First Wesleyan, which is the second oldest black church [in Dayton, Ohio].  When they built the other schools they were still segregated and Louise Troy was one of those teachers, Hallie Q. [Quinn] Brown was one of the teachers.  Then they quote integrated the schools, but what they did when they integrated the schools was to get rid of all the black teachers.  Alright? So what the schools looks like depended on what time period you're talking about.  They started out totally segregated, alright. Then they were integrated.  So when Dunbar was at Central High school, he was with white students including Orville Wright, alright.  But because the neighborhoods were segregated, alright, the schools were segregated.  So at that point when the children--black children were in separate buildings, all right, the NAACP was the one--because one of the fathers brought a case.  And they went to the Board, they had to get a lawyer, and eventually that was changed.  But when I was going to school--I went to Irving [Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], where all the students were white, all the teachers were white.  And when it was time to go to high school, we went to Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] because that's where mama [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] went to school.  So we would go right past Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio], and Dunbar had all black staff, all black students.  And what had happened was that earlier after Roosevelt was first started, you had students like Phyllis Blackburn [ph.] who met all the qualifications for being in the honor society. They would not let her in because she was black.  So she transferred to Dunbar.  And Dunbar was built specifically because black parents objected to the way their children were being treated in the high schools.  I never had a black teacher going to the Dayton Public Schools for twelve years.  That amazes the students because Dayton now is predominantly black.
Speaker 1: And Dunbar was created in 1933?  I think it was opened--
Speaker 2: Because the first class came out in '36 [1936] I believe.  It was a junior-senior high school. In fact we have the diploma that C.J. [Clarence Josef] McLin, Jr. got from Dunbar.  Mayor [Rhine] McLin gave it to her, gave it to Donnelly [ph.], which is one of our--which is our local black history organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father was the head of the NAACP when they filed the suit?
Speaker 2: Right, the suit.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's it so he sounds like he was really active.
Speaker 2: He was a very active person. We still have an essay that he wrote when he went into the service in World War I.   He was one of the first black men into the service at that time where he outlined all the service that black people have given this country in every war it's been involved in.  Despite, you know, the segregation within the service and the treatment that they got when they got back home.  And we still have that speech.
Story_ID: 278501
Speaker 1: Well let's go back a little bit now.  Did your father Joseph Andrew Peters ever talk about his mentors or, you know, in school or who guided him?
Speaker 2: He was close friends with some of his older cousins.  As I mentioned, Grandma Peters [Laura Bell Patterson Peters] had, you know, eleven children, but her father had a brother who was very close and some of them are like a year or so older than daddy was.  And so they were very close.  We still have some of the letters that they shared when they were in college.  And they were, you know, very supportive of one another, didn't have a whole lot of money. They worked their way through.  But it was that strong family beneath them that really kept them going.
Speaker 1: He sounds like quite a man, so.
Speaker 2: Yes he was, he had the little card which said, "J.A. Peters, Builder of Homes Not Houses." (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So he had a holistic concept of this.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, builder, yes.  And he was very demanding. Everything had to be just so.  He was building some homes out on Liberty Road [Dayton, Ohio] and he went in and one of the mantle pieces was about, you know, quarter of an inch off, you couldn't even tell it.  He tore the whole thing out and rebuilt it because it had to be correct.  That's the kind of person he was.  We also have the architectural history of Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] that he wrote.  And he talks about, you know, the black tradesman who built it, the fact that the lot--all the work here was done by black contractors, black cement mixers, black cement layers, everything.
Speaker 1: Now this is with what church now?
Speaker 2: With Zion Baptist, which is the oldest black Baptist church.
Speaker 1: And where is that located?
Speaker 2: It's at what was 40 Sprague Street and when the congregation left in '84 [1984] because they widened the street and kind of messed up the surroundings, he wrote the architectural history of Zion Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: That's the church where, that's the church where--
Speaker 2: That's where we are now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the converted church.
Speaker 2: It is now the Dayton Cultural and RTA Center [Dayton, Ohio].  And when you come into the center, what is the Zion Legacy Theatre Gallery was the sanctuary.  And you'll notice that there are no columns obstructing your view. The floor is sloped so that everybody had an excellent view. It's laid out like a baseball diamond with the pulpit being home plate, just a beautiful structure.
Speaker 1: With the pulpit being home plate, was that intentional too?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's got a beautiful dome.  It's just a marvelous building.  I'm so glad that it is still standing because we've lost so many other buildings that are important to our history.
Speaker 1: Was that the rationale behind making this a cultural center that it was built by black architects?  Is that part of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we need to go back a little bit.  What happened after the congregation left there were plans to have the museum at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  You know, have sort of a satellite museum here, but that didn't work out because of the funding problems with the Ohio Historical Society.  So the City [Dayton, Ohio] took over the building.  And we were concerned a few years ago that the building was still empty and we were afraid that it might just be allowed to deteriorate so we worked with the City and they made it into the Dayton Cultural and RTA Center.  So we were very glad that that happened.  And part of the reason is simply its location.  It is, you know, right on the border of the Wright-Dunbar Historical District.  It is on the National Historical Register.  We found that out so that really relieved a lot of our concerns.
Speaker 1: Okay and this building is used for community meetings and--
Speaker 2: It's used for community meetings.  We've had several programs here.  Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio] brought some speakers in. We had them here.  It's available for meetings with the community.  It has a lovely area where you can have actual plays presented.  So it's a great asset to the community, very easy to reach.
Speaker 1: Right, I know that I was told by Walter Williams [ph.] that when it was sitting vacant someone came and tore the stained glass windows out and carted them away.
Speaker 2: Yes, it had beautiful stained glass windows but they were lost.
Speaker 1: Okay or taken.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were taken, yes.
Story_ID: 278502
Speaker 1: You must have had a pretty busy household I guess.  A lot of people coming in and out.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the second oldest in the family.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three brothers, one sister.  My older brother is deceased but all the others are still living and still in Dayton [Ohio] and my two brothers live with me and my sister lives a few blocks away.  So that's--we're a very close family.  And because daddy was so involved in a lot of different activities and mother [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] was very active in the church and she enjoyed writing. Our house was always full of books.  When I was teaching at Colonel White High School [now Thurgood Marshall High School, Dayton, Ohio], which is just a few blocks from where I live, so when the students came by and they said, "Oh Ms. Peters, there's nothing here but books," and there were a lot of books there to enjoy and when we--before we lived there, we lived on Homestead Avenue in Edgemont [Dayton, Ohio].  And it was a very close neighborhood.  My mother would do day work and but we knew that we could count on the neighbors by us to look after us.  So it was a very good childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, I always ask this question.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?  Let me take you way back.
Speaker 2: I'm trying, what's the earliest thing I remember?  Not before school or church.  I can't--I know some people can talk about when I was three or four years old.  I can't remember anything that far back.  I can remember, you know, first grade, those kinds of activities but nothing before that.  I know my first grade teacher was a lady named Miss Dudy [ph.].  Miss because, you know, women didn't marry when they were teaching.  And she was the kind of teacher who was very close to the students.  She liked to read to the students.  And so of course I enjoyed that.  Early memories of church, I remember people like Mrs. Pierce [ph.] who was a Sunday school teacher for the little children.  And people like Mrs. Hall [ph.] who was over the children's chorus for just years, and years, and years.  So those were like the earliest memories of people who had a big impact.
Story_ID: 278503
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  I mean, what was your neighborhood like and what did it smell like, sound like.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a great neighborhood.  I lived at 246 Homestead Avenue in Edgemont [Dayton, Ohio].  And about two blocks from us was the Sunshine Biscuit Company.  And we had to pass it on the way to school.  And so of course when you passed it, you smelled, you know, all those wonderful things that they were cooking.  There were stores on either corner.  At Campbell Street, there was a Jack Ward who had a store with his brother.  At the Kirkham Street, there was another little neighborhood store.  A few more blocks away there was Gershows [ph.].  We could walk straight up Holmstead, cross the railroad tracks and we'd be at Burkham Park.  We could walk to my grandmother's [Laura Bell Patterson Peters] house at 981 Washington. And my Aunt Catherine [ph.] lived with her and she had children who were the same age that we were.  My Uncle Guy lived there and Uncle Guy was--every family has usually one person who never marries but who's great with children, and that was Uncle Guy.  He played the guitar, the steel guitar.  And when he was about eighty, he went to Hawaii so he could take lessons and improve his playing.  My Uncle Thomas lived with her for a time.
Speaker 1: So he would be Guy--what was his last name?
Speaker 2: Guy Peters.
Speaker 1: Guy Peters.
Speaker 2: And he came here shortly after my father [Joseph Andrew Peters] did and along with uncle Arthur and uncle Arthur didn't like it so he walked back to Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: He walked back to Charleston?
Speaker 2: Yes, he walked back to Charleston.  And uncle Guy stayed and he worked for Westside Cab.  He helped build the Classic Theater [Dayton, Ohio].  And he was just great with children (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) he helped--
Story_ID: 278504
Speaker 1: He [Peters' uncle, Guy Peters] helped build the Classic Theater [Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Gee now that's, okay--
Speaker 2: Yes, he helped.
Speaker 1: --so that was built like prior to the--
Speaker 2: '20s [1920s].  '26 [1926] or '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: '20 [1920], '20 [1920].
Speaker 2: Yes, either '26 [1926] or '27 [1927] [the Classic Theater opened in 1927].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's an earlier--I know it was built before the Palace [Theater, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Palace was built, I think in '26 [1926], '27 [1927].  I think it's in '25 [1925] that, yes [the Palace Theater was built in 1927]--
Speaker 2: Okay it came before the Palace.
Speaker 1: Before the Palace, right.
Speaker 2: So he helped build that.
Speaker 1: That's Goodrich Giles and Lucinda Giles built that.
Speaker 2: Yes, and [Carl] Anderson, right.  And Anderson.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Joseph Andrew Peters] interact with Anderson and Giles any?  I mean, they were builders.
Speaker 2: I don't think so. No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: They were two black builders.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yes, so that was Uncle Guy.
Speaker 1: This black contracting thing, I--we could actually--we I don't know if anybody's ever tried to put together a book about black contractors or architects.
Speaker 2: I don't believe there is but one of the things that daddy did when he wrote the architectural history of the church [Zion Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], he talked about the fact that black tradesman had done so much here [Dayton, Ohio] and on some of the buildings and that black tradesman in those days were as respected as black athletes are today.
Speaker 1: Yes indeed.  So yeah, so Uncle Guy worked on the Classic Theater?
Speaker 2: On the Classic Theater, yes.
Speaker 1: Which was a black vaudeville house basically in the beginning [1920s].
Speaker 2: Well, a theater and then they also had live acts come in.  Lena Horne came in.  So it was a very beautiful theater.  A couple of the black senior classes from Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] had their prom there.  And it was just a good place to go.
Speaker 1: It was a ballroom too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah they had a ball--
Speaker 1: Ballroom and a theater, yeah.
Speaker 2: And when I was talking to children about it and I mentioned that it only cost sixteen cents to go and for sixteen cents you saw two movies and a cartoon and previews and a newsreel.  And you could sit and watch the whole thing over again if you wanted to so it was really a big thing.  One of the nice things when we were doing the first book on Dayton's African American heritage, one of the ushers there gave us a lot of the old programs from the Classic Theater.  And one of them was for when Paul Robeson came in 'Song of Freedom.'  And usually the movies would play for two or three days but because the great Paul Robeson was in this one, it played for six days.  And it was just a good place to go.
Speaker 1: 'Song of Freedom,' yeah that was the one--that was the good African movie he made.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Where he was heroic and I think there was another 'Sanders of the River' it didn't turn out as well.
Speaker 2: Yes, he explained with that, but he had such an impact. My niece teaches and she had shown his film to her students and they were just so impressed by it.  He was a genius in so many ways and a linguist, a singer, a scholar, athlete.  They named a mountain after him in Russia.  And they even stopped fighting in Spain to hear him sing.  And it's just a shame the way that they have written him out of history.  I was so glad that his son [Paul Robeson, Jr.] finally put together that video ['Paul Robeson: Here I Stand'] on him.  We showed it at where Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] is now for a black history program a couple years ago.
Speaker 1: 'Here I Stand?'
Speaker 2: Yes, and people were just amazed at what he [Paul Robeson] had done and how that's just been wiped out of the history books.  And they even took his picture out of the picture of the All-American Football Team.  So they were just determined to remove him but you know, fortunately, now people are starting to realize what he did and how important he was.  One of the things they point out in that video is that when the Civil Rights Movement started--wondering how he felt because they did not acknowledge him, you know, and he had fought for the same things that they were fighting for and they just sort of ignored him, but a lot of them were scared, you know.  The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was following them and they didn't want to be associated with him.
Story_ID: 278505
Speaker 1: All right, this is the Martin Luther King School Awards Program at Sinclair Community College [Dayton, Ohio] in 2002.  And on the left is Faye Johnson [ph.] who's a member of the Holiday Celebration Committee and now works for the City [Dayton, Ohio] so she's here at the cultural center.  Next is Marsha Bonhart a broadcaster for TV 2, one of our sponsors.  And Dr. Juanita Wehrle-Einhorn who's over the affirmative action program at Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio] and a really hard worker in this program.  Then Margaret Peters then David Fox who's the coordinator and Dr. Kim Goldenberg the president of Wright State.  What happened is that while I was giving an award, they walked up on stage and unfolded the banner renaming it the Margaret E. Peters School Awards Program.  I couldn't figure out what in the world is Faye doing coming up on stage. (laughter)  The ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] program at Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] in 2003 but because it was the anniversary of flight, our topic was African Americans in aviation and space science.  So on the left again is Lloyd Hathcock whose father was a Tuskegee Airman and shot down as a prisoner of war.  Then there is Mrs. Neal Loving  whose husband was of course an aviator known for losing his legs but still continuing to pilot, wrote an excellent autobiography ['Loving's Love: A Black American's Experience in Aviation'].  Then it's Dale White, Jr. whose father Dale White, Sr. was one of those who flew the flight that kind of prepared the way for the Tuskegee Airmen with Chauncey [E. Spencer].  And he is buried at Woodland [Cemetery, Dayton, Ohio].  And on the end is Charles Feaster from Xenia [Ohio] who was a flight engineer with the Tuskegee Airmen.  Excellent storyteller.  This is in front of Bing Davis EboNia Gallery on Martin Luther King Junior Way [Dayton, Ohio].  And lined up there are all of the trustees for DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute]. So starting on the left is-
Story_ID: 278506
Speaker 1: Okay, I want you to talk about, you know, West 5th Street [Dayton, Ohio] and that area over there and you know, and as well as your old neighborhood where you grew up.  But that was like the hub of the black business community.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was on West 5th Street you could go from the bridge where Garfield Jones had his funeral home for fifty-five years 'til the freeway came through.  All the way up to really past Broadway.  And you would pass black owned theaters like the Classic and Palace.  You would pass the homes of black lawyers like Mayor [James "Jim"] McGee.  You would pass doc--black doctors' offices, Dr. McFall [ph.] was there.  You would pass Cox's drug store.  The 5th Street--
Speaker 1: We used to call the was Dr. Cox really a doctor or was he--
Speaker 2: Well, there were two Dr. Coxes.  There was Dr. Lloyd Cox who was a medical doctor, studied in Vienna [Austria], was a doctor here for fifty-three years.  His office was on West 5th Street.  His younger brother was Leroy Cox who was the first licensed black pharmacist and also owned Cox's Drug Store, which was right across from really the Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 1: Dr. [George] Pugh, I interviewed his son [HistoryMaker Roderick Pugh] in Chicago [Illinois].  Yes, he was a psychologist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Pugh, yeah, he was there. They were all there.  Of course, we mentioned that-
Speaker 1: Rohan [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Rohan was there.
Speaker 1: He was a Garveyite.
Speaker 2: All were congregated there.  Then you also had of course all the black entertainment places, you know, were right there.  Mr. Harris, Paul Harris' place was there.  Lloyd Lewis had both his--had his service station, his appliance store and one of the people who worked for him of course was Judge [Arthur O.] Fisher and he was one of the sponsors of the, you know, the radio show on WHIO where Delilah [Edythe Lewis] sang.  Then you go further up and you'd come to the Palace Theater, which Dr. Cox helped to build, with Johnathan Winters.  And it wasn't just a theater--
Speaker 1: With Jonathan Winters now he's a-
Speaker 2: Well his family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Winters--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah the Winters family, right, Winters family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jonathan Winters is a comedian.
Speaker 2: The comedian.  That's his family that helped to build the Palace Theater. And you'd go to the Palace not just because of the movies, but they had, you know, beautiful stage shows. They brought people like Fletcher Henderson.  And all those people would come there to entertain.  They'd put on live shows.  A magnificent ballroom. You have drug stores.  You know, everything on West 5th Street.  People would go there, you know, on Sundays just to kind of stroll up and down the street so people could see how good you looked.  And it was the heart of the black community.  Unfortunately, you know, when the freeways came through, despite people like Mayor McGee and my father [Joseph Andrew Peters] and others who told the city commissioner if you put that freeway through, you're gonna ruin the city.
Speaker 1: This is the late '50s [1950s] we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes, and they put it through anyway.  And of course, you know, you could not get to or from West 5th Street.  You could get to or from East 5th Street so East 5th is now flourishing and on, if you go down West 5th Street, the only building that remains from that time period is the where the Urban League moved back because that's where they started in '47 [1947]. The old YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] is still there but it's a wooden building. It's deteriorated very badly.  The home of Captain [Robert] Bob Mallory is still there, a beautiful building.
Speaker 1: Now who is Captain [Robert] Bob Mallory?
Speaker 2: Please?
Speaker 1: Who is Captain Bob Mallory?
Speaker 2: Oh, Bob Mallory was director at the Linden Center for years and years.  And when World War I came, he was the Captain over Company C, which was the all black unit. Garfield Jones was part of that unit.  And they were on the front lines for 108 consecutive days.  His mother was Harriet Boone [ph.] who was one of the first black businesswomen.  And they owned this beautiful Queen Anne home, which you can see if you're at Linden Center and you look straight down Horace [Street].  The building is still there.  DAALI, The Dayton African American Legacy Institute, we went through the building, because we were looking for a place where--which would be like our office and we could have meetings in this place.  But it's in such really bad shape, it's gonna take a tremendous amount of money, you know, to make it useful, but it's still there.  So [West] 5th Street is just like so many other black business districts across the country almost all of which are either under a freeway or inaccessible.  When Claud Anderson was here [Dayton, Ohio], he talked about that fact that they'd just been destroyed.
Speaker 1: And he's the author of Black--
Speaker 2: Author of 'Black Labor, White Wealth' [Claude Anderson].
Story_ID: 278507
Speaker 1: Right, and now we were discussing, I was saying after--during the break that the black community of Tulsa [Oklahoma] has got a freeway over top of it.  Greenwood and Pine, the gap, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Greenwood, Archer and Pine, right the gap they call it.   Yeah, has a big freeway over it.  That destroyed--
Speaker 2: Destroyed.
Speaker 1: --That community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's so many, you know, misconceptions people talk about the Tulsa Riot, but as you mentioned it was rebuilt after the riot, but then the freeway came.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is all in the late '50s, [1950s], early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yes, same time.
Speaker 1: Interstate highways built right over top of the black business district.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And right over the oldest black neighborhoods.  You know, when they came through here [Dayton, Ohio], not only did they destroy the black business area, but the site where the Marcus Garvey, the local Marcus Garvey group met was gone.
Speaker 1: You and I--
Speaker 2: The old black churches like Wayman [Chapel A.M.E. Church, Dayton, Ohio], which is the oldest black church and they're just gone.
Speaker 1: Wayman is an A.M.E.?
Speaker 2: A.M.E., right.  First Wesleyan [Church, Dayton, Ohio], you know, they're all inaccessible.
Speaker 1: That's a sad tale.
Speaker 2: Yes, because once a neighborhood is gone, you know, you lose that closeness.  When we were on Homestead [Avenue, Dayton, Ohio], we were there from the time I was born, until the freeway came through.  So for eight years, I went to the same elementary school [Irving Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio] that my oldest brother had gone to, that my younger siblings would go to, had many of the same teachers, the same neighbors, and we knew that we were safe in that neighborhood.  You know, we knew that even while mama [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] was at work and daddy [Joseph Andrew Peters] was gone, that there were neighbors who would look after us so they didn't have to worry.  And if anybody got out of line, the neighbors were free to give you a little swat and tell your parents when you got home--when they got home.  So you had a lot of security that our children don't have today.  I think we need to realize that when so many adults are quick to condemn young people, just to realize that their lives are totally different from ours when we were their age.
Speaker 1: And one is compelled to think that this is of course deliberate action by city government to--
Speaker 2: It is.  It did not just happen by accident.  It did not.
Speaker 1: So we have, you know, what we have here is a kind of a war going on, on some level in terms of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] suing the city and the city putting a freeway over the black--the heart of the black community and it's a--it's unstated as such but it's a battle.
Speaker 2: But it's still--it's a different kind of war.
Speaker 1: It's a struggle.
Speaker 2: And it's hard to get people to see that because they look at some of the progress that has been made and they say, "Well what do you want now?  We passed the Civil Rights Act. We passed the Voting Rights Act."  I said, "Yes, but that didn't do a thing for the majority of black people," all right.  It did very little in terms of economic power.  And that's what we need to struggle for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well any more reflections about the [West] 5th Street area or the West Side on a--now the West Side of Dayton [Ohio] is the black side of town.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We know that and it's--when something happens--
Speaker 2: Well the West Side expands.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it expands, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) so we sort of carry the West Side with us. You know, what used to be Dayton View is now West Dayton.  So it's--you lose--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So when a West Side man is arrested, we know who he is.
Speaker 2: We know, yes, we know that.
Speaker 1: Right, we don't have to worry about--
Speaker 2: A sort of code word.
Story_ID: 278508
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in those days [1940s], what was--what are your reflections on the West Side [of Dayton, Ohio] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh it was a wonderful place.  I could walk from my home to my grandmother's [Laura Bell Patterson Peters] house to [West] 5th Street.  I walked in fact from my home to UD, which is University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio], which is not West Dayton.  But I could walk to St. Elizabeth, it was a safe place, it was full of places where I could go.  I could go to Linden Center. I could go to Burkham [Park]. I could go to the Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association].  And all those places are gone, you know.  Now they're planning to close Linden Center, but we're trying to get the City not to do that because there's no place for the children.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mallory Pool was the black swimming pool, that's named after Captain [Robert] Mallory.
Speaker 2: Captain Mallory, yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that until today. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well there are a lot of black people from Dayton who have made tremendous contributions, simply aren't known.  One of the people that I put in the first edition of the book was James Parsons [Jr.].  And Mr. Parsons when he was a child--well a teenager--mentioned that he wanted to be an engineer and of course he was told, you know, you don't need to do that, nobody's going to hire a black engineer.  But he ignored them and went to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York], where he got his degree in engineering and came back and was put over the lab [Duriron] at the foundry which was the only all black lab in the country as far as we know.  And he got patents for five processes that you need to make alloys including stainless steel.  So anyway, anytime you use something made out of stainless steel, much of the credit needs to go to James Parsons who most people never heard of, you know.  And we talk about people like Mac Ross, who was one of the first five Tuskegee Airmen, a graduate of Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio], was in the same class as General Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.  So there are a lot of black Daytonians [ph.] who have made their mark.  Of course Jeraldyne Blunden, founder of the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company, born in the DeSoto Bass Courts [public housing project].  And this is an internationally famous organization.  We've got [HM] Dr. [William] Manning Marable, you know, just a genius, born right in Jefferson Township.  And so there are just lots and lots of Daytonians we need to hold up so that they know that while we've got all these great musicians from the Dayton area, you know, you think of the Ohio Players and some of the--
Speaker 1: The funk bands.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the funk bands.
Speaker 1: Lakeside, Slave (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) and you think of Malcolm Taylor.  Yeah, you know, Booty Wood--
Speaker 1: Malcolm Taylor, yeah right.
Speaker 2: All those, but there's some beyond the area. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: [Eugene Edward] "Snooky" Young.
Speaker 2: Of music and sports.
Story_ID: 278509
Speaker 1: Well, now tell us about going to school. Now where did you go to school, grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to Irving Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Irving.
Speaker 2: Which was on Cincinnati and Albany Street [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I loved school.
Speaker 1: I figured.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved school, in fact I often you know, played teacher in the neighborhood.  My mother [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] had planned to be a teacher, but then she got married and it never happened.  But early school was very good; I had the same teachers my brother had had.  All white women until I got to seventh and eighth grade and of course men taught math.  But I have very good memories of Irving School, in fact just recently, [Robert] Bobby Denney who had been the director of athletics for the Dayton City Schools for a long time passed, and we went to his viewing.  And people were there from Edgemont [neighborhood, Dayton, Ohio] and from Irving, both black and white.  And many of them remembered us from Irving School.  We hadn't seen them for years and years, but they remembered us from Irving.  So they were very good years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved English.  I loved English, Reading, History.  Those were my favorite subjects.
Speaker 1: Did they teach any black history in the schools in those days?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't a--well they taught about Booker T. [Washington] and George Washington Carver.  Those were like the only two black people who ever did anything and they didn't teach everything about them, you know, just George Washington Carver you always think peanuts.  And for Booker T. it was his, you know, let down your bucket where you are and his starting Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  So there was no black history, yeah, don't complain. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Stop complaining and--the message is stop complaining and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no complaining, you know, sort of like in Dudley Randall's poem.  But, I got my black history at home, okay, because my parents were avid readers and they shared not only their family history, but African history.  History of soldiers, history of inventors, I got all that at home--great black writers.
Speaker 1: Now was that just at home, I mean did the church play any role in teaching black history or did your--
Speaker 2: Oh, well Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] did because we had--when I was baptized, our Pastor was Reverend H. Laurence McNeil who was a brilliant speaker and who was one of the first directors of the Dayton Urban League, and who worked with C.J. McLin, Sr. on projects like the West Dayton movement where they were getting jobs for black young people.  And Dr. George Pugh was a part of the church, Garfield Jones.  So a lot of the people in Zion played prominent roles in the community and beyond.  And so I had them as examples, you know, of black people who were active in the community.  And many of them were teachers and so from them as well as from my parents and Grandma Peters [Laura Bell Patterson Peters] and everybody else, we got the black history that we did not get in the schools.  And of course there was no black history at high school level at Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio].  But when I went to the University of Dayton, I had a teacher Irving Beauregard who was an excellent, excellent teacher.  I mean he knew history, he loved history, and it wasn't just a bunch of dates.  It was, you know, people acting and what they did so Mr. Beauregard was a tremendous teacher.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard of Beauregard. I think I talked to him a couple times before I left town, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, really? Yes, he was a great teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when Black History Month would--a week--it was Negro History Week in those days.
Speaker 2: Initially, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know about it before, I mean, when did you first find out about that?  Did you know about it as a child?
Speaker 2: I knew about it as a child and I'm trying to think whether we actually observed it in school.  And I really don't remember us doing anything-
Story_ID: 278510
Speaker 1: -(Simultaneous) I'm sure they probably observed it [Negro History Week, now African American History Month] at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio], knowing that--I imagine.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I'm sure they did.
Speaker 1: In that neighbor--you know.
Speaker 2: But I don't recall us doing anything about it at either Irving [Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio] or Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered.  So now you went to high school at Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now that was far away from Homestead [Avenue]--well it was out of the district, because you would have gone to Dunbar primarily, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Dunbar was much closer.  In fact, we would walk past Dunbar to go to Roosevelt because my mother [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] went there.  My cousins all went to Dunbar, all the Thomases.  So there was kind of a rivalry there between us.
Speaker 1: And Dunbar, you know, it was a lot of pride at Dunbar, I know because of--
Speaker 2: Because of who [Paul Laurence] Dunbar was and, you know, it was very sad to see it torn down.  But at least they did keep that Frederick Douglass speaking to the colored youth mural that had been in Dunbar.  They had a--
Speaker 1: So the old Dunbar is torn down?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Well all of the schools will have to be torn down because with these regulations from the State [of Ohio] about how much space you have to have around them and many of the schools are very old so their all coming down and new ones are being built.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it became the--Dunbar--
Speaker 2: It became MacFarlane [Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the original--yeah, Dunbar became MacFarlane Middle School.
Speaker 2: So you'll hear some people talk about the real Dunbar, which means the one on Summer Street, yeah.
Story_ID: 278511
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at Roosevelt, though now Roosevelt, I read that when it was built, is the largest school east of the Mississippi [River] and a huge high school. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it's a spectacular building, you know, two indoor swimming pools, a very solid structure.  And right now of course, the Board [of Education] is considering what to do with the building.  And there are a couple of plans one by Annie Bonaparte, who's a great community activist.  And she is the one responsible for that development on James McGee Boulevard where initially there was nothing, you know, but now we have a much needed service station, as well as some restaurants, as well as a drug store.  She is the one responsible for that so she has a plan where it will be an actual community center.  One of the professors at the University of Dayton had his students do several surveys over a period of years to find what the community would like to see in the building, and at the top of the list of course was programs for young people, you know--after school programs, educational programs, chances for small businesses to get started.  So the Board is considering that option and we're encouraging them to accept it, okay, because it is a fantastic building.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was a thriving place when you were going to school there I guess--
Speaker 2: Please?
Speaker 1: It was a thriving school when you started.  You started in 1950?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I graduated in 1954.
Speaker 1: Yes, you started in '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And well, what was Roosevelt like for you when you started?
Speaker 2: It was a very good school. I had some teachers there who were excellent, Laura Dwyer [ph.] was one of those old-fashioned teachers where everything had to be just so and then Jean Booker was just starting her career as a teacher.  And so she was the gym teacher and I was the first black member of the girls' athletic association, played volleyball and made a lot of really close friends at Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the percentage of black students there I mean roughly, I mean I know you don't know exactly but-
Speaker 2: I know we were in the minority, but I'm not sure by what percentage.
Speaker 1: Would you say one-fifth or one-third (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Maybe one-third or one-fifth.  Yeah, maybe a-third or so, but what's interesting is that in the book I have photographs of the state championship teams in '54 [1954].  And there were like four blacks on the basketball team.
Speaker 1: So Roosevelt won the state championship in '54?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, with Uriah Holland, Anthony Steele [ph.]. Then they won again in '60 [1960], and in '66 [1966].  And if you look at the pictures, by '66 [1966] it's the exact opposite of what it was in '54 [1954].  In '34 [1934] when Al Tucker [Sr.] played, when Al Tucker was on the team that won the first state championship, there were two blacks and the rest were white.  By '66 [1966], it's the exact opposite, there were two whites, and all the rest are black, but the coaches were white all the way through.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, I thought by '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: We were just about gone. It was predominantly black by that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '60 [1960] I think--
Speaker 2: Is that when Henderson played?
Speaker 1: --Van Heusen [ph.] was. No '60 [1960] was when Henderson played.
Speaker 2: Okay, '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: John Henderson and Ray Brown and all of them.  I think Van Heusen's the only white player on the team, or there may have been another one.
Speaker 2: I think there were two on that picture.
Speaker 1: By '66 [1966] I think they were all black.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So it's the exact opposite.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it sounds like an exciting time to be at Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Oh it was, it was very good.
Story_ID: 278512
Speaker 1: And some of the teachers you mentioned [Laura] Dwyer [ph.] and Ms. [Jean] Booker were there [Roosevelt High School, Dayton, Ohio] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loretta B., oh yeah, they stayed for years and years.
Speaker 1: So were you involved in clubs and things and--
Speaker 2: Other than the girls' athletic association, I think, and then I'm, you know, I worked with the English Club and the Drama Department, and so that was--then when I started teaching I was over the Speech League and junior counseling, world affairs, those kinds of programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's see, did you run for any class offices or anything at Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I was one of those bookish people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I figured that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt had a pretty good library as I remember.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it had a great library.
Speaker 1: Very--yeah the atmosphere of learning there.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was a very solid academic school.  A lot of emphasis on that and of course we would have the test every year and so I would always take the test in Latin and then the kids were amazed, "You took Latin?"  I said, "Yes, I took Latin."  Everybody should take Latin so you know your prefixes--
Speaker 1: --Yeah, I think that was a requirement for the college prep course.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, college prep, you had to take it--
Speaker 1: --Latin until the--
Speaker 2: And geometry and all of those courses.
Speaker 1: Any stories from high school that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Well one involves the--Miss Booker and the girls' athletic association I mentioned.  At one point we went outside the area to play some other teams, and we were heading toward the South and we stopped at this one little place to get something to eat.  And when we went in, they would not serve the team because I was there and I was the only black one on the group.  So Miss Booker and all the other girls just turned around and walked out with me.  They refused to be served since I couldn't be served.  But that's something that sticks with you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Miss Booker seems to have been a leader.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she was.  She was the total opposite of Miss Dwyer.  You know, Miss Dwyer was a strictly books only, I could care less what your home life is like.  You're here to learn, you know.  And if you have problems at home, leave them at home, where as Miss Booker was the kind that wanted to know what was going on.  When her little boy was born, you know, we went to her house and met him so just total opposite so when I started teaching I tried to kind of combine the best of both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any other teachers that you would consider mentors or models at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: No, those are the two main ones.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well, when you were graduating--I mean--now did you--now I have to ask you this, I know they give a Theodore Award every year and well they give one for history.  Were you a candidate for that award?  Or did you-
Speaker 2: I didn't get the Theodore Award. I got a bunch of, you know, awards from the state for doing well on assorted tests.  I was sent a bunch of those mainly in Latin, English and history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think your brother [Wendell Peters] got it at-
Speaker 2: Wendy has a Theodore, yes.
Speaker 1: Wendell got the Theodore from-
Speaker 2: Oh, he's got a photographic memory.
Story_ID: 278513
Speaker 1: Now when you finished Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio], now where did you-- how did you decide to go to the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio]?  I mean, there are other choices around here so I'm--
Speaker 2: Well University of Dayton was within walking distance of my house.  I was the second oldest. My father [Joseph Andrew Peters] was a self-employed contractor.  My mother [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] at that point, was doing day work and there was no money to go elsewhere.  Plus University of Dayton has an excellent academic reputation.  So I started going to the University of Dayton.  The first year I went, I was working at St. Elizabeth Hospital during the day and going to school at night.  But, I could take so few courses that way that after a year I switched and went to school full time and then worked full time from 3:00 to 11:00 at St. Elizabeth.  But I was very blessed because I worked in central supply, and there were times when we were not very busy and so I was able to do some homework and classwork during that particular time.  So, I graduated in '59 [1959] with honors.  And enjoyed my years at UD [University of Dayton].
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about UD in those days?
Speaker 2: Well I had--I mentioned-
Speaker 1: It's a Catholic school.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --A lot of people don't realize that who are outside of Dayton [Ohio].  The University of Dayton is a, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right, well, because it was a Catholic school, and I am a Baptist, instead of taking the religion courses, if you're not--if you weren't a Catholic you had to get a minor in philosophy.  So I took, you know, logic, and epistemology, and all those courses.  But I kind of enjoyed them once I got into them.  Because you really have to use a different kind of thinking, you know, and we get a lot of--a much broader understanding.  So the philosophy courses, I really enjoyed those.  The teachers were excellent, I mentioned Mr. [Irving] Beauregard.  I also had a--I also have a minor in Spanish.  And one of my Spanish teachers was an excellent teacher.  I met a few black people. There were not a whole lot of blacks on campus at that time, but one was Gordon Simmons [ph.] and I remain very close with him, close friends with him over the years.
Speaker 1: What did he teach?
Speaker 2: He wasn't in education. He was in another field. I ran into him somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from University of Dayton in '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: '59 [1959], okay.  Okay, and did you--so your degree was in education?
Speaker 2: I had one in education, but at that point I thought I would like to do something besides jump right into teaching.  So I worked at Wright Patt [Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] for three years in--it's called MCSIHA, which was in cataloging.  And then went back and did my student teaching and got my teaching degree in '63 [1963].  Then went into teaching.
Story_ID: 278514
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did you start teaching?
Speaker 2: I started at Roth [High School, Dayton, Ohio], which was a high school at that point--and though my teaching fields were English and social studies and Spanish, I started out teaching reading because so many of the high school students could not read, or couldn't read at grade level.  So I took some coursework at Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio] and started teaching reading at Roth.  And then about '67 [1967], [Arthur] Art Thomas was one of the teachers at Roth at that point, and he and I and some of the others were concerned about the lack of black history.  So we started going to the Board of Education, and pushing for the inclusion of black history in the Dayton Public Schools.  And the superintendent was Dr. Wayne Carle, and so he arranged to have a citywide meeting where Dr. Charles Wesley was going to be the keynote speaker.  But Dr. Wesley was ill and didn't come.  And so I stood in for him and spoke about black history.  You know, some of the major phases, why it was important to include it.  And so after that meeting I was appointed as the Negro History Resource Teacher for the Dayton Public Schools.
Speaker 1: Now, that's quite a--we may have skipped over a lot of ground here to get there, but to be able to substitute for--
Speaker 2: Dr. Charles Wesley, yes.
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Right, and he was president of ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History].
Speaker 1: The confidant and co-Author with--
Speaker 2: Dr. Woodson.
Speaker 1: Dr. Carter G. Woodson of many black history books, a national recognized--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, brilliant man.
Speaker 1: --Leader of black history.  I mean to be able to substitute for him is quite a--I mean how did you get to that point?  I mean you just didn't jump up and--
Speaker 2: Well, I always loved history and I had done a lot of reading, and this was about the time that [HM] Lerone Bennett [Jr.] was doing a lot of writing for Ebony Magazine.  A couple of years after that, The Dayton Daily News had serialized his, "'Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America, 1619-1962]' and they asked me to write a biography to go with each of the twenty chapters.  And I had done a lot of speaking in the community on different phases of black history.  And so, he--when he asked me to speak, I was able to do that without a whole lot of preparation.  I have a very good memory also, and so I could start with, you know, Africa the home of man and talk about Egypt is in Africa even though a lot of people would prefer that it not be there.  And we'd talk about the fact that when [Christopher] Columbus got here, not knowing where he was, black people were already here.  And we could kind of go chronologically and hit a lot of the main points.  And because so much of that was new to a lot of the teachers who had come through just a regular school system, they simply didn't know what we considered just basic facts of history.  And so as Negro History Resource Teacher, I would do workshops in the area. We prepared newsletters, we talked about how you include black culture regardless of what subject you're teaching whether it's science or math or literature. That we belong in all of those, it's not just history.  So I worked in that area from '68 [1968] to '74 [1974], then in '74 [1974], I went to Colonel White High School [now Thurgood Marshall High School, Dayton, Ohio].
Story_ID: 278515
Speaker 1: Alright, this is in 2004.  This is in front of [HM Willis] "Bing" Davis EbonNia Gallery on Martin Luther King, Junior Way [Dayton, Ohio].  And these are the trustees of DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute].  On the left is Judge Bill Littlejohn who is the president.  Next is Patricia Rice [ph.], an architect who has now moved to Florida.  Then Earle Mundell, Martha Mundell, Newscaster Retha Phillips, then Willis "Bing" Davis, Margaret Peters, Nero Williamson, Dr. Carolyn Dorsey, and Michael Sampson.  And in front of them you can see my block on the walk of fame but it's not very legible.  Alright and this is the block on the walk of fame that's in front of Bing Davis studio.  And it simply says, "Margaret Peters, 1936,"--I can't read it-"Educator, author, historian, volunteer, award winning expert on the subject of African American history.  Her contributions in both education and history have left an important legacy for the Dayton community."  This is 2004. This is inside the Bing Davis studio and this is when we were promoting our 2005 calendar with Old Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] on the cover.  And the background of course is Judge Littlejohn who is our president.  Alright this is 2005. I'm standing with my sister, Rosemary Bryan [ph.] and we're looking through the updated edition of the book so you see the cover in the background with DCDC [Dayton Contemporary Dance Company] and then some of the photographs of Kevin Brame and the Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] class of '54 [1954] at our fiftieth reunion and some of the black--
Story_ID: 278516
Speaker 1: So I want to go back and ask you how did you first get seriously or organizationally involved in black history?  When does your organizational life with black history begin?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Well it really began in 1984, which is--
Speaker 1: 1984?
Speaker 2: Well, you wanna go back to the Roth [High School, Dayton, Ohio] part--
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking back when you first started--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, as a child.
Speaker 1: --You know, paying attention to it in a serious way as a focus.  You know, because you mentioned the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [ASALH].  Like when was the first time you attended one of those conferences, and why did you go?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't go until like the late, until the 1980s because I started our local organization in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay well let's go back further than that into when you first, I guess got involved with, you know, before that meeting with the [Dayton] Board of Education.
Speaker 2: With the board in--yeah, that was '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: And, you know, when you knew that you could write those biographies to accomplish--to accompany--the '"Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America, 1619-1962'] for The Dayton Daily News. And when did you--
Speaker 2: Right, it was for the news (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --Yeah, because not everybody can do that now.  So--
Speaker 2: No, I think I really trace that back to--I had actually started doing some writing because I just enjoyed writing--while I was still in high school [Roosevelt High School, Dayton, Ohio].  And then when I was at UD [University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio], and I got my master's in history [1972].  My subject was this huge revolt in Brazil.  And I found-when I went into it, that it was sort of like the Denmark Vesey revolt that a lot of what was written about it was driven by the fear that blacks would revolt.  And I was really interested in the difference between what had actually happened in terms of what could be proved, and what people thought had happened.  And I began looking more closely at American History and World History.
Speaker 1: Now what revolt in Brazil is this?
Speaker 2: This was called the--I forget the exact name of it, but it was one where a large number of black people were hanged afterwards because of their involvement in this huge conspiracy which really was just a small conspiracy, but because of the fear of the white community, it was blown way out of proportion.
Speaker 1: Sort of like the Nat Turner revolt and then Denmark Vesey.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, you know, all the soldiers that they hanged because they supposed they were involved in the Brownsville [Affair] thing.  And so that kind of got me to thinking about the fact that there are probably a lot of other things in our history that have been passed down as supposedly what did happen.  And they really aren't true and so I really started investigating a lot of (air quotes) facts about history.
Speaker 1: About what year-now this is at while you were at UD?
Speaker 2: This was while I was at UD.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a little bit later, I think that James Baldwin was doing some writing in the '60s [1960s], and he talked about the fact that America is like a person.  And if a person is sick and won't admit what's wrong with him, he's not gonna get any better.  And if a country is sick like America is sick, and doesn't look at its history and admit what it really was, it's not gonna get any better either.  And it's very difficult for Americans to do that because we've been fed so many bits about, you know, land of the free and home of the brave, which [W.E.B.] Du Bois called, you know, the land of the thief and the home of the slave.  And so I really wanted people to look at history and see what it was really like.  And I had read some of Dr. [Carter G.] Woodson, where he talked about the fact that if you don't know your history, then you'd lose the inspiration that comes from the teaching of history.  And that other people's perception of races is shaped by what they think those people's ancestors accomplished in the past.  And when you have historians who say, you know, the Negros contributed nothing to the advancement of civilization.  You've got a whole group of people who believe that.  And sometimes, black people absorb that thought.  And think they can't do anything--so we just needed--I just felt that we needed to correct that.
Story_ID: 278517
Speaker 1: Now did you ever meet back in the days when you were in grade school [at Irving Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio] or high school [at Roosevelt High School, Dayton, Ohio], people like, J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] or--
Speaker 2: I didn't get a chance to meet him.  I did meet the man who delivered the Pittsburgh Courier.  It was a Mr. Poore, and he had a great interest in history.  And so he would often speak with us and of course they carried J.A. Rogers' column in there.
Speaker 1: Right, 'Your History.'  'Your History [From the Beginning of Time to the Present]' by J.A. Rogers.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so we were able to look at that.  And so, I think that really is what got me started.
Speaker 1: So the man who delivered the Courier's name was Mr.-
Speaker 2: Euward [ph.] Poore, P-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had a great interest in that.
Story_ID: 278518
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're--the biographies that you wrote for the [Dayton] Daily News were I guess compiled to make the 'Ebony Book of Black Achievement?'
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened is, you know, 'Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America, 1619-1962'] is an excellent book, but there's not much on any individual in it.  So the news ran at twenty episodes.  And with each episode, they asked me to write a biography of someone who lived during that time period.  So we started with Mansa Musa, you know, the ruler in West Africa.  And then we just went chronologically up through people like, you know, [Frederick] Douglass and I think we had Crispus Attucks in there.  And Paul Cuffee and Mary McLeod Bethune and Mr. [Charles Clinton] Spaulding, the businessman and we ended with W.E.B. Du Bois.  And then those were compiled in a book--a booklet, which went to the Dayton Public Schools ['Striving to Overcome: Negro Achievers'].  And I took a few of them and sent them to Johnson Publishers and asked if they would be interested in publishing them.  And they published it as the 'Ebony Book of Black Achievement' in 1970.  And a lot of schools began to use it and some still use it to supplement American History because the biographies are, you know, relatively short.  The illustrations by Cecil [L.] Ferguson are excellent.  And so it's, that was the first published book.
Speaker 1: Now we were--when we found out that someone from Dayton [Ohio] did that, we were very proud.  I mean, you know, in Dayton.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We got a lot of good comments on it.  I did an interview some time ago in Yellow Springs [Ohio] with a young man who was from out of state, and he was familiar with the book because his teacher had used it when he was in the eighth grade.  And when I was teaching at Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School, Dayton, Ohio], the book was there and the students would look at the picture in the back where I have all this black hair, and they would say, "Is that you Miss Peters?"  I said, "Well, yes it is but that was back in 1970."  So--
Speaker 1: The students assumed you always had grey hair?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They can't--it's hard for them to imagine teachers being younger than they actually see them, yeah.
Story_ID: 278519
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 1968, you become the Negro History Resource Teacher for the Dayton Public Schools.
Speaker 2: Resource, right.  For the district, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For the City of Dayton [Ohio] or for the--all right.  That's a duty above and beyond just teaching every day.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was--you know, I had an office at the [Dayton] Board of Education and in the instruction department.  And I would go to the different schools and put on workshops and we prepared materials that the teachers could actually use. Sometimes I would go and teach a lesson, you know, model a lesson for the teachers.  We prepared material that they could use in their classrooms with the students.  It was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from those days, because I'm sure you were bringing something that was new.
Speaker 2: It was something that was totally new and we ran into--we ran into some resistance obviously because it's so contrary to what people have been taught and it's hard for them to admit, what our history is really like.  But we also found some who were very, very accepting of it.  We had a lot of students who wanted it not just incorporated into a class, but as an actual separate class that they could take.  So we started pushing for a Black History class.  Took us about twenty-six years, but we finally did get one in.  And some of the teachers, even some of the black teachers did not want it because they didn't want to discuss slavery.  And they look at it as something to be ashamed of.  And we keep trying to tell people that when you think the word slave, you should not automatically think black.  That all people if you look back in the history far enough, have probably been enslaved.  That the Jews were slaves in Egypt longer than black people were slaves in this country.  And so we never start teaching African American History with slavery. We always go back to Africa, which is the home of all people.  And one of the funny things that happened, I was at Colonel White [High School, Dayton, Ohio] and I would always have the students copy something on the board and we discussed it when they first came in because that gave them a time to kind of settle down and gave me time to take attendance.  And at one point I simply had the statement that Africa is the home of all men.  This is when the Leakeys [Mary and Louis Leakey] were doing their work.  And so after they had copied it down and one young black man raised his hand and said, "You mean everybody is from Africa?"  And I said well, yes.  And he said, "Well damn, that's good."  And he was so pleased just with that one little fact. You know, it doesn't take a whole lot, but if we start teaching African American History with Africa as everybody's home, and you teach about Ancient Egypt, which is in Africa, and the fact that the only one of the seven wonders of the ancient world that's still standing, is the Great Pyramid [of Giza], which was built by black people who obviously new math and all those other things.  We teach about Ancient Ethiopia, you know, with the great--the churches that are built underground.  We teach about the Kushites when they were pharaohs of Egypt and the fact that the Opera Aida is based on the writing of one of the Kushite rulers.  It just gives them a totally different view.  And when we get to the slavery period and we talk about the fact that when Africans were brought here as slaves, their culture did not totally disappear even though we keep being told that.  That there are words we use in English, which are African words.  A lot of them deal with you know, food, music because those things stay with us.  We talk about slaves who resisted being slaves because they have this--[HM] Lerone Bennett called it this 'Gone with the Wind' view of history.  We hear all the slaves were happy and worried about Miss Scarlett [O'Hara].  So we talk about, you know, people like Nat Turner and they know who Nat Turner was.  And we talk about the ones who resisted by running away or destroying the master's property or working as slowly as possible.  So they get a different view.  We talk about the fact that not all white people owned slaves that the minority of white people in the south owned slaves, but they supported it anyway because it made them feel they were better than somebody else.  That there were whites who did not own slaves and who opposed slavery, you know, like the Quakers way back in 1688.  Talk about John Brown, and I had one young man at Colonel White who assumed John Brown was black because he had fought on behalf of the slaves.  He was amazed to find this was a white man who had spent his whole life fighting against slavery.  So we try to get them to put black history into a worldview or into a total American History view because you can't really pull it all out and not deal with the rest of history.  And so we try to get them to do that.  We also in teaching history, we would have them when we covered the period closer to our own time like World War II [WWII], talk to people in their family and find out what they were doing during that particular time.  And some of them were amazed to find you know what my grandfather was an air raid warden or he was in this particular battle because a lot of people don't talk about their war experiences unless somebody specifically asks them.
Story_ID: 278520
Speaker 1: Okay, so but there was you said there was some resistance [to African American history curriculum] on the part of and I think it's interesting that some black teachers actually resisted that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and we tried, you know, one of the people that I always promote is Malcolm X because we put so much emphasis on [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and Malcolm sort of gets shoved aside.  But one of the things that Malcolm said was that black people need to remember our history. That just as the Jews used the Holocaust to bind them together regardless of where they live or how rich they are or how poor they are, that we need to do the same thing with slavery.  It took strong people to survive that and we are the descendants of those strong people and we need to see ourselves that way.  And I think that that's what we're trying to do and I think we're getting a little farther with that, but there is still some--a lot of older black people mainly, who don't want any association with Africa because of the negative things they've been told about Africa.  So it's a battle to fight that and then at the same time you've got the struggle with those who don't want to admit that black people ever did anything positive.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I know when I was in grade school, it was very little black history taught in the schools and hardly any of it entered into the school but I found that Carnegie library on 5th Street [East 5th Street Branch, Dayton, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Was, I mean browsing through the shelves, here are the books I know I bought, I mean I checked out 'African Heroes and Heroines' by [Dr. Carter G.] Woodson and [Charles] Wesley, which was illustrated, out of the Carnegie library.  I was amazed--
Speaker 2: To find out what black people had done.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That we had some history beyond what I'd been told which wasn't much.  My father's perception is that we were dancing around a fire in Africa and that's all we were doing until white people showed up to bring us here and--
Speaker 2: Civilize us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, civilize us.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do you civilize people by denying them the right to learn to read?
Speaker 1: So I mean the library really helped yeah but it wasn't anything that was really taught in the classroom I guess unless maybe you went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio] or maybe some of the schools in that area.
Speaker 2: Yeah and we still have problems with what they're teaching our children.  My niece, when she was in elementary school, came home with a book that she had been told to read because they were studying American heroes.  And the book was about Nathan Bedford Forrest, a founder of the Ku Klux Klan, you know, and one of those who murdered black soldiers at Fort Pillow.  So we sent her with a little note to the teacher explaining that she was not gonna read about Nathan Bedford Forrest and we told them to give her a book on Frederick Douglass.  You see, that's part of the problem is that textbook publishers want their books to sell to as many people as possible.  And Nathan Bedford Forrest to many people in this country is a hero because of the way we mis-teach the Civil War, calling it the War Between the States, which it wasn't. So they're not gonna print books that will not sell.  That's one of the reasons we are working to promote black history being taught in black churches, in black fraternal organizations because they are not gonna teach it in the public schools the way it should be taught.  It's just, it's not good business and it's contrary to what so many of them have been taught.
Story_ID: 278521
Speaker 1: Now one model, I guess I would pick from my own school experience, I finished high school at Fairview High School [Dayton, Ohio], which I guess is about thirty percent Jewish when I was there and I had Jewish students who were friends of mine, they would talk about what they--now they didn't, there wasn't much Jewish history taught at Fairview High School--
Speaker 2: Right, they got it at home.
Speaker 1: --Just like there wasn't any black history, but they would go to Temple Israel or Beth Abraham, and there they would learn--
Speaker 2: Get their history.
Speaker 1: --Hebrew history and culture and, you know, even more so than even the religion with the reformed Jewish population, they weren't into religion as much but I thought--
Speaker 2: And see, that' what Malcolm [X] said.
Speaker 1: --I said, "Well gee, why aren't we doing that in our," and when I would go to church, we had the picture of a white Jesus on the wall, knocking on a door, he's tending sheep and stuff, but there's no black image of Jesus in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I have my kids read what is it, 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black?'
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Henrik Clarkes [sic, Clarke].
Speaker 2: Yes, John Henrik Clarkes.  But see that's another whole struggle.  I mean when you see a movie where Max von Sydow plays Jesus--I mean his parents took him to Egypt to hide him. I mean doesn't that tell you something about what he looked like?
Speaker 1: You couldn't hide a Scandinavian in Egypt.
Speaker 2: That's right, not in Egypt.  Not in Egypt.  Let's see, but we were able to get when we--one of the people who came to speak at Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] was the pastor who put out the African Bible, whose name skips me at the moment, but the illustrations in it are true to life, you know, so our children open that and Jesus looks like Jesus really looked when he was walking the earth.  You know, so you don't see white Jesus.
Speaker 1: So is there a particular school program that you can look back on and say that they really got it right in the public schools when you were--you know.
Speaker 2: Well, at Colonel White [High School, Dayton, Ohio] we had a teacher named Eleanor--I'm sorry, Irma Kitman [ph.], who taught what they called minority history before we got the black history at the seventh grade as a required course, and she did a fantastic job.  A fantastic job of teaching it.  Yeah, so there were individual teachers who were doing it and there were some of the teachers at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio]--Bob Rice, he did a great job with--
Speaker 1: Now Robert Rice, he's a descendent of Paul Laurence Dunbar himself.
Speaker 2: They're related, when Matilda Dunbar came here she already had two children by a Mr. [R.W.] Murphy.  And so the Rice's are a part of that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered--he looked a lot different from Paul Laurence Dunbar--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --You know, in terms of--Mr. Rice was about 6'4" and Paul Laurence Dunbar was a very small man, yeah.
Speaker 2: Very small and frail, not in very good health.
Speaker 1: So I wondered about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were from--the family, the two boys she had while she was in slavery, before she came here and met Joshua [Dunbar] and they had Paul and his sister [Elizabeth Dunbar].
Story_ID: 278522
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And Mr. Robert Rice was known as the town [Dayton, Ohio] historian for many years.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah a lot of the material that I have in my early writings is based on some of the research that he did as well as Luther White who was also a Dunbar and Charles Austin who was you know, a really great researcher.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Mosley Austin who has written quite a few--yes.
Speaker 2: I mean he knows it, I mean he--I look at some of the research he did and he copied by hand just original documents.  So if you give him a person's name, he can tell you when their ancestors came here and where they lived, all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: And now Luther White, I'm not familiar with him.
Speaker 2: Coach White?  He was at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio] for many years and he started an early black history organization.  He's deceased now.
Speaker 1: Okay, Luther White?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now how did you get involved with the--we were talking about the association.
Speaker 2: The ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like that would have been a natural thing to get involved in--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: --With a lot earlier than you did but--
Speaker 2: Right when we started our Dayton [Ohio] branch in '84 [1984], but I had been aware of the organization because Dr. Joseph [Daniel] Lewis, of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], was part of the national organization.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Wilhelmina Robinson was, [Dr. Paul] McStallworth would go to those meetings.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Paul McStallworth, yeah.  So I sort of got involved with it through the Central State Wilberforce area.  And then we started our own Dayton organization in '84.  And I was able to go to a number of the national conventions and Dr. Lewis, because he was over Upward Bound, at one point he took some of the students with us and they were able to meet Dr. John Hope Franklin.  They were sitting in this one meeting and one of the kids looked over and he was sitting there and he said, "Isn't that Dr. Franklin?"  Because they had just seen his photo, I said, "Yes, that's Dr. Franklin."  They got to meet him and speak with him and it was just, you know, wonderful that they could do that.  You know, the association has really helped us with our younger students.  Back in, I guess 2003, because all the emphasis was on aviation, our local organization did one on Africans Americans and aviation and space science.  And so we invited Charles Feaster who had been an engineer with the Tuskegee Airmen. He lives over in Xenia [Ohio].  We invited Dale White, Jr., whose father was one of the pioneers who flew before the Tuskegee Airmen, kind of got some really positive publicity.  Lloyd Hathcock whose father was a Tuskegee Airmen and Mrs. Neil Loving, and Mr. Loving of course is a, you know, real inspiration.  He was a pilot. His plane crashed, and he lost--both legs were amputated, and he was flying again shortly after that.
Speaker 1: Was he a Tuskegee Airman?
Speaker 2: No, I had a chance to meet him up at Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio].  And so those four were at our ASALH meeting in 2003, and a lot of the young people got to meet real Tuskegee Airmen for the first time, and we had--for our essay contest, we asked them to write about an African American involved in aviation and space science and several of them picked Dr. Mae Jemison, the astronaut and she was coming to Dayton [Ohio] that year.  And the women who was over the program, was one with whom I'd worked with the Martin Luther King program, so I told her that some of our children had written about Mae and they would like to meet her, so she arranged for them to be at the table with Dr. Mae Jemison.  She spoke with them. She gave them autographed copies of her autobiography.  And they still talk about it, you know, to this date.  So, that was really wonderful that they were able to meet them.  Then C.I. Williams who's also a Tuskegee Airman. The C. stands for Charles, but he says it's cast iron.
Speaker 1: C.
Speaker 2: C.I. Williams.
Speaker 1: C.I. Williams, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, a couple of our students got to meet him and he's one of the people that DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute] is going to interview for the veterans' history project that the Library of Congress is doing.
Speaker 1: Now what did he do?  Is he a pilot too?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Cast Iron Williams, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, C.I. Williams.
Speaker 1: Is he a current pilot, or was he like a--
Speaker 2: Oh no, he's World War II so he's up there.
Speaker 1: World War II, okay.
Speaker 2: But he still, he went out to talk to some of the students at Wilbur Wright [Middle School, Dayton, Ohio] a couple weeks ago, and we're gonna be interviewing him as well as, you know, five or six other veterans for the Library of Congress' veterans project.  But he's just a remarkable man. He goes to all the reunions.
Story_ID: 278523
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you--are you still the--no you retired now but how long did you serve as the--
Speaker 2: President?  I'm still president.
Speaker 1: No, I'm going back to the--
Speaker 2: Oh, Negro History Resource--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Until '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: 1974.  What happened in '74 [1974] that they--
Speaker 2: Well '74 [1974] they just abolished the office that day and I went back into the classroom.
Speaker 1: It seemed like the mid '70s [1970s] seemed to be the nadir for black history for some reason even though it was hot in the '60s [1960s]. It was still needed but for some reason it was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was still needed but I think what happened is that, you know, with the end of the '60s [1960s], a lot of people kind of lost their fervor, you know, and they kind of drifted away from it.  And they kept saying, well you know, what do you need this for and all that and so they abolished it.  But we kept pushing for the black history as a separate course.  So I was at Colonel White [High School, Dayton, Ohio] starting in '74 [1974] and some of the students went down to the Board [of Education] and demanded a black history course, which we eventually got at Colonel White.  And finally in '94 [1994], well twenty-six years after we started pushing for it, we got a required black history course at the middle school level in the Dayton Public Schools.  And unfortunately--
Speaker 1: And when was that?  What year would it have been?
Speaker 2: That would have been, let me see, from '67 [1967] to--about 1993.  And unfortunately, the State [of Ohio] put World History at that grade level, and the students were being tested on it so it was dropped as a required course and became an elective.  And the World History course that they put in as a required course, I had a chance to look at the proposed standards and one of them asked students to identify ancient civilizations that impacted other civilizations.  And Egypt was not on the list, so I called the State Department of Ed[ucation] and asked them about it and they said, "Well, it's at the sixth grade."   So I looked at the sixth grade, which is not history, but geography, and they had one reference to the Nile Valley civilizations, and absolutely nothing about Egypt as a civilization impacting other civilizations.  So that--
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: Well what happened is all the things that Egypt did were listed as Greek contributions, you know, because I even had one student who told me he read in a humanities book, the statement "Civilization began with the Greeks."  All right, so what we did, I got--I just wrote to everybody I knew and told them to write to the Ohio Department of Ed [Education] and tell them that they had to include Egypt as a civilization impacting other civilizations.  They had another one where the students were asked to identify people and cultures who had scientific and cultural legacies.  Africans were not on the list so we said, "You've got to put Africans on there."  So we kept writing and then they had a meeting where everybody could come and offer their comments.  So I went up with a young man from Columbus [Ohio], his name was Ory Pianchi [ph.], and we got there and the lady from the Department of Ed said, "You know, we got more letters about leaving Egypt and Africa out than about anything else."  So I thought well this is great, they're gonna go ahead and do what they should.  It took me two hours of arguing before they finally put Egypt on that list.  When they did, they removed the word classical because they had been classical civilizations.  And their argument was well because of the time period, it's not in the classical period.  And I said, "Well, you know, you all gave it those dates deliberately so that Egypt is not a classical civilization."  But they finally did put Egypt in. They did put Africans as people with cultural and scientific legacies, but then I had to actually write the lesson plans to support those two because they didn't have any.  So that's when we did the research on the Kushite pharaohs and put them in, all the great things that they had done.  And so it is now part of the curriculum for the entire state that Egypt did contribute to other civilizations.  And when I would talk with the other people on my committee about it because they had been taught the same thing, you know, everything great began with Greece.  And what we pointed out was the fact that the Ancient Greeks went to Egypt and they studied with the Egyptians and they had no problem with the fact that they had gone to Egypt to learn, and the fact that those were black people. They described them as being, you know, Ethiopian black.  But then when you--slavery started, and they had to justify slavery, the justification was Africans had no civilization.  So you can't admit that the Egyptians were black people, or that Africans had any civilization and you've got to try to overcome all of that in order to correct what's being taught to our students and they still have it.  There's a photograph in one of the schools, the pyramid [Great Pyramid of Giza] and the Sphinx.  And underneath it, it says, "The Middle East," doesn't say Egypt, doesn't say Africa, so we're campaigning to get them to take that down because, you know, if you look at a map and imagine it before the Suez Canal.  If you simply go north, all of that area is what they call northeast Africa.  You know, Middle East is a term that people have made up.  So we just have a huge battle to try to get them to admit that.
Story_ID: 278524
Speaker 1: Right this is the cover of the updated revision--updated edition of the 'Ebony Book of Life Achievement,' came out in 1974, and the drawings in it are just remarkable.  On the cover you see of course Mansa Musa, Mary McLeod Bethune and Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois.  Cecil [L.] Ferguson just did a great job with the illustrations.  Alright this is the first local calendar that DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute] put together.  This is the 2005 calendar. On the front again is the building that we're in now [Dayton Cultural and RTA Center, formerly Zion Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], built in 1906 by black contractors.  1907, DAALI local history calendar, civil rights milestones in Dayton [Ohio].  So on the cover you see Mr. [Robert] Bob Rice.  In the upper left corner in the center over the R in Rice of course is [William Sumpter] W.S. McIntosh.  A little further to the right is Malia Williamson [ph.] who was executive secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for many many years, one of those arrested during the protest.  And in the upper right corner of course is Mr. Clarence [E.] Bowman, Sr., leader of the NAACP.  Alright, this is the original edition of 'Dayton's African American Heritage,' published in '95 [1995] for the city's bicentennial.  On the cover of course is Mac Ross.
Story_ID: 135629
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're just talking off camera about the vindication of a lot of the ideas of ancient African civilizations coming out of Egypt and predating--well if you think about the pyramids being built in 3000 B.C. and Homer, the date of Homer is 600 B.C., that's a big--that's a lot of time--
Speaker 2: That's a lot of time.
Speaker 1: --To ignore and slough aside and say well this doesn't count.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You've got a great pyramid [Great Pyramid of Giza] that's, you know, three times as old as, you know, well I don't know it's just--
Speaker 2: As anything else.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's just--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I was glad to hear you mention about the--turning the corner because for so long, the scholarly organizations have said that it wasn't so.  One organization even put out an outline of African History and it was, you know, the Roman period, the Greek period, the Arab period, the European period, colonization.  Nothing was there before the Europeans got there.
Speaker 1: Well I'd like to ask you a quick question about this too cause I know this has got to be a challenge for the, our black churches, especially when they look at ancient history, they look at it through the eyes of the Bible.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in the Bible, we're singing-every church-when we go to church on Sunday, we're singing, let our people go from Egypt, which is a black country.  What are we taught--I mean is this--do you get a resistance from people in the black church around--
Speaker 2: No, I've done a lot of speaking in black churches on, you know, the role of blacks in the Old Testament times and so forth and most of them are very receptive I think because we start out by pointing out how many times Egypt and Ethiopia are referred to in the Old Testament.  And we talk about, you know, "Out of Egypt and I called my son."  And they tend to be receptive because a lot of young people are turned off by this European version of Christ.  And so it's good for the black church to look at those black roots.  Christianity, I mean if you look at the New Testament after Pentecost, when Philip was traveling and he met the treasurer, for Candace and that man was converted.  And this was before Paul had done any of his mission--
Speaker 1: Candace was the Queen of Ethiopia.
Speaker 2: The Queen, yeah, the Queen of Ethiopia.  And this was before Paul did any of his missionary work.  So Christianity is not something that is new to Africa.  I think if you approach it from that point of view as I have when I speak with different church groups, that they're very receptive to it.
Story_ID: 135630
Speaker 1: Now talk about, well I know you've been involved in a lot of civic activities in town [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean what would have been some of the most rewarding ones?
Speaker 2: Well, one of them was what was called the Wallpaper Project.  Back in the early '90s [1990s], I worked with the historical society and city folk on an oral history project.  And we would meet in churches, people's homes and, you know, sit in a circle, and people would share their stories and all of these were audiotaped and they're--
Speaker 1: And these are people citywide, all races and groups of people?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah.  We have--you know I was looking at some of the transcripts and we have like, you know, the Jewish community, the African American community, the Greek community, all of these.  And then we took those tapes and it became a play, which was at the Victoria [Theater, Dayton, Ohio] and then in 2002 a lady named Rachel Barber who lived in Wapakoneta [Ohio], got a grant to do an oral history project for the whole state.  And she contacted me because there were not very many African American stories that she had and also there was no participation in Dayton.  So I was able to get together a group of people from the area, you know universities and churches and businesses and other groups.  And we went through the old tapes and saw where a lot of things were missing.  So we added some new interviews of people like Fred deWeaver who was a noted businessman.  Reverend Walter Dunson [ph.] who worked with [William Sumpter W.S.] McIntosh in the protest movement here.  We included Lester Bass [ph.], the great musician and we have a total of seven African Americans whose stories were part of the ones we did here in Dayton.  Then all of those stories were put into a play, which was called, 'From Here: Stories from Ohio.'  And this was the largest oral history theatrical production in the United States.  It toured from March through August, hitting a lot of different cities and they were here at Sinclair [Community] College [Dayton, Ohio].  And then in 2004, the play was presented at the International Oral History Festival in Rome [Italy].  So we were very pleased that we were able to get so much African American participation in the stories and in the play. It was really excellent.  The National Folk Festival came here in '96 [1996], we were able to participate in that and share some of the same stories.  And it was a real rewarding experience.
Speaker 1: So you all went to Rome in 2000--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't go. The play went.
Speaker 1: Okay, the play went in--
Speaker 2: Yes, the play went in 2004.
Speaker 1: 2004, okay.  And you said 1996 the National Storyteller?
Speaker 2: '96 [1996] was the National Folk Festival. They came.
Speaker 1: National Folk Festival, okay.
Speaker 2: So it was really was a long process. We started with the Dayton Stories Project, where we did the local stories and that was turned into a play which was down at the Victoria called 'That's My Story.'  And then when Rachel Barber got her grant in 2002 to put on the statewide touring play, that was called the Wallpaper Project.  And people always ask, "Well why is it called the Wallpaper Project?"  And what had happened, they were interviewing an auctioneer in Wapakoneta and he was telling about this one time where these sisters didn't trust the bank because after the depression [Great Depression] a lot of older people refused to put their money in the bank because when the banks closed or froze they lost all their money.  So when these sisters died they were getting ready to auction the house off and the guy told the men who were helping to move the stuff out of the house, "There has to be money in that house because they never put any money in the bank."  So as they were taking the wallpaper off and taking objects down, he would tap the wall and at one point he heard this hollow sound and they tore the wallpaper off and found $43,000 that they had hidden and that was the treasure.  So what we're doing with our oral histories is finding the treasure that's in just ordinary people's lives and bringing it to life so that was why it was called the Wallpaper Project.  But it was really rewarding.  You know, I got to meet a lot of people I would never, probably never have met, you know not--from the African American community, the Asian community, Greek community.  Because I knew Greek history in terms of Ancient Greece, but when we went to the Greek Orthodox Church and got to meet the Greek people and one question that they asked was, "How does it happen that you're in this country and this place?"  And almost every one of them said it was because a father or grandfather had left Greece because the Turks were in control and had they stayed there, they would have had to go into the Turkish Army.  So it was really very-a lot of stories from the Jewish community. When we had our community storytelling and the Jewish people were talking about the discrimination they ran into, like only a certain number could go to medical school.  You could see the black people in the audience, well yeah, yeah, I know what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had quotas on that, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, only a certain number could go so it was a great experience.  And we still have the transcripts and all the audiotapes or, well, it's now Dayton History because the historical society merged with Carillon [Historical Park, Dayton, Ohio].  But they're available to scholars or anyone who would like to find out what it was like in Dayton at a certain time period.
Story_ID: 135631
Speaker 1: I know one interesting aspect of the history of the West Side of Dayton [Ohio] has got to be the Hungarians.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: The Hungarians were a big part of West Dayton history at one time and I know--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and they all lived in one little community.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And see that surprises people too because they automatically think West Dayton, black.  And so we point out that the first Daytonians [ph.] who came here lived on East Side where the Bing Davis family still lives and once they started moving to the West, the whites were there first.
Speaker 1: John [E.] Moore's [Sr.] family too lived on the East Side for a spell.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, they're still over there.  But the Hungarian story is really fascinating you know that they came over here to work. They all lived in the same little place.
Speaker 1: Now I heard now, I read that the Dayton Daily News some years ago when I was visiting town in the Sunday paper about a community in West Dayton that was fenced off--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Was a Hungarian man who ran a foundry, had them-
Speaker 2: Just like the old coal towns with something.
Speaker 1: Yeah they--he paid them with his money. They had to spend it at his store.
Speaker 2: Shop at his place.
Speaker 1: And they couldn't leave the compound.  I mean they--and they couldn't speak English and it was finally broken up by the State of Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but if you talk to [Walter] Walt Williams who works here at the cultural center [Dayton Cultural and RTA Center, Dayton, Ohio], he lived close to that community, you know, so he talks about going by there and, you know, smelling the strange foods and these people who couldn't speak English.  But Dayton has a lot of, you know, really fascinating history that we're trying to get out which is why in addition to the two books on Dayton's African American heritage, we started Dayton's African American Legacy Institute, which started like two years ago.
Speaker 1: That's known as DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute].
Speaker 2: DAALI.  Right, our president is Judge Bill Littlejohn and our members include Dr. Carolyn Dorsey who is an excellent scholar.  And what we are doing is--
Speaker 1: She was director of black studies at University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 2: At University of Missouri, right.  So she did the local history calendar that came out last year, working with Martha Mundell on the Civil Rights Movement.  We did one in 2005, and for almost every day we have some fact about black history here in Dayton [Ohio].  And we'll be doing another one for 2007.
Story_ID: 135632
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now of all the stories you've heard about black history in Dayton [Ohio], is there any one that's the most fascinating that you've run across or is there--you have any favorite stories?
Speaker 2: Well I like a lot--well one of them is--deals with the Dayton Marcos, the baseball team.  I was also on the committee at Carillon [Historical] Park, Miami Valley Sports.  And we brought in people like Edwin Moses and some current people for a big program.
Speaker 1: He's a Daytonian [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he's a Daytonian, holds all these world records.  But we also went back to look at some of the older teams and one was the Dayton Marcos who were part of the original National Negro League [Negro Baseball League].  And we found that there are not a whole lot of records because people didn't keep track of them.  But during the 1913 flood, one of the Marcos, his name was Bill Sloan was with some friends and, you know, people were up on roofs and second stories and they wanted to go rescue the people, but they didn't have a boat.  So they found a man who had one and he wasn't using it, but he wouldn't let anybody else borrow it.  And fortunately, one of Sloan's friends just happened to have a pistol, and so he sort of borrowed the man's boat and they went around, you know, and rescued a number of people.  And there was a really good story in one of the Ohio history magazines called, In Search of the Well Known Colored Baseball Player, which is about Mr. Sloan that talks about that particular incident.  But the flood gives you a lot of great stories.  William Avery [ph.], one of the black contractors who built Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio], the 1906 structure we're in now, lived over in Edgemont [neighborhood, Dayton, Ohio], and his sister was Ella Lowry who was--his daughter was Ella Lowry, who taught in the Dayton system for many many years and she remembered him going out in a boat and helping to rescue people during the flood.  And there are stories, one of the ladies in the book is Juanita Senior. She's a little girl in the book, but her mother worked downtown and when the flood began she walked from downtown Dayton, across the bridge in water up to her waste to get to her children.  You know, and you have stories of people who used coffins because the coffins washed out as boats.  And a lot of great stories of the flood, and unfortunately, you seldom hear the stories of what black people were doing.  Because, what Mr. [John Henry] Patterson was doing at the NCR [National Cash Register Company, Dayton, Ohio] was, you know, so huge, and so all the publicity goes to the role of the NCR, but there were a lot of individuals you know, who also were working to help other people.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Mr. Sloan's first name was-
Speaker 2: William, Bill Sloane.
Speaker 1: William Sloane, okay.
Speaker 2: They have a photograph of him and some of the Marcos at their ballpark which was on where James Mcgee Boulevard is now, where that market is.  The field was right there.
Speaker 1: It's also like a history of Negro League play and all--the old Hudson Field, which is now occupied by a warehouse for Delta.
Speaker 2: It's a warehouse now but I remember going to see the Homestead Grays when they came here. My dad [Joseph Andrew Peters] would take us out and we'd go see the Homestead Grays and it was neat.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Yeah, Homestead.
Speaker 2: And Curtis ["Bing"] Lloyd is still living, and we got a chance to get him into the display.  And of course he played with, you know, [James] "Cool Papa" Bell.  And when the [Dayton] Dragons were starting their season in 2002, he threw out the starting pitch, and all of the Dragons had on the jerseys for the Negro League teams.
Speaker 1: So Curtis Lloyd, he's still alive here in-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he's in his nineties now.
Speaker 1: I've got to get his number from you when we finish.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll write his number, yeah.
Speaker 1: So we need to interview him.  But we've interviewed quite a few Negro League baseball players.  We'll be having a collection now.  Mostly in the Chicago [Illinois] area, you know.
Speaker 2: That's a great story.  I was noticing in yesterday's New York Times, there's a new book out on the Negro Leagues.  I forget the exact title, but they say it is excellent.
Story_ID: 135633
Speaker 1: Any other stories from Dayton [Ohio] that you-
Speaker 2: I like stories of we have a lot of men you mentioned who were in the service and so of course we enjoy meeting those Tuskegee Airmen, but also Charity [Adams] Earley, the first black WAC [Women's Army Corps] officer lived in Dayton.  Another remarkable woman. I was reading her book, 'One Woman's Army[: A Black Officer Remembers the WAC'].  And of course at that time there were people who thought not only did women not belong in the [U.S.] Army, but certainly black women didn't belong in the Army.   So when you read her book, she talks about this one time a white officer came and told her that he was going to show her how to teach the women in her unit and her response was, over my dead body.  And of course he didn't try to bother her again.  But she was a great lady, you know did so much work for the community, an excellent professor.  And we had the chance to take--
Speaker 1: Did she teach at--
Speaker 2: She was at, I want to say Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Central [State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: And then she was at Sinclair [Community College, Dayton, Ohio] on the board of trustees but later on in her life, I got a chance to take some of the children from Sunday school to meet her and this was right after she was on TV at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] and it just amazed them that this lady they had just seen on television with President [Bill] Clinton, just lived right up off Germantown [Ohio]. And, you know, she invited them into her home and showed them all her trophies and everything.  That was really great, and--
Speaker 1: She was the wife of Dr. Stan Earley [Sr.], right?
Speaker 2: Stanley Earley, right.
Speaker 1: Stanley Earley.  Right.  But the Earley's are really quite a family.
Speaker 2: And of course her--their son [Stanley Earley, Jr.] is now like the assistant city manager [sic.., Deputy City Manager] or whatever his title is.
Speaker 1: This Stan Earley?
Speaker 2: Stanley Earley, yeah.  So that's another great story and then of course with--
Speaker 1: There are quite a few women in Dayton history there really were--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Charity Earley, you've got Louise Troy is one.
Speaker 2: Louise Troy, you know, teacher for just years and years. Her students included people like the Stokes [ph.] and of course Paul Laurence Dunbar and of course you've got--put Jeraldyne Blunden in there who started the world famous DCDC [Dayton Contemporary Dance Company], and won the MacArthur Genius award, came right out of the DeSoto Bass Projects.  So you know like [HM] Jesse [Jackson] said, "It doesn't matter where you start, you know, the slums not in you."
Speaker 1: Reverend DeSoto Bass himself.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Reverend DeSoto Bass.  And what's odd is when I was showing slides from the book and one of them is of Reverend DeSoto Bass and people who lived in the DeSoto Bass Courts, didn't know who it was named after, so that's more teaching that we have to do as to who these people are.  One good thing is that when Nettie Lee Roth [High School, Dayton, Ohio] was torn down, when they asked the students to select a name, they selected Justice Thurgood Marshall and they had excellent reasoning for it, excellent, so that's you know a lot of our young kids are doing good things.
Speaker 1: So a new school is gonna be named-
Speaker 2: Is gonna be erected and it will be the Thurgood Marshall School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Nettie Lee Roth was the principal of Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] when you were there I think, right wasn't she?
Speaker 2: She wasn't too fond of black people. In fact, when I was interviewing the Bowman's, they mentioned that she would just give them notes to their mother asking her to take them out of Roosevelt, which she refused to do.
Speaker 1: The Bowman's are related to the Bowman Funeral Home.
Speaker 2: The Bowman Funeral Home, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which is another powerful family in Dayton, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were sponsors for both the new edition of the book ['Dayton's African American Heritage'] and the first one.  Then of course, Clarence [Bowman], Sr. was a leader in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Story_ID: 135634
Speaker 1: How do things look now in terms of the teaching of black history and culture in Dayton [Ohio] and I want you to look at it holistically.  And do you think it's gonna come out of the public schools, do you think we need to put it in our institution, our churches and other institutions?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I really think that for it to be taught truthfully, it needs to be taught in the black churches and fraternal organizations and clubs in part because a lot of the teachers aren't equipped to teach it and also because all of this overemphasis on testing means that teachers have to teach what the children are gonna be tested on.  And unfortunately, that means overemphasis on testing and there simply is not space in the curriculum to teach what needs to be taught.  It has to be-
Speaker 1: Well they haven't made the space in the curriculum to make black history a part of what you're gonna be tested about, right.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean you know, the two omissions that we mentioned earlier from the seventh grade and that was for the entire state and I'm afraid that that's not a rarity, you know. Black history is simply not a priority in terms of what they think children need to learn and I believe it is.  And I think we're just gonna have to teach it ourselves, you know, Malcolm [X] said you know, that that's one thing we need to do.  You know Jewish people don't depend on the schools to teach their history to their children. They teach it in their temples, they teach it in their home, they teach it in their synagogues and we need to do the same thing.
Speaker 1: And it also will afford you more control over what you teach.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Because I had one young man who--honor student, had never heard of Frederick Douglass.   I mean and this man was essential to our history, to American history, all the way from the time he escaped slavery until his death in 1895, you know, not just in terms of helping end slavery but in getting black people allowed to fight in the Civil War, in terms of the Women's Rights Movement.  When they had the first big women's rights convention [Seneca Falls Convention], he was the only man there. Not the only black man, the only man period.  And if you looked at his North Star [newspaper] on the front page, he said, you know that right is of no color and no sex.  Wrote a beautiful essay on why women should be allowed to vote and he talked about the fact that men had been voting for years and years and they have not done a really great job.  And that women were, you know, just as well equipped mentally to vote as men.  And this is the 19th century he's writing this.  When he died, he was coming from a women's rights movement, you know and this young man, bright young man, honor student, high school, had never heard of Frederick Douglass.
Story_ID: 135635
Speaker 1: And then, you know, my favorite around here is Martin [R.] Delany who is the co-founder of the North Star with [Frederick] Douglass (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) of the North Star.
Speaker 1: He had a similar view of women attended Delany's convention and voted as delegates and he's buried right out here in Wilberforce [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah and one of the nice things is that they're trying to erect a proper headstone for him and get him the recognition that he deserves along with Colonel Charles Young.  And we know people drive right by his home on Route 42, every time they go to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] or Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] or the Museum [National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center, Xenia, Ohio] and many of them don't know who Colonel Charles Young was.  I mean this is the highest-ranking black officer from World War I, and to avoid giving him the promotion that he deserved, they claimed that his health wasn't good so he rode on horseback five hundred miles from Wilberforce to Washington, D.C., perfect health.  Still refused to give him that. They sent him to Nigeria, you know, as some kind of embassy, and that's where he died.  He taught for years there, he was an excellent teacher and so I think it's Omega [Psi Phi]--I hope I'm giving the right fraternity here, the fraternity to which he belonged is working with Dr. Thomas at the museum to try to turn that home into a military museum because it's, you know, it's a disgrace that somebody who did so much for his country gets no recognition whatsoever.
Speaker 1: You know another one of my favorites is Hallie Q. [Quinn] Brown who's buried right next to Delany.  They both have roots in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] but Hallie Q. Brown was, I mean her books are should be read by everybody-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Internationally famous, yeah.  Homespun heroine. And you know, internationally famous as an elocutionist, you know, great teacher.  They have named the library after her, but a lot of people see that name and they don't know what she did, you know so really we just now telling them.  One of the good things is that Mrs. Skee [ph.] whose over at the Paul Laurence Dunbar State Memorial, does Hallie Q. Brown and she does her in costume, you know it really makes her come to life and people tend to remember seeing a person as somebody else, often better than they do just reading about it in a book.
Speaker 1: That's Laverne Skee?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes so one of the things we learned from the inventing flight, was that the living history where they had people in costume as real people, really had more of an impact than a lot of the big fancy programs that they had designed.  So you really have to find a way to make history interesting for people because so many teachers teach it, like you know learn these days, read this chapter, answer these-and that's so dull. That is so dull.  So you just have to make it interesting for people.
Story_ID: 135636
Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Okay, well one would be that we come together because there's still a lot of distrust among black people, you know. We don't trust one another at times so we need to come together.  We need to not let little differences separate us. I'm thinking in terms of education or where I live or what kind of job I have, you know, that all of those things should not matter, and they must not matter, because we have too many other problems we have to deal with.  We also have to get back to our emphasis on education.  One of the saddest things is being a teacher and knowing that you have bright young black men who deliberately do poorly in school because if they do well, they're accused of trying to act white and they don't want to speak standard English because that's trying to act white. And you know, we're killing ourselves with that attitude.  I have run into it, and when I do I talk to them, you know, one on one and explain to them that it was their ancestors who had the first libraries, who developed hieroglyphic writing, and then speaking well and learning.  That's not white, that's black history.  And when we came out of slavery, we built colleges, we started business, you know, and now we are going backwards in so many ways, you know. That emphasis on education is lost.  I would hope that we would get back to the importance of religion in our lives, because so many of those who have done well, now think, well I got it made, I don't need God.  And so they never participate in any kind of worship and their children are being raised the same way.  And at the same time in school, they're being taught that there is no God.  You're an accident, you're evolved from an animal, you know, human beings are no different from other animals.  And that's a terrible thing to teach a child.
Story_ID: 135637
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) do you think that religion should be taught in the schools?
Speaker 2: Please?
Speaker 1: Do you think religion should be taught in the public schools?
Speaker 2: I don't think--I have no problem with religion being taught as a subject because you can't teach American history and leave religion out.  What we don't want and what's illegal is for teachers to say you should be a Christian, you should be a Muslim, you should be a Buddhist.  That's what we don't want.  Alright, but what has happened, is that some teachers now are almost afraid to even mention religion.  I even had a third grader tell me, he's in my Sunday school class, that you can't teach religion--you can't mention religion in school because that's what's coming down, and that's not what's actually true.  When we were on the--when I was on the social studies writing committee and we would send the lessons out for people to review, and one of them was a lesson on teaching B.C. and A.D., as we've seen on B.C., Before Christ, A.D., Anno Domini, year of our Lord.  And one comment that came back was, "Do we have to mention his name?"  I mean how are you gonna teach ancient history B.C. and not mention the name of Christ?
Speaker 1: Well, they have like kind of genericized it--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well now they've changed it to B.C.E., Before the Common Era.   But that's not, that division in our history at least, is the birth of Christ if you look at it on the calendar, it's different, but to take that out--
Speaker 1: Yeah or another religion where they have like based on after the hegira if you're a Muslim or Judaism, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would be different, like the Jewish come here or Judaism--Chinese history, they're all gonna be different, but you can use those difference in your teaching.  You know, you don't say, "Well this one's right, that one's wrong. This one's right that one's wrong."  Because then you're teaching a religion and you're saying follow this religion and you can't do that. You must not do that, but at the same time you should not change our history.  And pull out all those references and you know some of our history books now for American history do not even mention things like the Mayflower Compact, alright, because the Mayflower Compact spells out specifically why they're here and it mentions God.  So they don't teach it because they want to teach that American history is a secular history.  So we don't mind pulling out some documents in order to get that across, but I think that if you teach children that you're an animal, which is basically what evolution teaches you, that you're no different from other animals.  That nothing is sacred.  There's no such thing as right or wrong, it all depends on your point of view.  That's what our children are taught, then we can't be surprised when they don't make distinctions between right and wrong because they're taught in school there's no such thing as right or wrong. It all depends on your point of view.  So I think we've gotten so far away from that, that it's hard to talk right and wrong to a lot of our young people because they're surrounded by a media that says many of the things that your parents and grandparents thought were wrong, are right.  And it's a constant struggle, very hard.  So, those are the things that I think because that's what got us through initially. We were grounded in the family, we were grounded in this is right, this is wrong.  If you act wrong outside the home, you're disgracing me, you know, and our children don't get that because a lot of them are raising themselves because of this drug culture. Parents are gone and grandma's raising them and grandma is tired so it's very difficult.
Story_ID: 135638
Speaker 1: We'll start again with him?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sure.
Speaker 1: Alright, this is the cover of the first edition of 'Dayton's African American Heritage,' published 1995, for the city's Bicentennial.  On the cover is Mac Ross, graduate of (unclear) and Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] and one of the first five Tuskegee Airmen.  Died when his plane crashed in 1943.  This is the expanded edition, which was just published last year with members of the Dayton Contemporary Dance Company on the cover.  So all the original material plus a new chapter going from 1994 to 2005.  Sorry that's wrong, 1995 to 2004.
Story_ID: 135639
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're talking about family values and you just mentioned a little incident that happened not too long ago.
Speaker 2: Right, even though we talked about the church and religion, people's basic values come from the family and the strong family is what's got us to where we are from slavery, but we still see that emphasis on what the family can do.  My sister and I were at a Kroger's a couple nights ago buying pop because we have a family reunion coming up.  And the young man who was helping us unload was, you know, very pleasant and smiling and we commented on it.  And he said, "Well, that's the way my parents told me to be."  So you still have a lot of families that are instilling those positive values in their young people and, you know, we really appreciate that.  We've got to get the family playing the role it plays because so often we expect the school to do what the family ought to be doing.  And everything is dumped on the school to teach. They're supposed to teach values, they're supposed to teach academics, they're supposed to teach nonviolence.  And the family has to be, has to be there.
Story_ID: 135640
Speaker 1: Okay now, one of your major contributions has been the 'History of the Black Community of Dayton' [sic, 'Dayton's African American Heritage']...  Now it's been two editions now, there's a latest edition out but tell us how that was conceived of and how did you approach this project?
Speaker 2: Okay well, when the city [Dayton, Ohio] had its bicentennial, the museum at Wilberforce [Ohio, National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center, Xenia, Ohio] was asked if they could find someone to write a history of black people in Dayton and they approached me and asked me if I would write it because I had done, you know, the 'Ebony Book of Black Achievement.'  I did several articles on black history for the Dayton Daily News, and then I do a weekly column for the Dayton Weekly News.  So I agreed to write it.  And in the book, we did it chronologically. We started in 1798, which is the first mention of a black person in the Dayton area.  There's a reference to William Maxwell [ph.] and his negro, small n.  And since there was no slavery here, we haven't quite figured out how anybody could be his negro.  And we talked about the earliest black people we know by name in the area, and that was like in 1804, we have several individuals mentioned by name.   We have black people who participated on the Underground Railroad.  We talk about blacks in the Civil War, including, you know, people like David Moody, who was in six major battles.
Speaker 1: David Moody?
Speaker 2: Moody, M-O-O-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he was from Xenia [Ohio], but then he settled in Dayton and it was in his family's home on Mound Street that Zion Baptist Church [Dayton, Ohio] originated.  We talk about families.
Speaker 1: On Mound Street, yeah, that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, on Mound Street.
Speaker 1: --The street I was born on.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Alright, we talk about particular families.  For instance, the Wheeler family has been in Dayton since 1824, and they helped to start the first benevolent society. They helped to start one of the fraternal organizations.  George Wheeler, the policeman, was a member of that family.  And then Josephine Wheeler Robinson who's like third or fourth generation, was the first black in this area accepted into--accepted into the Ohio First Families [sic., First Families of Ohio].  They were very active at the Y[MCA], so they're one of the families in there.  We talk about the schools, so we find people like Louise Troy and Hallie Q. [Quinn] Brown.  We deal with business people so you'll find, you know, in the later time, Lloyd Lewis, Jr. and all those people.  We talk about early business people.  So you have people like Moses Moore who had an amusement park right at Lakeview [Avenue] and Germantown [Street] called Dahomey.  It's no longer there.
Speaker 1: Moses Moore?
Speaker 2: Moses Moore, oh he was quite a person, sort of on the shady side.  But he was a well-known promoter.
Speaker 1: Dahomey, huh?
Speaker 2: D-A--Dahomey, right at Lakeview and Germantown.
Speaker 1: Now, what time period was this?
Speaker 2: Oh this is like the early 1920s but we found one article about it. They had a merry-go-round and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now that's close to where Lakeside Amusement Park was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was pretty close to it, so he's in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's pretty close to Lakeside.  Yeah so is there any relationship?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we have people like Moses Jones who was a lawyer, and very active in the community.  And when he died, the local judges had a committee to honor him and he was called the foremost colored attorney in the State of Ohio.  We talk about different sports figures. I mention Bill Sloan and of course Edwin Moses is included a lot of little baseball and basketball players who come from the area, Byars and Bayless are in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Keith Byars and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Martin Bayless, they're in there.  We have those who were like city champs, state champs are all in there chronologically.  We have a whole chapter on West 5th Street because you go there now and it's just so different from when I grew up.  We end that first book in 1994 and the last we have people in there like RoNita Hawes Saunders of radio.  Mrs. [Jeraldyne] Blunden is in the book.  And the last photograph in the book is of Dr. Daryl Ward a pastor of Omega [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] with some children from Youth Explosion standing in front of Roth Middle School [Dayton, Ohio].  And when I was doing the book, the publishers wanted an inspirational picture for the last one, so they suggested a skyline of Dayton and you know, I've been looking at Dayton's skyline for a lot of years and it's not real inspiring.  So we put the children there and underneath it we put a line from one of [Paul Laurence] Dunbar's poems about Frederick Douglass where he says, "Over all that holds us we shall triumph yet, place our banner where his hopes were set."  And we put that under the children because they're the ones who are gonna carry on the history.  And I was at one of the schools showing the slides and one of the little girls yelled out, "Oh that's me, that's me," and she ran up and pointed to her picture on the screen and you know that's exactly what we wanted.  There's a timeline, you know, national as well as local timeline because there's so many people and things that we couldn't get into one book.
Story_ID: 135641
Speaker 1: And that particular edition [of 'Dayton's African American Heritage'] sold out and people kept writing to Donning [Company Publishers] or asking me for books and I didn't have anymore, so we put out a new edition, and DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute] is the group that got the sponsors together to put it out.  It came out late last year and what we did was reprint entirely the first book, and then we added a chapter to go from 1995 to 2004.  Follows roughly the same format in that we start with a multi-generation strong black family.  And we picked the Mundells of Jefferson Township [Ohio].  Earle and Martha Mundell who are the grandparents are very active in the community. He used to be a principal.  She was the ombudsman.  Their children are remarkable.  Robert is a commander in Afghanistan.  Lisa is working in funding at the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio]. Glean Moss [ph.], of course is their son-in-law. Their grandson, Alfred Minor the Third [ph.], when he graduated from high school, he had about $200,000 in scholarships offered to him. He's an excellent scholar-athlete so they start out.  Then we deal with you know the churches so we have St. Margaret's [Episcopal Church, Dayton, Ohio] which just broke ground on their new area.  We talk about education so we have Chaminade-Julienne [High School, Dayton, Ohio] when Tamika Williams was there and she went on of course to play with the Minnesota Lynx (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Great basketball player.
Speaker 1: We have Jefferson Township [High School, Dayton, Ohio] when they were state champs.  We have our political leaders, so Mayor [Rhine] McLin is there and Fred Strahorn and [Tom] Roberts in one picture, they were nice enough to get one picture.  They were gonna send me separate photos, but I said, well we can only have a certain number, so they had a brand new photograph taken.  We have the Serious Young Musicians, excellent musicians--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a group of--what was the man that--
Speaker 1: Tumust Allison.
Speaker 2: Tumust--
Speaker 1: So they are the last photograph in the book, they played at the Apollo [Theater, Harlem, New York] and got, you know, three standing ovations.  And just made their first CD.
Speaker 2: Young jazz musicians and they are fantastic.
Speaker 1: They are, you listen to them, you'd think you're listening to adults.  We have [HM] Dr. [William] Manning Marable, because he came back home to speak at DAALI's first lecture series.  We have Dr. Herbert Martin from UD [University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio] who of course does [Paul Laurence] Dunbar so perfectly, and is an established writer on his own.  Oh, the negative side, we have one of--Kevin Brame.  That's the police officer who was murdered six years ago, and nobody has been arrested for his murder.  That's my nephew.  So we have Kevin in there also.  We also have--let's see who else is in there.  Corinthian Baptist Church because they just put an addition on their church so that they could do more things for the community.  We have the Mary Scott Nursing Center, and that's an excellent picture because it's three different generations.  We have one of Allen Elijah's [ph.] children who is a teenager.  We have Mrs. Helen Allen whose maybe a little younger than I am, and then we have two of the residents of Mary Scott Center, all in one photograph because the center is so close to where Zion's [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] located now.  Our children every year go over there for the thirty hour famine where we do some community service, you know, serve the meals and read the bible to them and help them play games and last year they sang for them, you know, some of the songs that they're familiar with.  So that's another photograph that we have in the book.  We have the [Dayton] Board of Education, when the kid's first team was elected because that's the first time we ever elected the board.  So it's a good addition to it, then we updated the timeline of both the local and the national to up to 2004, but the price didn't go up, same price, $29.95.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright, I'm gonna get one when this is over with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've got the old edition, so I'm gonna get the new edition.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right and then of course DAALI also put out for community calendars.  We put out the first one in 2005, and for almost every date we have something significant in the history of black people in Dayton and it covered all fields, business, religion, sports.  The second one in 2006, deals with the civil rights struggle here in Dayton.  So you'll find people in there like Miley Williamson who was executive secretary of the Dayton NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] from the 1940s until her death last year, and was one of those people arrested in the protest in downtown Dayton.  W.S. McIntosh who led so many protests is also included.  One photograph is from when the national SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] had its national convention here so we have Mrs. [Rosa] Parks and [HM] Jesse Jackson, [HM] Andrew Young and [HM] Reverend [Joseph] Lowery, along with [HM] Reverend [Raleigh] Trammell who's the Dayton chair and now of course is also the national chairperson--
Speaker 2: For SCLC.
Speaker 1: --For SCLC.  So it's a civil rights one.  And what's nice is that Dr. Dorsey did a study guide to go with it because she was concerned that so many of our children have difficulty on the proficiency test because of vocabulary, so she's pulled out some of the words that they will use, and put them into the study guide and she talks about how it is that black people came here, she explains what the Chicken Bone Express was.  And, you know, what the different terms are.  It's a really great great piece of writing.
Story_ID: 135642
Speaker 1: Tell what the Chicken Bone Express is.
Speaker 2: The Chicken Bone Express?  Alright, because of the segregated travel facilities, you know, black people couldn't get on trains and buses, the safest thing to do was for, you know, have some grandma--fry you some chicken along with maybe some pound cake and some bread, and that was your lunch.  It began as the chicken bone express. That's how we got--how a lot of us got out of the South and came North was through that chicken bone express Chicken Bone Express and for our children, that's totally new because they think if you wanna go somewhere, you just get in your car and go.  But we need to let them understand how difficult travel was, what had to be done just to get North.  My own uncle Bud Lee [ph.] was working in Mississippi on a farm, and the owner would not let him go.  So my father [Joseph Andrew Peters] and some of the other members had to sneak down there at night and drive him out.  Get him out of that place.
Speaker 1: And it was a--you'd have to stop to get gas, which could be a dangerous experience down South.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah that could be very dangerous, yeah.
Speaker 1: To feed you, that's why they had the chicken because you--
Speaker 2: They had that so that you would not have to stop.
Speaker 1: You wouldn't have to stop to eat.
Speaker 2: So you could just keep going straight on.  Of course they wouldn't serve you anyway in most places.  That's another thing that amazes our children.  There's a story that Langston Hughes wrote that I had my children read where this black man coming back from serving overseas gets on a train and when it hits a certain area, a curtain is put up and he's not allowed to eat with the others.  And in many places, the black soldiers couldn't even go on to the canteen--go to the facilities on the base.  Judge [Arthur O.] Fisher is one of the men who was arrested in the Freeman Field Mutiny.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know because they were black soldiers they're gonna risk their lives for this country.  And they could not use the facilities on a base in the United States.
Speaker 1: I interviewed [HM] Roy Chappell who was also a signee of that paper for the Freeman Field Mutiny, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so they were arrested and-
Speaker 1: So Judge Arthur O. Fisher.
Speaker 2: Judge Arthur O. Fisher was one of those arrested and that's where he met who would soon be Mayor Coleman [Young], and he talks about the influence that those older men had on him.
Speaker 1: Coleman Young of Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Coleman Young, and that's one of the reasons why he became a lawyer, so he could fight that kind of thing.  So it's a lot that needs to be told because a lot of people look at the things we can do now with no problem.  You know, they look at a [HM] Colin Powell, or they look at people who have high positions in the [U.S.] Military, but that's not the way it's always been.
Story_ID: 135643
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently?  Any major thing?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, because after I retired--I retired from teaching in '93 [1993].  I taught thirty years, and the year I retired we started a free tutoring program up at where Zion [Baptist Church, Dayton, Ohio] is now.  And that's been very rewarding.  We have some children who've been with us for three or four years and they talk about what they have gained from it.  Their parents and grandparents are very pleased with it.  We had one woman who was a grandmother who was raising three children and she had gone to a tutoring program and they were gonna charge her twelve dollars per hour, per child and so when she came to Zion, she says, "Well how much is it gonna cost?"  I said, "It's free."  Because it's the ministry of the church.  And she was just amazed.  But it works so well. We have some volunteers from the church, old and retired people as well as some students we get from Wright State [University, Dayton, Ohio] through the Ohio Reads Program.  So that's a real--something I'm really satisfied with.  ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] is going very well, we just finished our Paul Laurence Dunbar Essay Contest and just started the veterans' history project.  DAALI [Dayton African American Legacy Institute] is doing very well with our oral history project and the calendars and the lecture series.
Speaker 1: What's the ultimate aim of DAALI?  Was there a-
Speaker 2: Yeah, DAALI began because we had, you know, two concerns.  One was this building, which is now the cultural center [Dayton Cultural Center and RTA Center, Dayton, Ohio] because we didn't know what was gonna happen to it.  And the other was the fact that local black history is really not known as much as it should be.  So whereas the focus of ASALH is sort of global, DAALI's mission is to focus on local black history, to make those contributions known.  To keep black history alive every day of the year, but focus on the local.  So both the calendars are local history. They are the ones who got together the sponsors for the updated edition of   'Dayton's African American Heritage.'  So focus is strictly local history.  In addition to the books, and the calendars, we've done the lectures with [HM] Dr. [William Manning] Marable.  We also brought in Dr. [Ronald] Mallett, the physicist whose such a genius--
Speaker 1: Ronald Mallett, yeah all right.
Speaker 2: Dr. Ronald Mallett, you know, the time travel man.  And he was here at the cultural center to speak to a couple of groups of students and was just so pleased with their reception.  They wanted his autograph, you know, like he was a star.  And he will be coming back in the fall, I think to Wright State as a visiting professor.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Michael Sampson of the National African American Museum [National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Well he's one of our trustees.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so we've already had calls from young people who want to be sure that they get to see him when he comes back and again, you know, we think this is so important.
Story_ID: 135644
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me ask you again, is there anything you would change now when you look back at?
Speaker 2: No, again I don't think so because the things that I'm doing now bring a lot of satisfaction.  For twenty-one years I've been chairing the Martin Luther King school program, and through that we've given about a quarter of a million dollars in scholarships and we've had about sixteen thousand young people participate in the Art Portrait Prose Contest.  And one of the nice things is that some of our winners are children--some of our scholarship winners are the same ones who won younger as artists or poets.  And in addition, I've run into children who say, "My daddy says you were his teacher."  And that's very true.  One of our winners was a young lady named Donya Listell [ph.].  She won as an elementary student, then she won a scholarship, and her father was my student at Roth High School [Dayton, Ohio].  So then the teaching aspect is really, really satisfying.  We were at the Dayton Cultural Center [and RTA Center, Dayton, Ohio] a few years ago and this guy came running up and he says, "Oh Miss Peters, you taught me how to read at Roth."  I have no idea who he was.  And the same thing happened in front of the Dayton Daily News.  I was going to an early morning meeting and this women came out still carrying her breakfast and said, "You know, you were my reading teacher and I still like to read."  And as a Sunday school teacher, I've had several students who've gone on and become members of the church.  So I can't imagine anything more satisfying than being a teacher, but that's a personal thing, I just love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 135645
Speaker 1: It shows.  Now when you look back on your life again--well you've almost answered this in some ways but what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I want to say the young people that I've had a chance to teach because several of them, you know, because all my teaching was in the Dayton City Schools except when I taught part-time at UD [University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio] and Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Sinclair [Community College, Dayton, Ohio], I've always dealt with basically the same population.  And a lot of them have stayed in Dayton [Ohio].  So a lot of them I see all the time.  Like there's a young man who shoots photographs and writes articles for the Dayton Weekly News, Ellis Hutchenson [ph.], I see him every week.  And seeing him and seeing how well he's doing, his concern about the state of our society and what needs to be done--. He called me this morning to mention that one of the articles he had written for the Final Call had been published.  So he's gonna bring it by the house tomorrow.  So, you know, seeing the students that I had as children, doing well is really, really satisfying, and knowing that they're here is nice.
Story_ID: 135646
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your family now.  Who constitutes your family?
Speaker 2: Okay, well I have one sister, Rosemary Brame who also went to Roosevelt [High School, Dayton, Ohio] and University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio].  She is part owner of Dayton Data Processing and she lives out on Philadelphia Drive she had twins Kerri and Karen who were born on my birthday.  And, of course, Kevin Brame the police officer who was killed is her oldest son.  Then I have three brothers. My older brother is deceased, that was Joseph Leonard Peters, but he had five children and four of them--well three of them are still here in Dayton [Ohio]. One of them died shortly after Joe did and I think it was because he missed him in part.  But, Ricky his oldest son has children, and now grandchildren and Mary Jo lives in Washington, D.C. and then Adrian Robinson who works for the City [of Dayton] is also my niece and when we had our reunion, they were able to write things that they remembered.  And one that Mary Jo wrote about, my going to pick them up.  Because on their birthday since we didn't have any children, they got to spend their birthday with us and they would be the only child for a whole weekend.  And with four brothers and sisters that was really a treat that they got to spend the time with us.  Then Andrew, he was my middle brother, he was in the [U.S.] Air Force and then Wendell is the youngest brother and he's now fifty-nine--oh sorry, he's sixty.  Yeah, he turned sixty on March 18th.  And he shares my interest in history.  He collects, you know, rare books.  Finds books for people who are looking for them.  Has a phenomenal memory.
Speaker 1: Phenomenal.  I know him, he does have a phenomenal--
Speaker 2: Phenomenal, like a photographic memory.  You ask him what happened, you know, when a certain thing happened he can tell you the date and the weather and just any kind of thing, just really phenomenal.  Okay, all of the generation above me, all of them are now deceased except for two of the widows on my father's [Joseph Andrew Peters] family, they have all passed.  My mother's [Mary Margaret Smith Peters] family, have all passed, but two of the aunts are still alive. My Uncle Robbins' widow Evelyn, lives in Georgia near her family.  And then Laretha [ph.] who is Uncle Arthur's widow still lives in Charleston [South Carolina] near her son, Christopher and we will be having another family reunion here this coming July.  So all of them will be coming back to Dayton and we're hopeful that Aunt Evelyn and Laretha will be able to come with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything that I haven't asked that you think you need to mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Okay, you asked about the books, schooling, teaching, books.  You got the Wallpaper Project in, you got the books in.   I think we've covered about everything. I'm trying to remember all of the stuff I put on that list.
Speaker 1: There's gonna be something we forget but I don't you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, did I mention SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] the national convention's coming?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Did we mention that? I think that's everything. I can't think of anything burning that we've missed.
Story_ID: 135647
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy but its, ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well as a person who really used all of the gifts that God gave me to benefit other people.  I know when we were in the choir, one of the songs he always sang, you know, "If I can help somebody as I pass this way, then my living will not be in vain."  And I think that really one of the things that one speaker mentioned was that people confuse success with greatness, you know, and that greatness is really what you do to help other people.  There are a lot of people who are considered successes really aren't successes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: No, thank you.
Story_ID: 135648
Speaker 1: Alright, on the left is Laura Patterson Peters.  On the right is Thomas Grant Peters.  They are my grandparents, and this is their wedding date, December 1, 1892 in Augusta County, Virginia.  Back on the left is Eva Smith, next to her is James Adams Smith and these are my maternal grandparents in Rural Retreat, Virginia.  Standing with them are my first cousins, the children of my Aunt Bernadine Handley [ph.] and her husband Claude Handley [ph.]. That's Karen, Adam, also known as "Peanut," and Jerry.  Okay.  All right this is also in 1947, this is at Burkham Park in Dayton, Ohio.  On the left is my mother, Mary Margaret Smith, next to her is my older brother, Joseph Andrew Peters, next to him is Wendell, the youngest, the baby.  Then I'm next to "Wendi."  And then leaning over is my sister, Rosemary Peters.  In the back on the left is the middle son, Andrew Anthony Peters, and standing next to him is my father, contractor Joseph Andrew Peters.  This is 1946. This is Easter Sunday and this is in the yard of our next-door neighbor, Mrs. Burbridge [ph.] and I was on my way to Sunday School at Zion Baptist [Church, Dayton, Ohio] at 40 Sprauge Street.  All right this is at Zion Baptist Church, and this is either 1953 or 1954.  I was a senior then, next to me is Mrs. Eva Burns [ph.] and she was my sponsor for this speech contest at which I recited Thanatopsis by William [Cullen Bryant].  Oh.  Okay this is 1954, this is when I graduated from Roosevelt High School [Dayton, Ohio] so I had my cap and gown on.   This is 1959 when I graduated from the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio].  On the left is my father, Joseph Peters, on the right, my mother Mary Peters.  All right this is the photograph that was in the 'Ebony Book of Black Achievement' which was published in 1970 by Johnson's Publishers and then in '94 [1994] was included in the American Library Association's Coretta Scott King Awards book from Vision to Reality.
Speaker 2: And who is it?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, this is Margaret Peters.  This is Margaret again at Colonel White High School [Dayton, Ohio] where I started teaching in 1974 and on the walls are posters from the Muse Machine which is the arts organization for young people which I helped to start with Susie Gasonie [ph.] and Sheila Ramsey [ph.] and [HM Willie] Bing Davis.  The National ASALH, Association for the Study of African American Life and History convention, which was held in Dayton.  On the left is Minister Ayo Ogunde Elay who is from Nigeria.  Then Vincent Thompson, Yvonne Johnson, Margaret Peters and Dr. Peter Eboni [ph.].  And this is 1995.  On the left in the back you can see Michael Sampson from the National-Afro American Museum and Cultural Center [Xenia, Ohio], which we got together the publication of the first edition of 'Dayton's African American Heritage.'  This is our book signing at National City Bank.  The left front is Lloyd Hathcock, whose father was a Tuskegee Airman.  Next to him is Emma Smith who's a descendent of Charity Brody [ph.] one of the Underground Railroad members in Dayton.  And the middle is George Cooper, who was one of the Golden 13, the first black naval officers and of course I'm working for the City for many, many years.  Then Margaret Peters and lady who's name I do not know.  All right, this is 1996, and this is the community storytelling which was the wrap up for the Dayton Stories Project that eventually led to the Wallpaper Project, the oral history project.  On the left is my brother Andrew Peters.  Next to him is Jackie Thomas, my cousin.  Then I'm holding the mike, Margaret Peters.  Then there's Doris Thomas, that's Jackie's sister, another cousin, then my sister, Rosemary Peters Brame, and on the end is my niece Karen Brame who is also a teacher.  This is at McNary Elementary School [Dayton, Ohio] in 1998 in the front is Cynthia Russ and she's the president of the Doris L. Allen Minority Caucus of the Dayton Education Association and they have been working with the Dayton ASALH for twenty-one years on an annual essay contest.  This is the awards program and the student is Dorian Reed [ph.] who was one of the winners when we asked them to write about an African American man whom they admired.  All right this is the Peters family reunion here in Dayton in 2000 and we were pleased at the turnout.  We met for the first time, oh sorry, we met for the first time a cousin whom we did not know.  I am on the right in the flower dress with the white color and we had four generations.  This is at Sinclair Community College [Dayton, Ohio] where we have our school awards program for the Martin Luther King Art Portrait Pro--
