Story_ID: 531422
Speaker 1: Okay.  Today our interview subject is [HistoryMaker] The Honorable Coy Payne.  My name is Jacques Lesure, I'm the interviewer, and our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Mr. Coy--Mr. Payne, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Coy C. Payne, C only and--there is no name for the C.  And spell it, C-O-Y, P-A-Y-N-E.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on May 22nd, 1929 in Sulphur Springs, Texas.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Is June--am I right?  It's July isn't it?  It's July 7th, July 10th, 2007.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Today is July 11th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we currently?
Speaker 2: We are in Chandler, Arizona.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired, a retired schoolteacher, administrator for the Chandler Unified School District.
Story_ID: 531423
Speaker 1: We have a few questions for you that we call our People magazine type questions.  And just bear with me as I ask you these questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fried chicken.  That's what I love the most.
Speaker 1: And the time of year, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is in the spring.  I love the springtime of the year, there's so much going on at that time naturally.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.  My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say my favorite destination is Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or a saying that you abide by or like to share with people on a regular basis?
Speaker 2: The thing that I really share with people that means a lot to me is: there is no limit to the amount of good that one can do if he or she is not concerned about who gets credit for it.
Story_ID: 531424
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Payne [HistoryMaker Coy Payne] could you please tell us a bit about your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Vergie Mae Stribling Payne, and Stribling is spelled with one B, S-T-R-I-B-L-I-N-G.  Mother was born in the same place that I was born, Sulphur Springs, Texas, out in the country about six miles.  Her father [Lewis Stribling] and mother [Sylvia Stribling] owned a farm in that community and this is where she grew up, in the same community in which I was born.  Mother was a domestic.  She was a homemaker.  She worked many years as--outside the home as a domestic, but sh- her primary job was to rear her children.  She had seven children, well she had a total of nine, but when we came to Arizona there were seven of us when we ca- .  She spent her time rearing her children, seeing that they were cared for and sometimes working outside the home.  Mother had some ailments, some physical ailments that she was possibly born with, a probably genetic, of genetic making, that she dealt with all of her life.  Consequently she died at an early age; she was only sixty-two when she left this earth.  But she was a very fine woman, spiritually, religious, very religious, attended church every Sunday, was instrumental in working in the church, singing in the choir, president of the mission, and so on.  She just was a very loving person, easy to smile.  She had a ready smile and she was also a very loving and caring person.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you of her life growing up?
Speaker 2: Mother didn't talk too much about her growing up.  She mentioned it occasionally, but nothing really specific about it.  Except that when she and her sister were quite young there was a strong competition between the two of them because it seemed that her younger sister was the favorite of her father's, and she thought that younger sister got all the benefits and she got to do all the work.  But other than sibling rivalry, she never mentioned too much about their growing up.  Evidently they had a loving mother and father, and mother and father insisted that they do right by one another and be fair with one another.  And of course, that was one of her strong points too.
Speaker 1: Did she have any other siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  She had, there were three brothers and two sisters.
Story_ID: 531425
Speaker 1: Now your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Father's name, Scott, S-C-O-T-T Payne, P-A-Y-N-E [Scott Payne].
Speaker 1: Now where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in the same general area that my mother [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] was born in, or that I was born in [Sulphur Springs, Texas].  Maybe ten or twelve miles from the community in which I was born is where my dad was born.
Speaker 1: And did he grow up in the same area?
Speaker 2: He grew up in the same area.  His father [Jasper Payne] was not a farm owner, but he was a farm worker.  He share- he was a sharecropper.  And so Dad and his brothers and sisters spent their childhood working on the farm and doing the things that they were required to do as farmers.
Speaker 1: Do you know any more about his background growing up?
Speaker 2: No, because Dad was even more silent than Mother was about the growing up.  He would mention from time to time that his father had, had a habit of wandering off and leaving the chores of the farm to the boys, to he and his brothers as they got older.  And so he consequently became the--since he was the oldest of that group of children, he, he became the one that was in charge of seeing to it that the farm was run right when Grandfather was on one of his offs.  They had some older brothers that, two older brothers who had, who were born to the mo- to Grandmother [Minnie Payne] in a previous marriage, so they had two of those, but, so they had some half-brothers and possibly some half-sisters, but he didn't know too specifically about those.
Story_ID: 531426
Speaker 1: Did he [Payne's father, Scott Payne] share any other stories with you growing up--about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Just that he was very strong physically and that he could do, he thought, anything.  When he was a teenager he felt there was no task, no physical task that he could not do.  He did have an experience in his late teens possibly early twenties when he was a chauffeur for the minister, the itinerant minister who came to visit the church that we belonged to, he traveled and he made the rounds.  I think he had about four different churches, and he made the rounds once a month, and Dad was his chauffeur.  And Dad talked about how the reverend would from time to time need a little clearing of his throat before he preached, so he would send Dad to the liquor store to purchase a little bottle for him to gargle his throat, he said, gargle it, Dad said, but he swallowed some of it too, I know he did.  He talked about that, and he laughed about that.  That was funny to him that a minister needed to clear his throat before he could preach, and he used alcohol to do it (laughter).  That was one incident that he talked about.  He also told about how they had some cousins that were older than they were, and somehow someone had stoled--stolen some chickens from one of the white farmers in the area and his cousins were blamed for that.  Now he wasn't sure that they even participated in the theft, but they were caught, and no trial; they were put in the jail.  And of course the citizens of the community broke into the jail, took them out, and built a big fire in the center of town and threw them in the fire.  They bound them first before they threw them in the fire.  And Dad, he would become very, very upset when he talked about this because he witnessed this; he saw what happens to a person when they are thrown in a fire, and they are alive and thrown in a fire.  He said that both of 'em, each time they were thrown in the fire, they crawled out, but as soon as they crawled out they were thrown back in there and that was done until they couldn't crawl out anymore and they were, they were burned alive.  He re- that was one incident he talked about.  He told me about a sign that he saw in a, in a town that was nearby that it said, used the N word, and it said, "Read and run.  And if you can't read, run anyhow."  And that was, he remembered that very vividly and he talked about that.  He talked about when he and his father [Jasper Payne] went to town on Saturdays to purchase the groceries and what have you that they, they had on the streets of the town, and this is Sulphur Springs [Texas] now, where I was born, they had on the streets laughing barrels.  And if a black person, especially a black man, if he wanted to laugh, he had to go stick his head in that barrel and laugh.  Otherwise he would be caught and put in jail for laughing out in public.  Or if they were walking on the sidewalk, he and his father walking on the sidewalk and there were white folks, they were meeting white folks, they had to get off into the gutter to let the white folks pass, even though the sidewalk was big enough to accommodate all of them, all four.  They would have to get off and let them go by and then they could get back on the sidewalk.  He talked about how they would go into the--they couldn't go into the front of the grocery store where they bought their groceries, they had to go in the back and, and get their groceries and come out the back.  Of course, there was no, no place they could eat.  No, they had some cafes and things in the town, but they couldn't eat in those cafes.  They couldn't even purchase food in those cafes, so.  Those were some of the things that he talked about in his, that happened while he was growing up.
Story_ID: 531427
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Scott Payne] as a person?
Speaker 2: Dad had a, he had a s- fifth grade education.  He had had to drop out of school because he nee- his father [Jasper Payne] needed him to help on the farm to do the sharecropping that they did.  So he dropped out at fifth grade.  He grew to be a very, he was about 6'2" physically, and a very muscular, very strong man; tall and strong.  I, I really wanted to be like him, however that didn't happen to me.  I was the smallest one.  In fact, I think I'm the smallest one in my family, today even, you know all of them are taller.  Well, I may be taller than one brother, but all of the other five are, are taller than I am and they're, they're bigger, of course.  They weigh more.  So, but Dad was the opposite of me, and I always wanted to be like him.  I wanted to be as tall and as strong, and I wanted to be able to do everything that dad could do because he could pick up a log, an enormous log of wood and just walk with it, carry it wherever he needed to carry it and it was no problem for him to do that.  And that just, I wanted to do that.  And I sometimes I was disappointed because I couldn't, I didn't have the physical stamina that he had.  I couldn't do the things that he did, and I think he was a little bit disappointed sometimes in me because he would say, from time to time to me, "If you're every gonna be a man, now is the time for you to be one, and now you, you're not, you haven't, you're not making it," you know.  But he didn't, he didn't chide me too much, but those were the, those remarks though, they were really cut me because I already had the feeling that I was not where I ought to be physically, so.  But anyway Dad was a very strong person.  He was, he was intelligent for the formal education that he had.  He was a very intelligent person and he was able to turn the tasks that were, were mundane or tasks that would bother the average person, he could turn that task into something that would be fun, and he did that from time to time because he had a great sense of humor.  And he used that in his work and that is what helped to sustain him through some of the hardships that he had as a father, as a person trying to raise a family, trying to make it and trying to have a better life for himself.
Story_ID: 531428
Speaker 1: And what years would you say your father [Scott Payne] and mother [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] were born if you could recall that?
Speaker 2: My, my father was born in 1903, and my mother was born in 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was it.
Speaker 1: How far back can you go in your ancestry?  Can you go to the, to your grandparents or your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather I remember.  He's the earliest member of my family that I remember.  I remember when I was, he died when I was about seven years old, but I remember going to his house and he would sit on the front porch in a rocking chair, and I remember sitting on that porch, on the floor of that porch by the rocking chair and just sitting there with great-grandpa, you know.  I don't know what he talked about, I don't know what he said to me, but it was nice for me to go there and sit and just be in his company, and I enjoyed that very much.  And Mom and I would be, we would walk from our house to Papa's house, which is Moth- Mama's father, and we had to pass great-grandfather's house to get there.  And it seems to me that every time we passed great-grandfather's house, that's where he was sitting until he died.  And he died when I was about seven but I remember him very well.  Grandpa George [ph.] was his name.
Speaker 1: Now was this maternal or paternal great-grandfather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is maternal, maternal.  I don't remember, I didn't, my paternal grandfather--great-grandfather evidently had passed on by the time I was born 'cause I had no col- recollection of him at all.
Speaker 1: Now your grandparents, your mother's parents.
Speaker 2: My mother's parents were Lewis [Lewis Stribling] and Sylvia Stribling.  And they owned their own, as I said, they owned their own farm, and we just loved to go to Papa and--we called him Papa, called Grandfather, Papa.  We'd go to Papa and Grandmamma's house.  We loved going there.  Sometimes we'd go there after school.  We would spend the night there.  We'd spend weekends there, go there on Sunday for Sunday dinner.  And Grandmamma was a great cook and she could, I think she could cook anything that anybody every cooked and she knew just from memory how to make it very tasteful and how to really please people as far as their appetites were concerned.  Papa was a, he was slight built physically.  He was about like I am.  I guess that's where I took my size from is him because he wasn't a very big man but he was physically strong.  He had a very sound mind.  He was a leader kind of in the community.  He--in his church work he was really top person in the church.  His farm was very productive.  He grew all kinds of farm products and he had orchards of apples and peaches and, you name it, he had it on that farm and he cows and horses and he just had a very productive farm.
Speaker 1: And did you help work on the farm sometimes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did sometimes work on his farm.  I remember he had a sawmill on his farm and it was kind of a community sawmill because it being the only sawmill, not a sawmill, a cane mill, a syrup making mill.  I'm back up there, it was not a sawmill, it was a syrup mill where they, you took the sugarcane from the fields and brought it into his place and ground it up and, of course, the juice that came out of the cane would be run into a vat, and that vat would be heated, and of course that's where the syrup came from.  And during the fall of the year when they were harvesting the sugarcane, and making the su- the syrup and there, people came from all over the community to bring their cane there and get it processed into syrup.  And then of course this syrup was put into buckets and sealed and those buckets, gallon buckets, were taken into town and were sold to the merchants or the grocery store merchants in, in the city [Sulphur Springs, Texas].
Story_ID: 531429
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that your grandparents shared with you that you'd like to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Papa [Payne's maternal grandfather, Lewis Stribling], he was a kind of a truck farmer where he would take his wares to town.  On certain days, he would go out into the field and take the watermelons or the fruit and take it into the market square.  And I guess every town in the South had a market square, and that's where the farmers took their, their farm products to be sold to people as they came into town.  And he would do this religiously, and he would even go further than that.  He would go sometimes thirty miles away.  He would take it to another city, which was Greenville [Texas], which was thirty miles away.  But he tells the story about how he, when he was coming from Sulphur Springs [Texas] back out to his farm, it was always night.  He would just get in his wagon and go to sleep, and head the mules or the horses down the road and they would take him home and he would sleep all the way home.  We talked about that.  And sometimes when he went the thirty miles away, that would--came in handy because the horses would--they wanna go back to the barn, you know.  They know their, where home was, so he didn't have to worry about them staying on the road, so he could sleep.  He talked about that, how pleasant that was and how relieving it was because after staying up all day trying to sell his wares, he, he needed rest.  He was a religious man.  Papa was a very religious man.  He was--very strong belief in God.  He taught me a lot about God.  I used to work with him a lot, later when I was a teenager, in my late teens.  They had left Texas and gone up to California.  They spent their last days, last years of their lives up in central California and--'round Thornton [California], between Stockton [California] and Sacramento [California].  There was a ranch up there, and Papa--I would go up there in the summer after school.  And, h- Papa and I worked a lot out in the fields there, and I, I would sing church songs for Papa 'cause he liked it too.  I never heard him sing, but he liked to hear me sing, so I would sing the song that I had, that I sang a lot was 'The Lord Will Make A Way' ['The Lord Will Make A Way Somehow'] and I was singing that song and I guess it kind of worried Papa, I'm singing it over and over and over 'Make A Way Somehow.'  He would say to me, "Bo," that's my nickname, he said, "Bo, the Lord--the way is already made.  You just have to find it."  (Laughter) The way he wanted me to stop singing.  But, I had a lot of fun working with Papa.  But I was too lightweight to work with my uncles who did the heavy work like drive the big tractors and, and stuff like that, so they always, I always spent time working with Papa.  And those were some very pleasant days.
Story_ID: 531430
Speaker 1: Who gave you the nickname Bo?
Speaker 2: You know that was kind of a family name because I had a cousin that also has that nickname.  And it kind of, according to my sister, it came, it's an African name.  It, it was a name that were given to sons of certain chieftains in Africa, so somehow somebody decided that I should be called Beau and that's how I got that name.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory as I recall was when, I must have been about between four and five years old, and we had a dog.  We always had a dog seemingly when we were growing up.  And the dog's name, we called him Yuno [ph.], and some people would come and ask us, "What is your dog's name?"  We would say, "Yuno."  (Laughter) They--and of course you know that meant that they knew what his name was, but that was actually his name; his name was Yuno.  I remember that as a child.  I remember my sisters and I, I was in between two sisters.  I had an older sister and a younger one, and we'd be standing at the door when somebody came to the house.  And so that was one of the questions they would ask, and we'd all in unison say, "Yuno."  That was the name of the dog.  That's the earliest remembrance that I had.  The strongest memory that I had was my wanting to learn to write.  My older sister had, was in school.  She's a year older than I am, so she, at six she went to school.  I was five.  When she came home with her tablet and pencil and she'd be at the table writing, and I wanted to learn to write and I would cry and rant and rave, and Mama [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] would say, "Why don't you show him how to write?"  So sister would show me the way the teacher had showed her, and so I would do what I thought.  And, but it wasn't, so she'd tell me, "You don't know; you can't, you can't write."  But I, that was a strong thing with me.  I wanted to do whatever she could do, so he had to try to teach me when she came home from school what she had learned at school.
Speaker 1: You mentioned your siblings.  Could you give us the names of your siblings in birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My, my older sister, Ruth, in fact Ruth Ann Franklin Payne [sic. Ruth Payne Franklin].  The sister that's younger than I, Morie Lee Matthew she was--Matthew Payne [sic. Morie Payne Matthew (ph.)].  James [James Payne] is the younger brother; and then a sister, Willie Ruth [Willie Ruth Payne]; another brother Ocie, O-C-I-E [Ocie Payne]; and then John [John Payne]; and then Wilmer [Wilmer Payne]; and Charles [Charles Payne].
Story_ID: 531431
Speaker 1: What was life like with that family, with your family, around holidays and things of that nature?
Speaker 2: We had a lot of fun during the holidays, especially in Texas when, on the 19th of June [Juneteenth], and that was the black history independence day.  Dad [Scott Payne] would never work on the 19th of June.  If it killed him, he wouldn't, he wasn't going to hit a lick at a snake on the 19th of June 'cause that was the day that we were freed, and he was going to celebrate that.  So he would make sure that all of his work was as caught up as he could have it, and we had, in the fields, you know, in farming there is a time of the year when they do what they called, at that time, they'd do what they called laying, laying the crop by, which means that you, you're, you're finished cultivating, you've finishing plowing and you're done with all of that and you're now just waiting for the harvest, so he would make sure that he was, had his crops laid by, by the 19th of June, so that on the 19th of June we could take that day off.  Usually we went fishing and we had fish fries, or we had a picnic where the community came together, and sometimes we had what they called a big community stew.  That means that a big black pot was set in the center of some coals and a fire lighted underneath that, and we don't know what all was put in the pot, but whatever went in the pot, that's what the soup consisted of.  And we would have something like that; it was a community thing.  So we had a lot of fun, swimming, fishing and just eating, and sometimes baseball games.  The adults would play baseball games and the kids would play their little games, you know.  It's a, it was a great, great community spirit there when I was growing up [in Sulphur Springs, Texas].
Story_ID: 531432
Speaker 1: Tell us more about your community [in Sulphur Springs, Texas] and your neighbors around you.
Speaker 2: We moved a lot in that community because Dad [Scott Payne] was always trying to find a better house.  Some of the houses that we moved into were really out of shape.  But Dad and Mom [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne], they somehow could, could put together a house, fix a house up so it was comfortable for us.  If there were cracks in the all, they would chink those cracks with paper and flour dough and what have you to keep out the winter cold.  Mama was a, she was a great kitchen engineer because she could make a meal out of nothing.  She could go in that kitchen and, with barely anything and she could come up with a very tasty and decent meal for us, so she was very good at that.  We were well fed.  We always had chickens and we always had--so as a result we had eggs.  We had hogs that we would kill in the wintertime and butcher them and the meat that we got from those hogs we kept through the winter and as some of it was preserved to a point where we had to actually keep it on into the summer without having to put, refrigerate it.  So we had what we called smokehouses. That meat was hung in there and then smoked and that was part of the preserving of it so it would last a long time, the hams and what have you.  We, we worked in the fields a lot.  There was a lot weeds.  We had to cut weeds out of the crops, you know, we'd go to the fields and cut the weeds, we would--plowing.  I was plowing by the time I was seven years old though I wasn't--
Story_ID: 531433
Speaker 1: Mr. Payne [HistoryMaker Coy Payne], could you tell me the street that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: I grew up on, on, here in Arizona, Colora- not Colorado, but Saragosa Street.
Speaker 1: Saragosa.
Speaker 2: Saragosa Street is a street that's south of the downtown area.  It's about four blocks south of the central downtown area, in east Chandler [Arizona], east central Chandler.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that block, the community of that--around there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The houses, housing stock there was not very good.  There was no plumbing in the houses.  It was outside spigots.  That's where you got your water; you carried water into the house in pails or what have you, you know, for use.  Most of the houses were shotgun type houses.  You stand at one end of the house and you see all the way through.  And they were very close together.  The lots were, were close together there.  Not paved, street was not paved, very dusty when cars went down the street, up and down the street.  There was a cattle feed lot to the east of, on the east end across the railroad track that every afternoon we had to contend with the dust that was generated by the cattle moving around in the feed lock.  At feeding time, it was very dusty and there was always a kind of a greenish pall that hung over that end of town from where it covered that whole section that we lived in and almost went to the downtown area, but it would stop short of getting into, beyond north of the downtown area.  And we always say well it stopped that way because that's where all the, the white folks lived up there, so there're not gone let that dust go up there (laughter).  Not knowing that was nature that was doing it.  That was as far as it could go anyway.  Outhouses, so you had a combination of smells in the afternoon or whenever it rained that would belie the imagination because you, when you mix cattle dung with human waste, the scent--the stench is awful.  Sometimes, depending on which way the wind is blowing, or how--whether it was dry air or damp air, it was, if humidity was very high we really caught it from the smell.  All of the black people that lived in Chandler, except maybe one or two families, lived in that area.  And those are streets, Saragosa Street was on the north, Kesler Lane was to the south, so you had in between there, you had Morelos Street.  So we had three streets on the east side of Arizona Avenue [Arizona State Route 87] that housed all of the African Americans who lived in the City of Chandler at that time, except maybe two or three families that lived up on Chicago Street.  So it was a time when swamp coolers were in force, but since there was no running water to the houses, you had to continue to, someone had to continue to pour water over the cooler pads in order to get cool air through the house.  That was our house.  Now some houses they somehow had rigged up a water pipe from the, the faucet outside the house to the cooler so they would have continuous water.  But the city had not put in any sewer lines.  There was no water lines or anything then in that area when I was growing up there.
Story_ID: 531434
Speaker 1: Now when you first left Texas [Sulphur Springs, Texas], did you go straight to Chandler [Arizona]?
Speaker 2: No, when we left Texas we came, we landed at Eloy [Arizona] because we came in the wintertime and was in the cotton picking season in January to be exact.  Very cold when we left Texas, freezing cold when we left Texas.  I'll never forget how cold it was because when we stopped we made one of our stops in Amarillo, Texas on the way out here and it was so cold, we got out of the truck that we were in.  We were in a, a semi-tractor--trailer with the canvas top over it, and we had coal buckets in that trailer to, for heat and for warming food that we wanted to get warm.  But we got out in Amarillo in the middle of the night, and we, we just stepped out, stepped right back in it was so cold.  But we came there to Eloy, Arizona, January 1942, and we landed in the middle of a cotton field.  There was not, I had never seen, I had never seen so much cotton in all my life and I had seen a lot of cotton, but not that much.  It looked like it was cotton forever, from one mountain to the other.  And there were tents.  We lived in tents.  We had two tents because of the size of the family.  There were seven kids, Mother [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] and Dad [Scott Payne], and we lived there and picked cotton for, from January to March, first of April.  Then we moved to Chandler.
Speaker 1: Why did your father leave Texas?
Speaker 2: He had become disappointed with his way of life in Texas.  He--and the war [World War II, WWII] was going on at the time, and he had heard that there was money to be made, lots of money to be made, but you weren't gone make it down there being a sharecropper or working on a farm.  And he had heard about Arizona because his brother lived in Phoenix [Arizona].  He had a brother who had gotten out of the [U.S.] Army at the end of World War t- World War I [WWI].  He had gotten out of the Army at the end of World War I and he had come to Arizona and he was living in Phoenix so he had been writing back to Dad's mother [Minnie Payne] telling her about it and trying to get her to come out here.  And Dad would read those letters and then he finally decided, well, that must be a good place to go and I wanna take my family out there so they could have a better way of life, so.
Speaker 1: Now prior to leaving to come to, you said, Elroy--
Speaker 2: Eloy.
Speaker 1: Eloy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was your father involved in anything else in Texas besides sharecropping?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.  He was a community man.  In fact, Dad was on the school board.  He had really ideas about education.  Even though he only had a fifth grade education, he felt strongly about the importance of education.  And he would say to me that he wanted me to get all the education I could get, but he didn't think I would be able to get it in Texas.  He said, "If you stay here, if I stay here with you, you're gonna end up just like me, working as a sharecropper, and we don't want, I don't want that.  I want something better for you."  He said, "I don't know, but," and he said, "you gotta, you gotta start at the bottom and go up."  And so that's what we want to do, that's what he wanted to do, that's what he saw Arizona being able to do for him.  He would tell me things like, you know he said, "I don't know but one job where you can start at the top, and that's digging a hole, and you don't wanna, you don't want to be a hole digger all your life, so we're going, we're gonna get to a place where you can have better education."
Story_ID: 531435
Speaker 1: Tell us about the school board that he [Payne's father, Scott Payne] was on [in Sulphur Springs, Texas].
Speaker 2: School board that he was on was for the black community.  He, he served with other blacks on that board.
Speaker 1: How many were on the board?
Speaker 2: There were seven on that board and they, they just did, made the decisions about what was to happen as far as the black schools were concerned in that county or in that district.  For instance, they, they made a decision to tear down the old school and build a new one.  The old school had two stories.  It was, on the ground floor you had grades one through four, and on the top you had five through eight.  And they decided to tear that down and build a new one, and they did.  They built a brand new school there with partitions, and with--just single story, but they had partitions between the rooms so that it could open up the rooms and all the kids could view one area.  That was very modern for that time.  Somehow there was a dispute that came up between the blacks and the whites in the community.  Some of the whites thought the blacks had a better school than the whites did because we had the newest school in the area and somehow that school ended up being burned down.  Somebody burned it down and, of course, they, they put some of the blame on Dad.  They said that he did it because they found an oil container that was his at the site of the school after the fire and so on.  They, they had a little trial about it and so on, but he got off or whatever.  They dropped the charges against him, but he knew that his time was just about up, that he needed to get out of that community so he started to plan a little bit more earnestly on getting out.
Speaker 1: Was this school board, an elected position or volunteer position (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, it was an elected position.  It was an elected position, yes.
Speaker 1: How long were the tenures, or how long were the terms?
Speaker 2: I don't know what the terms were, I don't know, but I'm sure they were staggered, but I don't know how, how long a person could serve, should serve on board once elected.  But he decided then along, well he was trying to make up his mind to leave anyway because he was, he getting a little bit discouraged about the way of life.
Story_ID: 531436
Speaker 1: So he decided to leave and, of course, we were living on a, on a, on a farmer's place, white farmer's place.  And he--course he didn't want us to go because the war [World War II, WWII] was on and it was hard to find help, you know.  You needed families, you needed people who you could depend on to help you to raise those crops.  So he had said to Dad one day that, "Scott [Scott Payne], you don't, you take all those kids, all those children and go to Arizona, y'all gonna starve to death out there.  You'll never make it, you'll, you'll die because you don't--you won't be able to find work.  So you ought to stay here."  Dad said, "No, I'm, I'm gonna go."  And so he said to Dad, "Well since you're gonna go Scott, why don't you leave that oldest boy of yours with me?"  He was talking about me.  "Leave him here with me."  Says, "He, he can already read and write, that's all he needs to know.  He can sign his name and he can read some.  He doesn't need to know much more than that.  So leave him here with me and let him make me a good hand.  Let him work for me.  I'll take care of him."  And Dad said, "Oh, no, no, I'm--he's my oldest son; I'm definitely gonna take him."  But that was one of the things that came up as a result of his leaving.  The other thing that came up when we, when we did leave, we got to the border between Texas and New Mexico there was a roadblock there, set up there.  And these were farmers who had come all the way from down in the area where we lived and set up on, on the border to keep migrants from crossing into New Mexico and into Arizona.  Of course they couldn't do it because the law wouldn't allow them to do it, but they did try to discourage us from coming even after we got to New Mexico.  So, but Dad, he knew it was time to go, and so he dropped all of his community ties about being on the school board [in Sulphur Springs, Texas].  The school had been burned down.  We had, had to have chur- have school in the basement of the church there and one year because of that, Dad had to take us to live with his parents [Minnie Payne and Jasper Payne] who lived in another city in order for us to go to school.  Which was very disappointing and discouraging to me and I think a lot of things that happened to me as far as school is concerned started to happen then because I was away from my family and away from family ties and I needed those family ties and I, when I was with my grandparents in that other city, and it seems to me that the teachers were really mean and cruel, you know.  They would whip you if you didn't understand.  If you didn't do your work, you got a whipping.  Well, how can you understand something that they not teaching you to understand and they gone whip you and make you understand.  Anyway, I think that, that kind of set me to thinking that, hey, I don't know if school is all that it ought to be--all that they say it is, you know.
Speaker 2: What city was this school in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was in Commerce, Texas.  So I really hated, that was really a blotch on my school life 'cause I hated that year that we spent there with a purple passion.  And I'm sure that I did, I must have failed a grade.  I think I did fail a grade, failed that grade that year.
Speaker 2: What grade would that have been?
Speaker 1: That would have been the fifth grade.  And then the next year, of course, we were in Arizona and because of us being out of school for so much, you know I was set back again.  So instead of going into the seventh grade when we came to Arizona where I should have been, I went into the sixth grade [at Booker T. Washington Elementary School, Mesa, Arizona].  And, of course, by now I'm two years behind where I should be you know.  I should be graduating at eighteen.  This is gonna make me graduate from, from high school at twenty, so, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did you feel personally about the move to Arizona?
Speaker 1: Bittersweet, was excited because we were going to a place that nobody knew that much about and it seemed really like it would be a great place to go because when Dad had told us, so that was the good part about it.  But the other part was, was leaving a place that was very familiar to me, that I had known all my life up to this point, didn't know how I was gone be able to cope with a strange place as far away as Arizona.  And we were leaving our relatives: grandmothers and grandfathers and uncles and aunts, cousins and all that.  We were gonna go and leave all of that.  So it, it was kind of a bittersweet experience.
Story_ID: 531437
Speaker 1: So your father [Scott Payne] had aspirations of moving for, for better education for his family.  You get to Chandler [Arizona], what happens?
Speaker 2: We, we come to Eloy [Arizona], and we picked cotton for three months because we needed to get provisions, we needed to get transportation.  We had no transportation.  So we needed a car actually.  So Dad--we worked for three months, everybody worked, and we made enough money to purchase a car.  He bought a 1929 Model A [Ford Model A], and then he decided that well, it's about time for us to get the kids in school.  He and Mom [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] decided it's time for us to go to school.  So he came to Chandler, and he found a rancher out south of town here out on Chandler Heights Road and talked to him about his needs and he needed some hands to work on his, his ranch.  And he would provide a place for them to stay, free of charge.  And he had a, an old store on his place, and so he converted that store into living quarters for two families, one in one end of it an one in the other end.  So two like families lived in that, that old converted store.  And we worked on his farm and then we went to school from there, Ocotillo Elementary School [Chandler, Arizona].  At--well first of all we, there was no school in Chandler for blacks.  Dad had always heard that blacks, black and white kids went to school together in Arizona.  That was one of the selling points to him.  He heard, somebody had told him that.  "You go out to Arizona your kids be going to school with white kids."  Say, "They all went to the same school."  And so that was great, but when he got to Chandler there was, we couldn't go to school with the white kids, and there was no school for blacks in Chandler.  So, in talking with the black families that lived in Chandler, we found out, Dad found out that, "Your kids, they're gonna have to go to Mesa [Arizona] because there's an all-black elementary school over in Mesa [Booker T. Washington Elementary School], so, this is where our kids are going, your kids will have to go there too."
Speaker 1: How far is Mesa from Chandler?
Speaker 2: Mesa is eight miles from he- from center of Chandler.  We were five miles further out, so it was about thirteen, fourteen miles one way.  But somehow Mesa agreed to pick us up off that Chandler Heights Road and transport us into Mesa to the all-black elementary school for that first year that we were here.  So we went to that school.  And we finished that grade that year and, and the next year, Chandler decided well, or I guess maybe, maybe Mesa put pressure on Chandler to get a school for your own kids, Chandler School District [Chandler Unified School District], you need to provide schooling for your own kids.  There is a law, there was somewhat of a law that said that if there are thirteen kids living in a school district, the school, a school has to be provided for them.  So I think we had reached the number of thirteen or more black kids living in Chandler School District, so this spurred the district to come up with a school for all those black kids to go to in the Chandler district.  Consequently, we were, they opened some office buildings over at Ocotillo, Goodyear [Ocotillo, Chandler, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Was Chandler as segregated as Texas?
Speaker 2: In some cases it was more segregated.  Living wise, it was more segregated.  In Texas, you had whites and blacks living next to each other out in the countryside, not in the towns, but in the countryside, you would find a black family living here, go up the road a little further up, there's a white family.  So in that community there was a mixture, but in Arizona that was not so.  You, if you were black you lived in one area and whites lived in another.  So in that way it was more segregated, and then we found out that in Arizona we thought differently.  We thought we can go in that store, we can go in that restaurant.  In Texas, we knew we couldn't.  But in Arizona we thought we could.  We, when we found out when we got there that we can't.  So that was, that was a big difference.
Speaker 1: What was your father's reaction at this point?
Speaker 2: Dad was interested in trying to make a better living for, for us, so he was hard at work, physically work.  He was a laborer.  He did not have any skills as far as a profession would go.  So he, his job was to provide for his seven, now eight kids and then pretty soon nine kids.  He--that was his sole thing to do then.  So he, he didn't get involved in, in trying to make things better for us.  He left that to us.  We go on out, you go on out there and you do the best you can under whatever circumstances you find yourself and you'll be all right.  That was his attitude then.
Story_ID: 531438
Speaker 1: Now you're at Mesa [Arizona] in the sixth grade [at Booker T. Washington Elementary School].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who influenced you there, or anybody there in particular that you can call by name?
Speaker 2: There was one t- my sixth grade teacher, his name was Mr. Dickey [Lloyd D. Dickey].  He was very influential in my life because he, to me, was the example of the person that I really wanted to be like.  And I knew that what I needed was what I was gonna get out of those, his class now and other classes that I would be taking in the future.  So it kind of set me on a different path, a different look at education and the value of education.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Mesa?
Speaker 2: We, we spent the rest of that year.  We went there in, in March, April, and, of course, school was out in May, or June rather.  And then the next year Chandler [Arizona] opened a school [Ocotillo Elementary School] out in Goodyear, or Ocotillo [Chandler, Arizona], for blacks in the Chandler School District [Chandler Unified School District], so we went there.
Speaker 1: At this point, did you have any dreams or aspirations?
Speaker 2: I guess what I wanted at this point was just equal treatment.  I wanted to be treated equal to white kids.  I had that feeling.  I wondered why we lived almost next door to a school and we could not go to that school.  And I thought about how much better it would be for me if I could walk to that school rather than to have to catch a bus and go miles away to the school that I'm allowed to go to.  I started to wonder about what was going on in the City of Chandler, you know who made the decisions, who, who said what was supposed to be what.  And I would pass, like go downtown and on the evenings when the city council met, passed that building where they were meeting and I wondered who was in there.  And I, and I would say to myself well I know my dad [Scott Payne] or nobody like him is in there, so what kind of decisions are they making?  And can they make a decision about me?  Because I don't have, there's nobody in there like me, so they probably don't make good decisions about me.  That's what, that's what I began to think as I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was thirteen, fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: Now you, you're in school, you have these aspirations.  What type of student were you at this point?
Speaker 2: Average student, average student who had the potential to do better but I wouldn't.  A lot of times I didn't because I, there were people that I would, didn't want to outshine.  I held myself back in some cases.  Some things that I could do well, I wouldn't do well, because I had a friend who didn't do them quite so well, didn't do those things quite so well, so I wanted to be equal to them.
Story_ID: 531439
Speaker 1: Who were some of these friends?
Speaker 2: There was one, one boy in particular, his name is R.D. Grant [ph.], we were bosom buddies and he was, he was in the sixth grade that year that I was in the sixth grade [at Booker T. Washington Elementary School] over in Mesa [Arizona].  We both, we were six graders and he was very slow I think, you know, in his learning and so on and that.  So, rather than to do what I thought is offend him, I will take myself out, be just like him, you know, rather than excel.  So, my grades reflected that, an average student.  It could have been, I should have done better.
Speaker 1: How was your overall behavior?
Speaker 2: I--very--no problem.  I, and teachers had no problem with me.  I never get into it with anyone.  I did get into fights and stuff because that's just normal for kids.  I remember this one boy in Mesa, in the Mesa school in that sixth grade class he sat behind me.  Every day I would, I would get into my seat early because I didn't want the teacher to say, "Well you're late," and so on.  I'd always be sitting and he would come in and he had to pass me when he come and he would either, he would hit me on the head with a pencil, or when he sat down he would thump my head like that, or he would walk by and he'd step on my foot and twist around on my shoe, scuff up my shoes.  He did that for, oh, a number of days and I put up with it.  I was afraid.  I said, nah, I don't like what he's doing, but I don't know how to do anything about it, you know.  I don't want to fight him outside because I won't have my help out there.  He'll probably (laughter) do me in, but I don't want to fight inside because I know I'm gonna get a, I'm gonna get a swapping, I'm gonna get, my parents [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne and Scott Payne] gonna get involved and so on.  So what do I do?  Well, one day he came I had some new shoes and I'm sitting there at my desk doing my work, he comes by and he steps on my new shoes.  He twists around on my new shoes.  I jumped up and I hit him.  I popped him right on the cheek.  And he started crying.  I said, "Oh."  I thought he (laughter)--I know I'm in for it if the teachers don't stop this, I'm gonna be in trouble.  But teacher didn't have to stop it.  That's all it took 'cause I, I stood up and hit him as hard as I could and he just went to pieces.
Speaker 1: Do you recall his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Wallace [ph.].  And after that I had no more problems out of him.  He was, we were best friend, best buddy.
Story_ID: 531440
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned earlier that your family was religious.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you attend church?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday that we could get there we were in church.  Mama [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] made sure that we went to church.  Sunday school, church and anything that was after church.  You know, if we had any afternoon meetings, we always went to those, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what, what church was that?
Speaker 2: It was the Mount Olive Baptist Church [Mount Olive Missionary Baptist Church] right down, it's right down here on, at 472--473 South Colorado Street [Chandler, Arizona].
Speaker 1: So you were Baptist?
Speaker 2: Baptist, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what were your experiences in church as a young man?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, before we left Texas, I was twelve years old before we left there.  So we had always been taught in our Sunday school classes that when you are below twelve, you know, when you're younger than twelve, your parents are responsible for you.  And if you should die, it's not you who would have to answer, but your parents will have to answer if you should die before you are twelve.  Then when you turn twelve, you gotta--that's your, it's you then, you're responsible for anything you do, so you gotta pay for it.  So we, we always believed, I've always believed that when I'm twelve I'm gonna get baptized for sure 'cause I don't want to die and go to hell.  So, and I had a, had a cousin who, when we were eight, he had appendicitis and for living way out in the country where we did, they didn't get him to the doctor in time so he, it ruptured and he died.  But before this happened he and I would talk a lot and we would always talk about how Jesus was our buddy and he would take care of us if we died before we're twelve, but we know when get to be twelve that we better get in the church or we might end up in hell.  And I was so glad that he, I knew he went to heaven.  His name was Bobby Gene [ph.].  I said, now Bobby Gene went to heaven, I sure want to go heaven, so I'm gonna make sure that I'm right so I joined church when I was twelve.  My sister and I--younger sister [Morie Payne Matthew (ph.)] and I, we joined the same night because they were having a revival and we went there for the purpose to do that.  So after that, I had an experience out in the field, I was working out in the field and I was singing church songs and praying 'cause I'm trying to feel my change, you know.  And I even tried preaching a little bit you know.  I was preaching to the cotton stalks and so on, you know.  So I really had a great experience out there, beginning of my religious life, and it, it paid off, because when we came to Arizona the first thing we did, we got ourselves connected with a church, at Mama's insistence.  She said, "No, you got to join Mount Olive Baptist Church."  So, because that's the church we went to.  So we did.  That's where I met my wife [Willie Woods Payne], and my wife, too, she was a church member too, so we kind of got together through that.
Story_ID: 531451
Speaker 1: And we're in Ocotillo Elementary School [Chandler, Arizona].  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: Ocotillo, I was there two years, seventh and eighth grade at Ocotillo.  We lived on the Chandler Heights Road, which was about a mile, couple of miles from the school so we walked from our house over to the school at Ocotillo.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends at Ocotillo?
Speaker 2: I had a friend whose name is Robert [ph.]; Jimmy [ph.]; Billy [ph.].  Some of the girls were Ardie Mae [ph.]; Joella [ph.]; Johnnie Lou [ph.]; Gladys [ph.].  Those were, those were some of the students that I was friends with there.
Speaker 1: What influenced with you at this point in your life?
Speaker 2: At Ocotillo, my teacher, my seventh and eighth grade teacher because she taught grades five through eight.  We had two teachers there.  One had grades one through four, the other one had grades five through eight.  My seventh and eighth grade teacher was the one that influenced me the most at Ocotillo.  And I was influenced by her by the way she spoke.  She was very articulate.  She, she had good command of the English language.  She spoke very well.  I wanted to speak like she did.  I wanted to be able to talk the way she did.  So I was now beginning to decide that higher education or more education was gonna be better for me.  And then too I did not like too much--and I wasn't that strong so I, the physical work in the fields did not appeal to me.  A lot of kids during that time when they finished the eighth grade they went to the fields and went to work.  But I wanted to get ready to go to college, and so I started, I think, to think about college and when I was in the seventh grade at Ocotillo.
Speaker 1: What was this teacher's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was, at the time her name was Perdue, Robie Perdue.  She became Robinson and her, she married again so sh- her, the last name she had was Robie Robinson [Robie Perdue Robinson].  But she was a wonderful person, a great teacher.
Story_ID: 531452
Speaker 1: So seventh and eighth grade you're going to Ocotillo [Ocotillo Elementary School, Chandler, Arizona].  Were there any other activities you did during those years?
Speaker 2: We were in, in the Scout troop.  Ms. Perdue [Robie Perdue Robinson] lived in Phoenix [Arizona], so she would, she knew that we needed extracurricular activities to be involved in as boys especially, so she took it upon herself to contact the Scout troop in Phoenix, it was at Eastlake Park [Phoenix, Arizona] in a black neighborhood and get us into that Scout troop, signed us up.  Well we got over there and got signed up and got in and became Boy Scouts as a result of her effort.  She would take us home with her on the weekends, like on Friday night, and that's when they had the Scout meetings on Fridays, so we'd go to the Scout meetings and then on Saturday she would bring us back.
Speaker 1: And did you have any other activities along with the Scout meeting, at school?
Speaker 2: Scout, Boy Scouts was kind of it as far as extracurricular activities went, organized extracurricular activities.  Of course, we had all the other things that kids do, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have to work at all during that time?
Speaker 2: Working was the mainstay.  We never had any holidays.  When school was out for a holiday, we went to the fields.  So it was that way all the way up through the high school [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona].
Story_ID: 531453
Speaker 1: So you were there [Ocotillo Elementary School, Chandler, Arizona] two years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then high school comes upon you, and what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School] in Phoenix [Arizona].
Speaker 1: And what age would you have been at that point?
Speaker 2: I, I went to Carver, I was sixteen my freshman year.
Speaker 1: So that would have been what year?
Speaker 2: That was 1945.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945], you're sixteen years old, you go to Carver High School--
Speaker 2: Carver High School.
Speaker 1: --in Phoenix.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Describe your experiences there for me.
Speaker 2: Well first of all, it, it was such a major change until it was, really it, it was an upheaval in my life.  Even though I wanted to go, I had a lot of apprehension.  I had a lot of fear.  First, to ride the bus for an hour to get there.  Which, that, that was new; we had not done that.  And then to walk for another thirty minutes, twenty or thirty minutes to get from where the bus left us off down to the school.  We had to cross railroad tracks.  All the railroad tracks that go into Phoenix came, we had to cross them.  Some mornings we would get to those railroad tracks and there would be so many trains, so many box cars and stuff sitting on the track or moving up and down that track.  It was really dangerous for us to cross that track, but nobody thought about the danger there might be.  So we had to learn safety measures to get us from where we got off the bus down to the school through those trains and box cars that are sitting on those tracks, and there were many tracks in there.  But we learned how to do that.  And, but that first day, I recall my sister [Ruth Payne Franklin], she had already been at Carver one year, and she had said to my younger sister [Morie Payne Matthew (ph.)] and I as we walked from the bus stop down to the school.  She said, "Now look, don't, don't tell anybody how old you are," 'cause we were all older than what we should be, you know.  I should have been a sophomore in high school.  She said, "Don't tell anybody."  It, it worked out so nobody asked.  Of course the school knew.  The principal's office, they knew, but they, they didn't make no big issue out of it anyway.  And the kids, the kids that we associated with, they never asked me how old I--.  They don't know today how old I am.  They don't know that I'm two years older than they are and that never, it never came out that I was.
Story_ID: 531454
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was the principal?
Speaker 2: W.A. Robinson was the principal.  But we were, we were kind of sheltered.  Mr. Robinson, he knew Dad [Scott Payne] and Dad had talked to him and he knew about us and the trials that we had out here at Chandler [Arizona] trying to get to school and then trying to get to Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona], so he was very sympathetic toward us.  And he went out of his way to do things to make life comfortable for us, and he also had the teachers do the same thing 'cause he knew what problems we had struggled with trying to get to school, let alone trying to be students in that school.  But once we got in there and got going, he expected as much out of us as he did anybody else, or maybe more.  You gonna do better, you got to do better 'cause of where you come from, you, you struggled, you've been struggling all your life.  Adversity has been a part of your life, so don't let this stop you; you're now ready to go on.
Speaker 1: What was his background as a principal and educator?
Speaker 2: Mr. Robinson had come from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  He, he had worked on the faculty down there.  I think he was, he had a master's degree in administration, so he was a great administrator.  He was a great principal.  I can remember him now standing in the hallway directing kids to and from classes because you know you had kids there who they'd just as soon go out the door as to go to class.  They just as soon leave as to go to class.  He would stand there and direct 'em, personally, call 'em by name.  He knew every kid by name and out of all those kids there, and get 'em into those classes.
Story_ID: 531455
Speaker 1: Now what was the racial makeup at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: It was all black.
Speaker 1: All black.
Speaker 2: All black.  It was an all-black high school set aside for the education of African American kids in the Phoenix Union School District [Phoenix Union High School District].
Speaker 1: How about the teachers there?  Who were they?
Speaker 2: The teachers were all black.
Speaker 1: And where were they, were they all native Arizona--
Speaker 2: They all came from the South.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson], when he came, and he came the year that I was a freshman there, when he came he brought his faculty with him.  All those he didn't bring with him, he reached back and got them to make sure--.  And from what I understood, was that he wanted to make sure that we had the very best teachers that money could buy, and he did.  And he would not accept a teacher unless that teacher had a master's degree in their field.  The--consequently, the Phoenix Union system, these were the first teachers that the Phoenix Union school system had in it that had master's degrees in that number.  And there were those black teachers that he had imported from the South to teach these little cotton picking kids that come out of these nooks and crannies out in this country here to give them an education.  In fact, Carver was a college preparatory school.  If you went to Carver, if you graduated from Carver, you were ready to go to college.  They didn't, they didn't spare the rod.
Speaker 1: What was the buzz in the community about Carver being this advanced school as you put it?
Speaker 2: The only buzz that was out there that I can know about, that I know about, that I witnessed, was that Carver was exceptional in athletics.  The football team, the basketball team and the track and field teams; they were the best in the state.  They took state records year after year after year.
Speaker 1: Were they--
Speaker 2: Nothing academic, not too much academically did I hear.  I'm sure there was a lot of academic praise too, but, but mainly, you know, what the world grasps, they grabbed after the athletics.  And Carver was renowned as far as athletics goes.  They had the great teams: football; basketball; baseball; what have you.
Speaker 1: So Carver had both academic and athletic prowess at this time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Prowess, yes, at the time, and we had an ROTC program [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], of course we stood out in that 'cause we competed with the other schools in the district.  Even though we got second rate equipment, we got rifles that needed to be redone when we got 'em.  We got clothes, the uniforms that we got?  We had to take 'em down to the home ec [home economics] department.  They had to patch 'em, you know, fix 'em up so we could wear 'em and come out and compete with the white schools in the district.  But we did that and we, a lot of time we took first place for the effort, other teachers' encouragement.  And we were proud, we were proud.  You, we're just not gone take this lying down.  We're gonna, we are going to do it.  And it was inspiration from the teachers.  They were pushing us.
Speaker 1: Besides Mr. Robinson as principal, who was some of the teachers who influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Grigsby [HistoryMaker Jefferson Eugene Grigsby] was one.  He'll tell you something about it.  J.S. Flipper [Joseph Simeon Flipper II]; Augustus Shaw; Harrison [Charles Alfred Harrison, Sr.]; Frazier [Robert T. Frazier]; Corbin [William Corbin]; Seneca [Arlena Seneca], she just passed away not too long ago, she was the biology teacher; Pato [ph.], Spanish teacher.  I really liked her 'cause I had a lot of fun in that Spanish class learning Spanish.  Edwards [ph.], Ms. Edwards was business.  She was, she taught typing, to girls only.  The boys didn't take any typing.  (Laughter) Now, our later years I thought boy I wish I had taken typing in high school, of course if I could have taken typing in high school I would have been a lot better off in my college classes, but I took typing as a freshman in college [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].  That's when I first got, took typing.
Speaker 1: Were there any classes that were, that were boys only?  As typing was girls only, were there any boys only classes?
Speaker 2: No, industrial arts.
Speaker 1: So only boys took that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, boys took that, that's all, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now besides your schooling, and, I'm sure that--how are your grades at this point?
Speaker 2: Average grades.  I was doing average, Cs, Bs, a B every once in a while.
Speaker 1: Were you doing it for the same reasons as earlier?
Speaker 2: S- not so much so.  By now, I had kind of accepted this as my, that's how I am, that's who I am.  I cannot do any better.  You know I begin to look at myself as that kind of a person, you know an average, academically average person.  But which was not the truth, far from the truth, but that's what I accepted at the time.
Story_ID: 531456
Speaker 1: Mr. Payne [HistoryMaker Coy Payne], besides your schooling, how did you spend time at this point, your extra time?  Any other activities you may have been personally involved in?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Working and going to school [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona].  That was mainly the activity that I participated in: working and going to school.  I wanted to be in athletics, but who's gonna look at a ninety-eight pound, four foot-something tall boy, you know.  I went out, went out for football.  Mr. Shaw [Augustus Shaw]--I'd go out there because my friend was out there, so I go out.  Dennis [ph.] would--he, Mr. Shaw, the coach, would say, "Dennis you can do it, Dennis you can do it."  And then when I, it was my time to do something, he said, "Well, why don't you go, go over there, go to home ec [home economics] or something.  You don't need to be out there playing; where he come from?"  Because I was so small, you know, and that's, that was the attitude.  So my aspirations and my hopes for becoming, for playing football and developing myself into some kind of a physical person was dash- were dashed at that time.  So I would do, I worked in the field mainly and did odd jobs and those kind of things.  Every summer I went to the ranch [in California] where my [maternal] grandparents [Sylvia Stribling and Lewis Stribling] lived, and worked there to make money so I could have money to buy clothes and books with when I came back in the fall of the year.
Story_ID: 531457
Speaker 1: How long were you at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Okay you--
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945] to '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945] to 1949?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now college is coming.
Speaker 2: College is coming up.  So I get out of school in 1949, the summer of 1949, I go to the ranch [in California] and I work because I'm gonna have enough money when I come back to buy my books, pay tuition, go to ASU [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Prior to that, can you tell us how you made the decision to go to college and to ASU?
Speaker 2: That, that was never any doubt in my mind that I was gonna go to college.  And I knew it was gonna be ASU from, from the start.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because like I said, because Carver was a college prep school.  If you graduated from Carver that was the next step is go to college.  At ASU, Arizona State Teachers College was out there, you know, so right by, so it would be easy for me to go there to Arizona State Teachers College.  And that's what I expected to do and I was trying to make enough money to do that so that, that year, right out of high school, I did go to the ranch to work, but then by the end of summer, by the time for school to start, I didn't have the money that I thought I should have, so I stayed a little longer so I missed getting into ASU that first semester, fall semester.  And then I came home and I worked at the rest of the year, the rest of the winter picking cotton here in Arizona to add to what money I had.  So by the end of the cotton season, which was in January, or somewhere in January, I was able to, and the second semester started in January so I was able to go to ASU the second semester.  So I went to ASU second semester.
Speaker 1: Did you have a major in mind as you entered college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I, I was majoring in, in English and a minor in social studies, or history.
Speaker 1: And why did you pick those two?
Speaker 2: I, I thought that I was really good in English, that I could do well, and I wanted to get into speech and so on, you know, and I figured in the English department that would be part of the curriculum there is public speaking and so on.
Speaker 1: In your senior year to your college freshman year, what where the conversations like with your parents about your next step?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there was much talk about it except that Mama [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] from time to time would say, "You know you need to get in school, you need to find a good job or get in school."  You know, that kind of ultimatum that she gave me, and so did Dad [Scott Payne].  Of course Dad was always a proponent of education.  The more you have, the more you--the better you'll do.  So he, he didn't say very much but he was always pushing for me to go back to school.
Story_ID: 531458
Speaker 1: So it's 1949 somewhere thereabouts?
Speaker 2: Well, actually it's 1950 now that I'm, I entered ASU [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], or as I say teachers college for the second semester of the '49 [1949], '50 [1950] school year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was the spring of 1950, my first semester at ASU or Arizona State Teachers College.
Speaker 1: So what happened when you got there?
Speaker 2: First of all, it was a cultural shock.  The classrooms are all white.  I was the only, a lot of times I was the only black in, in the classroom.  That was hard to relate to.  It was hard for me to be myself to do, to re- to meet the requirements, but I did manage to do the studying that I needed to do and complete that second semester.  And, then the next year, I was gonna go to school if I could find a part-time job.  Well, there was no part-time job that lasted long enough for me to work out so it fit my schedule of classes and jo- and work.  So I just decided not to go to ASU that fall of '50 [1950], '50 [1950]-'51 [1951] school year, decided not to go, and I went up to the ranch [in California] that summer and stayed into the winter and came back.  Well, when I came back that winter, say in December, January, I had a draft notice.  It was, they were gonna, I was being drafted.  So, I just didn't worry about it anymore.  I didn't worry about anything.  I just waited for the draft.
Speaker 1: Were any of the other siblings in school at that time?
Speaker 2: Not, my sister, my younger sister [Morie Payne Matthew (ph.)] was.  She was in nursing school by now.  She had gone, she had finished, she had gone two years at ASU and she was in nursing school.
Speaker 1: How was she--
Speaker 2: Over in Berkeley.
Speaker 1: --how was she paying for her--?
Speaker 2: Family, and that was one reason why I could get no help from the family because we all had to help her sometimes with money that she needed to, to pursue a nursing career.  So, but that was the sacrifices that we, we made.  Our parents [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne and Scott Payne] wanted it and we didn't say no and it happened.
Speaker 1: Did she eventually become a nurse?
Speaker 2: She did, became a registered nurse, and worked at it until she retired.
Story_ID: 531459
Speaker 1: So 1950 you get drafted.  You're about twenty-one years old I would expect (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get--fifty-one [1951], in January 1951.
Speaker 1: And then what happens?
Speaker 2: I go from here [Chandler, Arizona] to middle of California, the desert out there, Camp Roberts [California] basic training.  Spend three and a-half months, fourteen weeks or so in basic training.
Speaker 1: How was that experience?
Speaker 2: I loved it 'cause I gained, I only weighed 110 pounds when I went in there.  And I gained, by the time I was through basic training, I was up to about a 155, 60 [160] pounds.  And oh, man, that was the cat's meow for me.  I was happy.  I'm a, I'm strong now, you know, physical specimen here, so I loved it.  Basic training was, was not a problem for me.  I sailed through basic training 'cause I just ate it up; that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: And what was your job in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: I was infantry, rifleman.  So at the end of basic training they had always, always told us, and that's why we giving you this kind of basic training is that, "All of you, most, I'd say 99 percent of you gone end up in Korea, and there's a war going on over there [Korean War].  And if you don't get what we have for you here, you ain't liable to last, so you need make sure you to take in what we telling you.  If you do, you can handle yourself.  You can take care of yourself when you get over there.  So, but that's where you going."  And that's true, that was true.  I think about two guys out of the whole outfit went to Europe.  The rest of us, directly to the Far East and to combat.
Speaker 1: Now was this right after basic training?
Speaker 2: That was right after basic training.  We, we were in basic training from January to June.  And then it was overseas, it was over to the Far East.
Story_ID: 531460
Speaker 1: So you get drafted [into the U.S. Army], you do your basic training [at Camp Roberts, California], now you're in, you been shipped off to Korea.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: What were your feelings at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I came home [Chandler, Arizona].  They gave us a seven day delay en route so we could come home and say goodbye to our friends and relatives, and seven days later we at that debarkation center of the Camp Stoneman, California [Camp Stoneman, Pittsburg, California].  So I came home for the seven days, enjoyed my stay at home, you know, we had, they had parties for me.  We just kind of lived it up a little bit.  At the end of those seven days though I was back on the train and up to Camp Stoneman, and there shipped down to Pier 91 [Seattle, Washington] out of San Francisco [California].  That's our troop transport.  It was six thousand troops on that transport, and we set sail.
Speaker 1: When you went home for those seven days, what was your conversation like with your mom and dad?
Speaker 2: I didn't spend much time with Mom [Vergie Mae Stribling Payne] and Dad [Scott Payne], man (laughter).  I had other fish to fry.  I was too busy associating with my friends really.  I spent a little time with the family, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you in Korea?
Speaker 2: I was in Korea from, let's see, I got over there in July and the outfit pulled out of Korea in January, January.  So we were from July to January my outfit was in Korea.
Speaker 1: How did you feel being in this foreign country?
Speaker 2: At first I began to look for familiarity, you know, familiarity.  Some places, parts of it looked like Texas.  I remember writing home to my mother and she asked me how, how was it over there, and what was it like.  And I told her, "Well, some days it's just like it was in Texas, you know.  I feel the same way I did when I was a kid growing up in Texas."  And then there was hot and it was dry in the summer months, very hot; very cold in the wintertime.  Getting there wasn't, wasn't too much that happened, but that long trip on the troop transport.  It took us eighteen days from San Francisco to Yokohama [Japan].  And by the time we got to Yokohama, we were fit to be tied.  We done been on that ship eighteen days and we got off and, of course, they sent us to a replacement center, and at the replacement center we were given new clothes, combat clothes now.  We've had garrison clothes, so they gave us waterproof suits and stuff, suspenders and stuff, to hold up those cartridge belts and so on.  So we get all of that, we get a new rifle.  We had to go to the rifle range and zero the rifle in, you know, clean it up, make sure it's--fires true.  We spent about a week in Japan doing that.  Then they sent us up to the port of debarkation, which is called Sasebo, Japan.  And Sasebo, Japan, they gave us a sack lunch.  They had a ham and cheese sandwich with a boiled egg and an apple.  And then they put, we got onboard these Japanese fishing boats which had straw mats where we slept.  It was an overnight trip from Sasebo, Japan to Busan, Korea [Busan, South Korea].  So we get on there and the next morning we're in Korea.  They had a big sign up there where we got off, when we got off the boat, they had a sign up there that said, "You are now entering a port where the most important people in the world have gone through."  And we go in and they put us on cattle trucks.  They run us up to a rail line and we get off the trucks in, onto a train.
Story_ID: 531468
Speaker 1: I mean before getting out on the train [in Busan, South Korea], we had been issued one round of ammo for the rifle that we carried, the M1 rifle we carried.  Each person got one round.  And the person in charge, the [U.S. Army] sergeant said, "Now this round is not to go into that bolt, it's supposed to go into your pocket.  So put it in your shirt pocket and button your pocket."  So we take the one round and put it in, in the pocket.  I wondered, what in the world good is a round of ammo, one round gonna do us in the first place if we are attacked.  And, and we got to go through all of this to get it out and get it into the rifle.  How, how (laughter) we gonna be able to do that?  But anyway, that's, that's what happened.  So we get on the train.  Now the train that we get onto was a passenger train but it had been, all of the passenger seats had been taken out of that, so, and they had built seats in there out of wood.  They were not seats, they were kind of couches that people could lie on, and you could lie down on those things, so, that's how we went.  We left that train station and went on up, a little bit further up the line.  As we got further up the line, I started to think, well, you know, suppose the train is attacked.  What are we gonna do?  How we gone protect ourselves?  And I began to look around to see what protection we had.  Well I went to the back of the train, one of the cars, and I stepped in between these cars and I kind of went up the steps there and I looked up on top of the train and there was their machine gun nest up on top.  On several of the cars they had machine guns up there.  So I said, oh, well, that made me feel a little bit better because we do have protection, we're not just out here running on ahead and don't, don't have any kind of protection.  I felt better about that.
Story_ID: 531469
Speaker 1: We ride the train until we get to the replacement center and then we debark, we get off the train and they walk us over to a place where we get on to some small, some more vehicles.  Well first we pick up some equipment that we had, had to have, and before we got to the replacement center, it was chow time; we had to eat.  So they came through the cars and asked for volunteers.  The train had stopped so they came and asked for volunteers to go and get the chow.  And they said it's just a few, few steps off the main line.  You just got to walk down through the woods here and go up through the mess tent and pick up the chow and bring it back for everybody.  "Got any volunteers?"  Not me, I'm not volunteering, I'm not going.  So I don't know, somebody did, somebody volunteered and went and got the chow and they brought the chow and we ate and moved on.  We got to the replacement center and we get off the tr- got off the train, there are vehicles there waiting to take us further.  So we get into the respective vehicles.  They have us assigned to certain vehicles.  Whichever vehicle is going to our particular company [in the U.S. Army], that's the vehicle we had to get on right now.  So there were two of us that were going to the same area, and so we two got on, in that, it was a Jeep that we got in.  And we go up this road for, I don't know, several hours up the road and came to a stop, came to stop and the driver says, "Well this is as far as I go."  And you know it was way out into nowhere.  I said, "As far as you go?  What, what's out here, you know?  What are we gonna do?"  He said, "Well you'll find out, but this is far as the Jeep goes.  You're--now you're on your own."  But he pointed in a direction that we were supposed to go, "You go, follow that direction, you'll run into a field artillery outfit there, and you'll stop there, and they'll tell you what to do after that."  So we got off, and we started walking, followed the path that he told us to follow.  Pretty soon we did see the artillery pieces over there so we went over there and they told us, "Well, it's getting pretty late in the day, so you're gonna need to spend the night here.  So what you need to do is take your, your entrenching tool, and you go out there and get in front of those guns out there and dig your- dig yourself a hole.  Dig in because that's where you're gonna spend the night."  Okay, so, me and the guy we went over there and we start digging.  Well the ground is really soft so you can dig pretty fast, you know, get down to your knees pretty quick.  So we had our hole about down to our knees, and they got a fire mission.  We didn't know that they had received a fire mission.  Everybody stole guns, cut loose and oh, man, we thought it was incoming, so both of us, somehow both of us got in that hole.  And I don't know, I bet you probably couldn't see us 'cause we had gotten down in that hole that quick and that--because of that noise.  Those guns were very noisy and we were right in front of 'em.  So we spent the night there, and the next day we got to walk some more because we're gonna, we're gonna go, well, we caught a little Jeep that went a little bit further up there and then he stopped and said, "Well okay one of you is going go up this path, and the other one is going to go that path."  So we split and mine was to the left and his was to the right.  So I walked, and I'm by myself now so I walked up that path, walked, walked.  Pretty soon I heard some talking, noise and went on a little bit further and I came into a, an area that was inhabited by something (laughter) or somebody.  But anyway, the officer, an officer met me and he said, asked who I was.  I told him, you know, showed my papers and so on.  He said, "Oh yeah, you are assigned to us, so come on in."  Said, "Your company, your platoon is not here right now; they're out on patrol.  And so you're probably gonna have to spend the night in their area by yourself 'cause there's nobody up there."  I said, oh, great, I'm going to go spend my first night on the front line in a position by myself.
Story_ID: 531470
Speaker 1: But, I stay there, around there for a while and they, we had chow, and then it was time to go up to the holes that my, my outfit [in the U.S. Army] was in.  So I went up there and I found a hole, well the place, they showed me the place where I was supposed to be.  I got down in that bunker in that hole, and I said, well, I hope I can get out of here in the morning, you know.  And during the night I heard all kind of noises and I didn't sleep very much.  I know I didn't sleep too much.  And the next morning I was really, didn't want to come out because, you know, I heard stories about the first one out in the morning is the one that's going to get it for the day, and I didn't want to be the first one out.  And I didn't know everybody else was already up.  So I didn't come out until somebody came up the hill and said, "Well, you can come on down to have some breakfast."  And so I go down, have breakfast and my company's still out, and pretty soon about midday, they came in.  And I looked at 'em, and I said, now this is what I'm gonna look like when I been over here for a little while because they were dirty, their weapons were dirty.  Mine, everything I had was clean and nice and so on, and they were all dirty, dirt and everything.  And they made themselves known to, told me who they were and so on.  And they told me my position that they were gonna need me to, to be an automatic rifleman because the sergeant told me we lost our automatic rifleman so we're, "And you're big and strong, so you, you can do a good job carrying an automatic rifle."  So I said, "Okay, well, I'll take the automatic rifleman, I'm that position."  And we went back up, when they came in we went back for the night, spent the night in the hole.  That night we did get on to something.  There was an attack on us that night, and we were up throwing hand grenades and firing out to the front and those kind of, you know, it was just a regular routine that happened every night from then on.  Every night somebody, something, someone hit, the enemy hit us some kind of way every night.  Then during the day we would string barbed wire, you know out in front of the position because usually if they attacked at night they would destroy, whatever they had destroyed out there, we had to go back out and fix it up the next morning.  So we would do that day in and day out.  We would go out and mend the fence, or set more mines and those kind of things.  And then, oh, about after I had been there about three or four days, the order came that we were to go on patrol, night patrol.  We were going on ambush patrol.  We got to go--they need information from the enemy to see what the enemy is doing so we'll need to send you guys, somebody.  We got to go out and try to capture some Chinese.  So we get our ammunition, enough food and water, everything that we need, and we take off.  It's, it's getting night now and we take off, we go so far out there into no man's land and we set up a perimeter of defense, a circle, and we wait, and we sat there all night, was there all night.  The next morning, we get up to leave, we start looking around, we didn't hear nothing, we didn't hear anything that night, heard nothing.  Next morning when we started looking around, we see footprints, and they are not G.I. footprints.  And those, they had been there and they had walked all around us, but we didn't know they were there.  I guess they didn't know we were there.  If they had, we, there would have been a fight.  We couldn't, we didn't hear them.  They were there, they didn't hear us.
Story_ID: 531471
Speaker 1: Was your company all black?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This was a mixed outfit.  We were mixed.  I think, let's see, we had about four blacks in, in the platoon that I was in; myself and three others.
Speaker 1: So how were race relations?
Speaker 2: There was none, there was no difference, everybody was close as could be.  I never seen people any closer, I mean the race, color of the skin had nothing to do with it.  I mean it was just you and me, you know, regardless of what--
Speaker 1: Was the [U.S.] Army officially, officially integrated at this point?
Speaker 2: At that point yeah, at that time, yes.  It had been integrated just a couple of years before, it had been integrated.  President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the military services.
Speaker 1: So you stayed in Korea and you went through, you saw some actual combat?
Speaker 2: We, well, we came back in from that ambush patrol, and then we went into reserve, went back into reserve for a few days so we could get clean clothes and hot food and so on.  Then we came back up to the front line and that's when the message came that we were to go into combat patrol, which mean we're gonna go and try to take a hill over there.  That's--the Chinese were on that hill over there so we needed to knock them off there.  So we get up one morning, they load us down with everything that we're supposed to have: ammo, food, water, so on, and we take off.  And we, we were, going quietly because they didn't know we were coming.  And we had been told that the hill that we were gonna attack, they, they had burned all the grass and weeds off of it so we wouldn't have any trouble seeing the enemy.  When we get to the foot of that hill, though, we see grass and weeds that taller than we are, higher than our heads, so it hadn't been done, you know.  But we still, that's our task for the day is we gotta take that hill.  Well so far so good because we had sneaked up to the foot of the hill and, and the Chinese they didn't know we were coming, but then somebody, I don't know who it was, we don't know, they never did find out who it was, somebody messed around with his weapon and it went off.  Of course, well, they knew we were down there now.  So what happens?  They start throwing stuff on us, you know, and we started countering, countering it by shooting back and leap frogging, we were leap frogging up the hill.  We were the first squad--I was in the first squad.  First squad run, go first.  So we'd go out there a little way and we'd drop and we'd fire on the hill.  And then the second squad comes through us and goes up and drops and they fire on the hill; and then third squad.  And so on the fourth squad, fourth squad is the heavy weapons squad, so it doesn't go, it doesn't move; it stays and it fires the heavy weapons up on the hill, like the mortars and the .57 recoilless rifles and so on.  But that's how we went up that hill.
Story_ID: 531472
Speaker 1: So far so good.  We're going, we go up the hill.  Then all of a sudden, my rifle, it doesn't fire.  I pull the trigger and nothing.  So the [U.S. Army] captain, my, the commanding officer was right next to me.  I said, "Captain, my rifle won't fire."  He said, "It won't?"  And that's all he said (laughter).  He never said, well, you know, so and so.  I thought, I was waiting for some advice, you know.  But that weapon did not fire.  So that day, the sergeant who drives people up the hill, he said, "Get up, get up, go, go, go!  They're not firing at you."  And I was wondering who they're firing at 'cause I could hear, you know you could hear the snap of the, the bullets coming by your head and hitting in the trees as you run through 'em.  And so I'm running along there and I dropped every once in a while and I'd get up and run a little bit further and then some heavy stuff was coming in because my, my trouser legs were, were shaking, you know, whenever the shell would hit.  It was like a clap a thunder and it would shake, shake the ground you know 'cause I know they are firing pretty close to me and I've got to do something, but I got to keep going.  So we run and I'd go a little bit further and something I thought came to me.  There were some bushes on the side of the trail and I thought, well you should fall right up under those bushes.  So I ran to those bushes and I ducked under those bushes and just as I hit the ground, everything cut lose.  Those limbs and branches and stuff start falling off those trees.  If I had been standing up a little bit longer, that would have been me.  Hid in that tree and it would've knocked all the branches off that bush that I was lying under and they would've fell on me.  So I laid there for a while and then pretty soon I heard people hollering 'cause we were getting pretty close to the, the enemy up there and I heard people saying, "Oh!"  You know, they'd been hit, and then next thing I saw was guys bringing people off the hill.  And I saw, they brought one guy by me and his, he had holes in his body from his, from his shoulder all the way down his legs.  Something that hit--had hit him and that just put holes up in that body.  And they brought him by.  And then there was another one that came by, he had been hit in the arm with something and his elbow, I could see the elbow protruding, the bone protruding out of the skin, and then another one came by.  He had been hit somewhere.  I don't know where he was hit, but he was walk- he was able to walk, but he was hit.  And then the word came that you need to cease what we were trying to do.  We were trying to take the hill, we need to cease it right now and go back.  Get all the, and then the word came bring all of the dead and wounded.  By now, ten guys had been killed by now.  So they said, "Don't leave anybody on the hill."  The order was do not leave anybody on the hill.  Bring the dead and the wounded off.  So they started to bring them down and they would bring them so far, the medics would bring them so far and then they would put 'em down and then it was our job to pick 'em up and take 'em on down.
Story_ID: 531473
Speaker 1: Well they brought my friend.  His name was Starks [ph.].  I'll never forget it.  They brought him, they laid him down there right by me.  And they said, "Well you're gonna have to get somebody, and y'all take him down, back down to the foot of the hill."  So I, we had ponchos--
Speaker 2: Was he alive or was he dead?
Speaker 1: He was dead.  'Cause his body, you know, it was just a crumple of flesh.
Speaker 2: How did you feel at that point?
Speaker 1: Aw, well I was, I was thinking about myself now.  I mean I could look like that too you know.  So the best thing for me to do is to try to get him and get up, get out of there.  So there was a guy next to me, we took our, took my poncho and laid it, spread it out on the ground and rolled the body on that poncho and we gathered each end of that poncho up and he and I brought him down.  And we were running down, trying to run in a cross position and run down that hill.  And we got to a point where the word came up that the enemy is right on you; they're right behind you.  Somebody needs to stop and stop them because otherwise they're gonna run over you.  They're gonna, they're gonna take you.  So I volunteered for that 'cause I was tired.  I thought they had--we'd carried that body and we'd run and he'd fall off, the body would fall off the poncho, we had to put it back on the poncho and run some more you know, but every time we hit a bump, he'd fall off you know.
Speaker 2: Were you angry too?
Speaker 1: S- yeah.  So I said now me, I don't want to keep this up, so I found a rifle that would fire and I said, "Well I'm staying, I'm staying."  And then the buddy, the guy that was with me, he said, "I'll, we'll stay."  So we stayed.  I don't know what happened, but they never, they never showed up.  But I was not gonna keep going through that punishment you know of trying to get down that hill and they right on, on us like that.  I guess they must have realized that we had set up a defense there, and they weren't going to come any further, so that's how we got down.  When we got down the hill, and it was getting close, the sun is going down now, and it's beginning to rain.  And then we got the guys that had been killed there laid out, they had them laying out on the ground down there, and then they brought a tank up, up the road and told us said, "Well, we've got to put those bodies, we're gonna put the bodies on the apron of that tank."  So we laid all the bodies on the tank and the wounded guys we'll put in the medevac, the Jeep that carries the injured.  So we did that and got them out of there, and we thought when we get everything cleared up then we're gonna go.  But the word came on the radio that no, you gotta go back up, there's a hill about halfway up where you were, you got to go back up there and you got to spend the night there.  And we will send a relief column for you before the night is over.  They will bring you food and water and ammo and you can come back to the area and they will stay.  We stayed there all night.  Nobody showed up.  Next morning we get up, we come out and we go down the hill and that when we get to the road we find mermite cans, food, ammo, water, sitting in the middle of the road.  Nobody there.  The guys that were supposed to bring it up to us they never got to us, but they brought it so far and then they turn around and hightailed it out of there (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How long was this into your [U.S.] Army career that all this occurred?
Speaker 1: That was, that was right out of basic, just after basic [at Camp Roberts, California], (unclear), yep.
Speaker 2: So to move along just a little bit further into your Army career, so that was one scene.
Speaker 1: That was--um-hm.
Speaker 2: Was there many more scenes, or was that the most influential to you?
Speaker 1: That was, that was the most--that was the worst case scenario and that was it.  The rest of the time was not so bad, but we went on patrols, reconnaissance patrols.  We went to, we did the barbed wire stringing and we went into reserve and those kind of things.  We kept doing those kinds of things.  And then I got hurt and had to go to the hospital.  In fact, I got a hernia because we were lifting a big log trying to make a bunker and a guy dropped his end of it and all the weight went on me, and so I went to the hospital and I was gone to the hospital for, I don't know, forty-five days, and then they sent me back up there.
Story_ID: 531474
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did two years in the [U.S.] military service.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it's about 1952, '53 [1953] now?  Help us out with that, what year do you think that was?
Speaker 2: At the end of 1952, let's see, from 19--from January 1951 to January 1952, that was a year.  But I left, I left Japan in December of 1951, that same year.  I left Japan coming home.
Speaker 1: And you left--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let me correct it.  I left Japan in January of 1952 coming home.  No, that's not right.  I left, it was 19--it was January 1953 that I left Japan.
Speaker 1: And you were discharged?
Speaker 2: In January 'cause I got home twelve days out of, across the Pacific Ocean and I was discharged the 27th of January in 1953.
Speaker 1: And then what did you do?
Speaker 2: I came home and started looking for a job.  Found a few jobs and got laid off a few times, and, and finally decided to go back to California, go to California and live with my brother-in-law--my sister and my brother-in-law and try to find a job over there in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Well that didn't pan out too well so I ended up coming back home, and I found a job as a custodian out at Williams Air Force Base [Arizona] at that time and I worked there in 1954, summer of 1954, August 1954 we [Payne and Willie Woods Payne] got married and--
Speaker 1: Stop there for a moment, you came back from the [U.S.] Army, and you, you went looking for a job--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and was it difficult for you to find, to find a position?
Speaker 2: It was difficult for me to find a lasting job you know.  That's why I went to California 'cause I thought the job market was a lot better in California than it was here.  But it didn't pan out.  So, I had to eventually come back to Arizona, and I went to work as a custodian out at Williams Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Was racism still a factor at that point?
Speaker 2: Racism, yes, was a factor, yeah.  It's always been.  Adversity as far as race, race goes has always been with me.  All my life I've had situations that were bad, worse because of my race.  So, that has always been a problem that I had to deal with at one time or another.
Speaker 1: It was a problem even with, even with your prior military service?
Speaker 2: Even with prior military service.  Did get some concession, did get some benefits as a result of having been in the military, but still not enough to overcome the whole scheme of things, you know, as far as race goes.
Story_ID: 531475
Speaker 1: So you said you were looking for a job.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In the midst of this looking for a job, you said you found a wife?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I knew about her.  I, I was just trying to find, wait until I got in a position so I could take care of a wife and family, because I had always intended, I knew I was gonna get married someday, you know.  And my wife and I had known each other since we were teenagers.  We at first could not get along with one another at all.  We, every time we talked we had argument, but I finally had sense enough to understand, and that kept it off and we were able to get married and have this beautiful family that we have.
Speaker 1: And what year did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married 1954, August 1954.
Speaker 1: How old were you, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was what twenty-four or twenty-five, twenty-five.
Speaker 1: So you married.  Her name is?
Speaker 2: Willie, Willie Esther [Willie Woods Payne].
Speaker 1: Willie Esther.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was she doing at the time?
Speaker 2: She was a student at ASU [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] at the time.  She was working on a degree in accounting at that time.
Speaker 1: And so you had been gone from ASU for a while now, she was in there.  Had things changed on campus?  Did she share anything with you about her schooling and what was going on there?
Speaker 2: No really too much except she was, like she should have been, interested in completing her course of studies so she could get that degree and get a decent job for herself, 'cause she had been working for the people that, that she finally got a professional job for.  She worked for them as a, a person who cleaned their trailers.  It was a mobile place, mobile trailer place that sold mobile homes.  She worked for them cleaning trailers while she was going to school, and when she had finished school--well, no, the owner of the, the unit had said that when she get, gets her degree in accounting she can come back and work for him as his secretary.
Story_ID: 531476
Speaker 1: That's me and that's my [U.S.] Army I.D. card--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --with serial number and all that.
Speaker 2: And that's me, my wife and son, my oldest son, Wendell [Wendell Payne].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's me when I was in the Army Reserve.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's me and a friend in, in the regular Army, active duty.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that's my platoon in Korea, up on 38th parallel.
Speaker 1: My wife and I and a friend.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my wife and I at my swearing in as mayor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.  What year was that?
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], 1990.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Wife and I.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About what time period?
Speaker 1: Oh, '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s], '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Wife and I and a friend.
Speaker 1: That's my wife and I and Earl Jones, James, [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I and a friend, Fred Bolender.  He's the postmaster of Chandler [Arizona].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what--try and tell us if you can approximately what year?
Speaker 1: That was in the mid-1960s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good, next.
Speaker 1: And that's me, graduation from high school, 1949.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's my graduating class, 1949.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's Senator McCain [John McCain] and I.
Speaker 2: That's Barry Goldwater; and the mayor of Apache Junction [Arizona]; and I.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, time period?
Speaker 2: Oh, 1990s.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Two former teachers and the wife; Mr. Grigsby [HistoryMaker Jefferson Eugene Grigsby] and wife [Rosalyn Marshall Grigsby]; and Mr. Olnot [ph.], the civics teacher at Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And about when was that?
Speaker 2: That was in the 1940s.  Oh, this, excuse me, no.  This was probably eighty--late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: That's the gymnasium that carries my name [Coy C. Payne Gymnasium], Chandler High School [Chandler, Arizona].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that is me exiting from the mayor's office.  My term has expired.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my family.  That's Gloria [ph.]; Wendell; Carolyn [Carolyn Payne]; Rodney [Rodney Payne]; myself; Willie [Payne's wife, Willie Woods Payne]; Douglas [Douglas Payne]; and Patrick [Patrick Payne].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, what year was that taken?  Approximately?
Speaker 2: Mm, that would have to be in the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's myself and one of the paraders and the do da de activities for the City of Chandler in the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Family again.  That's Carolyn; Rod; Wendell; Doug; Patrick; Gloria; myself; and Willie.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Taken?
Speaker 1: It had to be in the '90s [1990s], maybe mid-'90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sounds good.
Speaker 1: Mid-'90s [1990s].  And that's the yearbook for the school that the junior high school was named after my family, Payne Junior High School Panthers [Queen Creek, Arizona].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Quite a graphic on the cover there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a Motorola filming--picturing the leadership that existed in the community at that time.  That's myself and those potential leaders, or those who were in leadership roles in the Phoenix [Arizona] area at the time.
