Story_ID: 25921
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Samuel George Philander, P-H-I-L-A-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Sir, is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: My father looked into it, and in the--I should probably give some background to South Africa, that originally, the white people from Europe and the blacks from basically equatorial Africa, arrived at the Southern tip about the same time. It was 1500, 1600. And that Dutch first were there, and at the time, they had a colony in Indonesia and Malaysia. So they decided not to interfere with the black people and brought in slaves. And so it's unusual place in that African exported slaves except for Southern Africa, which imported slaves from--and so that group would be my ancestors. So these were people from Malaysia, from--when the British came, they brought Indians also. So there's quite a big mixture and if you visit the cities such as Cape Town, there a enormous diversity of racial groups.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So in, there's--and then some Europeans drifting in and out. In Germanic speaking languages, which Afrikaans is one that the Dutch speak, you pronounce the letter "V" as if it were "F". So it's V-I-L-A-N-D-R would be Philander. And it's actually not uncommon name, I think in some parts of Germanic speaking countries.
Speaker 1: So originally, it was with a "V"?
Speaker 2: With a "V"--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --V-I-L--okay.
Speaker 2: And my father thinks that when the British came in, it's not a "V", the Phi, is not spelled with a "V". It's spelled P-H or F. And if you're fancy, you choose P-H (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so that's the story.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five, July, 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: At the moment, I'm a scientist. I'm a professor at Princeton [University].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're a professor of Geo--
Speaker 2: Geo-science.
Speaker 1: Geo-science.
Speaker 2: I study climate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: I'm (unclear), I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: What is it (laughter)?
Speaker 1: March 8th (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, March 8th (laughter).
Speaker 1: Twenty-thirteen [2013]. If you agree, then that's good (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Alright, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At Princeton University in the Guyot Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 25922
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up that only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Good food (laughter), and nothing particularly favorite. I like French food.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Year, it would Spring or Autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm now of the age where I have to choose between revisiting places I like so much or seeing new places. And that's actually becoming difficult (laughter). I like to see new places, but I'd also like to revisit--I grew up in what's called a Mediterranean climate, very similar to Southern California. It's basically winter rains. The summers are dry. There's a very special vegetation. I'm not particularly fond of that vegetation. What I don't like about this part of the world is too many trees. You can't see where you are (laughter). I like to see far (laughter). So I like the Southwest of the U.S. You can see far (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Why not?" (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 25923
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Alice Harker, H-A-R-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, must be 1920s or some time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: A place called Plettenberg Bay [Cape Town, South Africa]. It's a fishing village. It's about 300 miles East of Cape Town.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: P-L-E-T-T-E-N-B-E-R-G. Today it's a, become a really fancy resort. But when I grew up, come for vacations, it was a small fishing place.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and are there any stories that are passed down about that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not really. There's a--they were fishermen in this place, and I'm not quite sure how they--but really, for some reason it was never much discussed. We would go to this place on vacation, to visit that side of the family. It was a boarders' place, wonderful beaches and so on. No, never any discussed. That whole side of the family lived there, lived next to each other, sisters, father. And to my astonishment, (unclear) later, under Apartheid the only job opportunities for educated people was teaching. There was no business, no lawyers, no doctors. And so everybody was a teacher. And so in this village, a succession of, in the one family, the head master has always been a member of that family. Again, the schools were segregated so this was a colored school. But it was always as if this was a tradition. They say that was moving upwards from fishing to become a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were your mother's people--they were fishermen, right?
Speaker 2: Her parents, her father was, and he then sent them to school. They became teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so, did your mother want to do anything else other than teach?
Speaker 2: I don't think it ever occurred to her (laughter) that there were other--there literally were no other options.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were lucky to get that far.
Speaker 1: Alright, now, did your mother have some stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Not really. It was about fishermen drowning. There was really risky-type of job 'cause they were in the very small boats, and the--they have vestigial fishing, village type.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kinds of fish were they bringing in?
Speaker 2: Oh, we don't want to go there (laughter). They were very unusual fish I reckon they ate a very very few, for the food. What they do to the food is not so good, but the food itself is good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, so, now, do you know what school your mother attended?
Speaker 2: There's only one school. Oh, then like I say, it's a very divided country. So there's English-speaking people, the whites are English speaking, Afrikaans speaking. The English speaking are in the something they call the Anglican church. The Afrikaans are in the Dutch church. And each then started school. And if you were, if you had pretensions, you went to that Anglican side. You went to their church and to their school and so on. This village was so small, I think there was no Afrikaans. There was no Dutch. It was just the English one.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and did she, now, did she get a teaching certificate or--
Speaker 2: She had to go somewhere else. The father did send some of the--he had several daughters, sent them to become teachers. They had to go to Cape Town for that purpose.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it like a normal school or a--did she go for four years or two or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for four, yeah, teaching college. The, as I said, what surprised me is, practically one of them went back. And so there's actually still a group, I still have relatives there.
Story_ID: 25924
Speaker 1: Can you give us your--well, did you know your grandparents--
Speaker 2: On both sides, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father's family was from another, different region, (unclear), called Caledon, C-A-L-E-D-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Peter.
Speaker 1: Peter Philander?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born in Caledon?
Speaker 2: Caledon, yeah.
Speaker 1: And about what year was he born?
Speaker 2: Again, early '20's [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how far back can you trace your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not far. Caledon is a agriculture village and several of my grandfathers have worked on the farm. And, again, it still is--where I was at recently, still is agricultural village. And they grow wheat mostly in the neighborhood. He was involved in that, and then at some stage my grandfather started a small shop and selling, small grocery shop basically. And it was a, the same pattern. He would send his children to become teachers.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father have any stories of growing up which he shared with you that you could remember?
Speaker 2: Not really. He was much impressed with the War. People left to go and fight, and in South Africa itself, at the time, politics was changing rapidly. The British were in charge up to about 1945, somewhere there. The Afri--some part of the white population supported the Germans. And so they first had to put down some local (unclear), before they could join the allies. And then some were sent to North Africa to fight. And this apparently was an amazing experience for, to have gone there and come back. So many stories would be about the soldiers who had gone to North Africa to fight and what--anyways, so there were stories about such things.
Speaker 1: Were there black and colored soldiers that went to fight in North Africa with the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the British Army?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they joined the, our side of the allies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as I said, that was after putting down some local opposition.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your father, did he go to teachers college too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where he met my mother [Alice Harker], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25925
Speaker 1: Okay, so they [his parents: Alice Harker and Peter John Philander] met in Cape Town [South Africa]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how they met that they share with you?
Speaker 2: No, actually, it's possible that his first teaching job was in this fishing village, Gordon Bay, something like that. And then he was a very driven person, and moved around. He would apply for jobs at different schools. He became the headmaster of a primary school. And then he moved to a secondary school. But been lots of movement from--all within the country and went from one place to another. And then he--most of these schools were church run. And the church obviously was a big supporter of Apartheid. So there are stories, there are stories about discrimination, but if a teacher was perceived as being not sufficiently respectful of a white person, he could get beaten up and then-- You know, you have stories of this type.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of these teachers would get in trouble of this kind. The, he, he's actually a poet, and he wrote--he's quite well known in South Africa where one of the pleasures of going back was if I introduce myself, I'll be asked if I'm the son because in school, some of his poems were prescribed for school children to read. The, and then I was intrigued recently that he died a while ago, and there was a preview of his work in some literary magazine. And they reviewed his entire life without mentioning that he was a teacher, that this was not his vocation. And this review gave the impression that what this man did was write poetry. What this man did was actually not (laughter)--he had lots of other things going on. This was a side activity. Anyway, it really intrigued me that this is how he gets evaluated, is what--because they would trace--he immigrated to the U.S. in the late '60's [1960s]. And they would trace our, his vocabulary started getting limited. It became old fashioned. And so they traced his whole career, looking at what he'd written. And they could detect when he had moved, what experience he's had. But they never mentioned that he did this entirely at night. I'm a scientist, and I would be shocked if I got reviewed for the things other than my science (laughter) because that's what I do. And so it's very strange to me that he gets evaluated for things that wasn't his main occupation.
Speaker 1: Now, was this review published in the United States or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it's in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright, so he's well known there as a poet now--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --and children read his work in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's (unclear) fade. I still get some royalties, 50, a hundred dollars a year from poems of his that get published and anthologies.
Speaker 1: Is there a--did he ever publish a volume of poetry or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, several.
Speaker 1: Can you name some of 'em for us?
Speaker 2: They're in Afrikaans. So they're colored--again, the language of Afrikaans is strongly influenced by Dutch. But one odd thing about it is because of the slaves coming from Indonesia, from Malaysia, many of the words are actually Malaysian. And so the colored community as it's now called as offspring of the slaves, contributed significantly to the Afrikaans language. And you can trace many of the words, as I said, back to, to Malaysian words and so on.
Story_ID: 25926
Speaker 1: Now, is there on your mother's [Alice Harker] side and your father's [Peter Philander] side or either, or, a keen sense of their history? Do they really understand their history, that they were brought from Malaysia in what--by the Dutch in 1650 or '60' [1560] or so to work--
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no. The only people in South African I know of who would have strong ties to the background would be the Malays. Many are Muslims, and they will actually go to Mecca [Saudi Arabia]. And even though they're living in the Southern tip of Africa. And so that would really be the only group that kept a connection.
Speaker 1: Oh, these are Malays, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who are Muslims?
Speaker 2: Who are Muslim, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, your parents would be--what would they call them? Did they have a specific group that they associated themselves with, historically, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --so they're basically a product of South Africa life, you know, after the--
Speaker 2: That's correct. There's a, there, yeah, it's come together, the very first people to get to South Africa were actually Portuguese. And then the Dutch, and then the British. And a little digression, it's been noted that (unclear) Brazil has relatively little racial tension in comparison with British colonies. The Portuguese colonies is less. And the reason people think, is the Portuguese were far more conservative than the British. So the British let women go to the colonies. When they got there, they kept themselves in a privileged position by ostracizing any man who associates with non-British women. And see, (unclear) we have trouble in the South here or wherever the British went. The Portuguese, there were no women (laughter). So they had far more intermarriage (laughter), far more. And so race relations are actually much more relaxed in the Portuguese colonies.
Speaker 1: And they would actually create families?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but in the case of the British, the women quickly realized you ostracize any man who does that. And so you have far more racial--anyway, it's a complicated--
Speaker 1: Okay, Vasco da Gama was there first, I think--
Speaker 2: Diaz, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or Bartholomew Diaz, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, 1480s, I think, right, 1480-something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was before Columbus [Christopher Columbus] came this way. They would--only recently I discovered why the--I thought they were looking for an easy route to the spices and so on. It turns out it was really part of the last Crusades. They repeatedly failed to conquer the Holy Land, going across land. So they thought they'd go the back way (laughter). And so these trips around the tip of Africa were actually to get to (laughter), to liberate the Holy Land from infidels.
Story_ID: 25927
Speaker 1: So your parents [Peter Philander and Alice Harker] met as school teachers in the 1940s, is that--would that be correct?
Speaker 2: It must be something like (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their--the way they walk, talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I suppose I'm quite driven (laughter). I must be like my father. Yeah, there was always something ambitious. He had a story to tell about his father going, you had to go to the minister to get letters when he applied to go to Teachers College. They went to the minister to ask if he could write a letter. The minister was having tea with a friend. As they walked away, he could overhear the minister say to his friend, "Imagine he wants his son to be a teacher" (laughter). Anyway, that's enough to drive anybody (laughter).
Story_ID: 25928
Speaker 1: Can you explain the racial policies of South Africa when you came on the scene? What were they--and, or what was the status, yeah, like what--yeah, white people 'cause you have like Africana's and British and then you had colored people. And then different black people. So explain what the policy was?
Speaker 2: Well, in--the majority of the black people live on, called the Eastern Cape or further North. So the very tip where Cape Town [South Africa] is, is unusual. As I said, they--the black people arrived there, got there about the same time as the whites. The as a, even today the number--well, in the last, say decade or two, it's changed quite a bit. But they're almost no black people. And that's why Afrikaans is the dominate language in that part. And so when I grew up, the town was segregated. You could live in certain parts, but there were separate areas for coloreds, separate areas for blacks. The blacks were few in number and my childhood memories of, in the village, are one wouldn't go off at 9:00 in the evening. Any black person on the street would be arrested. You had to be within your allocated corner. There were separate schools for blacks, colored, for whites. The whites further subdivided separate schools for the English-speaking, for the Afrikaans speaking. The government when it got to the extreme, distinguished between at least a dozen different groups, different languages, different cultures. And they started opening, giving colleges for different racial groups, different residential areas. So they went crazy implementing Apartheid. They, really, Apartheid literally means "apart", separateness. So they went sort of overboard and they wanted to separate everybody. So in terms of practical matters, a teacher in the white school would earn a hundred dollars. In the colored school, they'd earn 50 and the black would earn 25 (laughter). So there was degrees of discrimination. Salaries if you were a policemen, you're independent. Certain jobs were reserved for certain people. It was a--but it wasn't, it wasn't too--petty discrimination, you were either white or black where you can go to the beach, or where you sit on a bus or this.
Speaker 1: So if you weren't white, I mean, if you were anything other than white, you were, you couldn't go to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right. However, when it came to jobs or where you lived, there were bigger distinctions. As a child, it was mostly--how crazy it was, if you went to a post office, there was a special door you had to enter. But then once you were inside, the lines that you buy stamps, and white people could stand next to black people. But they couldn't stand behind each other (laughter). It was a completely absurd system (laughter) that they implemented.
Speaker 1: Now, we alluded to it before, but what--were the East Indians and the Malayans treated as colored too?
Speaker 2: When it came to petty discrimination, there were just two. You were either white or you were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When it came to schools or how much, which jobs you qualified for or what you get paid, then the government then fine the discriminations.
Speaker 1: Okay, one thing I was surprised to learn, and I didn't know it until I was in my twenties, was that Mahatma Gandhi was in South Africa.
Speaker 2: That's correct, yeah. And he, he was a very clever fellow, and the--anyway, at some stage he did get into conversation with the prime minister of the country at the time, who acknowledged that this fellow was smarter than he was (laughter). Crazy things happened over the, say the Olympics for South Africa wanted to enter. But they could only have one team. So in things like the marathon, the black runners would start, you know, half hour later. You couldn't win (laughter). So they would send you on the basis of the time. But you couldn't be seen to cross the finishing line ahead of a white person (laughter).
Story_ID: 25929
Speaker 1: So, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Two brothers, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, my father [Peter Philander] came, was invited by the Americans in the 19--early '60's [1960s]. It wasn't that he--he probably fell in love with the country and then made strenuous efforts--at that stage I was in, I think I was already in the university. And through his contacts--it would never have occurred to me to apply. But after his visit, it became--in South Africa, in--you're not really, in those days, not told much about the U.S.. Great Britain or Europe was what you were--Americans were considered, especially amongst the English-speaking ones--
Speaker 1: They were considered what, now?
Speaker 2: How can I put this? They were pretty, typical British (unclear), unsophisticated and whatever the British happened to think. And so I was lucky I went to the University of Cape Town. It was the last year that nonwhite students could be, were allowed in. But you were allowed in, I couldn't--I could go there to take classes. And I couldn't join the chess club. I couldn't--no social life whatsoever. So I stayed at home, (unclear). My brothers are younger. Both of them are medical doctors. One actually would, likes being a doctor. I'm not so sure about the other. They went simply because the only condition under which you could go to one of the white universities is if you studied the subject not offered at one of the newly created black ones. So for that reason, they began. But then the strange thing that happened when, when there was an autopsy of a section of a body, if it was a white person, the blacks had to leave (laughter). The laws were such that if there was an accident on the street, and there was a black doctor present, he could instruct a white person what to do. He couldn't touch the white person (laughter). Anyway, so the education system had its very peculiar points.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25930
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were telling us about your brothers. You have two brothers, and they're both doctors.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Are they in South Africa or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, they moved here. One is in Minnesota, and the other one's in Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Oh, they're here, Minnesota and Las Vegas, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're medical doctors.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in your household growing up, it was you and your two brothers, your mother [Alice Harker] and father [Peter Philander].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did any other relatives live with you?
Speaker 2: Off and on, not on a permanent.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: No, in retrospect, I know things change. Well, like I say, I graduated from high school when I was 17. If at that point, somebody had predicted what would happen to me over the next 10 years, I would have dismissed this noise complete. I wouldn't even have bought it as a lottery ticket (laughter). It's just amazing what happened subsequently. The high school I was in had no library, no sport facilities.
Speaker 1: I don't wanna go to high school yet. We've got to go through grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh--
Speaker 1: But I just--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, grade school, nothing really. At one point--
Speaker 1: But do you have an earliest childhood memory, earliest, first memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I said, my father moved around quite a lot because he was changing school, his job. And then anyone--at one point, I was in a school where two or three classes were being taught simultaneously in the same room. There was only one teacher. And in one year, I entered at one grade but actually left at another grade (laughter). That's all I remember.
Story_ID: 25931
Speaker 1: Well, can you describe, you know, some of the memories of growing up and what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was, it was in small villages, and as I said, but you asked earlier about the countryside or where I like vacation. And I just went back to one of these places, and it's spectacularly beautiful. It's very mountainous and rolling hills, wheat fields. And I kept on asking myself--I left and I became (unclear) when I was 21, and my father [Peter Philander] when he was in his mid-fifties. And I could see a major shock for him. To me, it was opportunity. To him, he was established there, and it, in his mind, he kept on living there. He was here physically, but he waited for the mail. He waited for people. And I can understand now, giving up the language, giving up an environment in which he was accustomed. He knew how to deal with it, whereas--and then he lost, the language was the big loss. But I didn't fully appreciate that until I went back recently. But, again, if you ask childhood memories, once you're older--and so I stopped speaking Afrikaans altogether when I left. And going back, it's actually quite entertaining just to stand on the street and listen to what people say, just a mode of speaking that's unique to a language. You can say things in a certain way. And, so being there I--you say something, and it comes with a package, just the way something is said, you know more is going on. And when I came as was originally, I was surprised to have friends to whom I couldn't say a word or two in Afrikaans. We didn't mean anything to them. This was quite an odd experience. If you have a friend, you share certain--and so I became much more sympathetic to my father. In his case, it must have been quite shocking to suddenly be deprived of them by ground.
Story_ID: 25932
Speaker 1: So you said you grew up in rural, small villages basically--
Speaker 2: Small villages, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your schools were--can you remember the first school you attended, the name of it?
Speaker 2: No, it must have been in this place Caledon [South Africa].
Speaker 1: Okay, in Caledon, okay. And how long were you all there in Caledon?
Speaker 2: Oh, it--he must have moved every three, four years. So it would have-as we were going to school in 10 years, I must have been to three or four schools, I'd say from the age of six to 16.
Speaker 1: So would you have been--
Speaker 2: But in the end, for high school, I went to a school in Cape Town [South Africa].
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Athlone High School.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: Athlone High School. I'll tell you something amusing about this. It's A-T-H-L-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you something amusing happened a few months ago. My students, former students here decided I was getting on, and they organized a meeting, and to discuss scientific issues. Anyway, and a lot of people showed up. And people in South Africa got to hear of this. And so they arranged for me to be interviewed through Skype by a talk show host, a radio show in Cape Town. So this guy starts out, and, in fact, I can play it to you. He start out interviewing me, but he start out saying he's very pleased to hear about South Africans who left and did well. And then and so he goes on and where did I go to school? And I say Athlone High School. The whole thing only lasts two or three minutes. Two weeks later, I get a letter to Professor Philander, and I'm not even sure it said, Princeton in New Jersey. And I'm quite surprised we had this hand--I don't get letters any more. You get emails, get this handwritten letter. It turned out to be from somebody who was driving there and heard this talk show. And it was a woman I haven't seen since I was 17 years old who sat at the desk next to me in high school (laughter). And she was really wanting to know. And so it was the first contact I have in almost 50 years with somebody I saw then. And since then we exchanged a few emails, and I was in South Africa a few weeks ago. And the main thing that occurred to me when I got this letter, it was very emotional because I couldn't remember this girl. And what surprised me as, in my mind, that was a really dark period in my life. I was glad to have left. When I got this letter, I realized that I was actually cheerful and optimistic when I knew her (laughter). If she hadn't sent it to me, I would have persisted in my view that I must forget about that part. Anyway, I was back there a few weeks ago, and I did think of maybe meeting her. She sent me telephone number, and I decided our lives had followed such completely different paths, it would be risky--I would probably be disillusioned. I have some image. I'd rather keep the image (laughter).
Story_ID: 25933
Speaker 1: At what point or was there anything that happened when you were growing up that made you think about science, becoming a scientist.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I was good at manipulating symbols, thinks like adding. And that's something you can almost teach yourself so that the teachers I had were basically not qualified to teach. As I said, the school I had, the problem there is most teachers will have a high school diploma and nothing more. And then they're teaching in high school. So I got in it from that school, and I succeeded in getting into the University of Cape Town [South Africa]. So my first big concern was how on earth would I do in comparison? At that time, we--it was integrated school. They were white and most of the students were white.
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back a little bit 'cause you're accelerating this way past what we normally do. But when you were a kid, was there any incident or anything that made you realize you had any scientific talent or mathematical talent?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was always the best in my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had no trouble.
Speaker 1: Alright, and in, the high school you went to was Athlone [High School] was big high school or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, not by American standards. I think there must have been, say 30 students in, seniors, who graduated.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a small--that is very small by American standards.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but one or two at most would go to university.
Speaker 1: One or two went to college?
Speaker 2: At most, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So was there--so I guess you would have been concerned going to the University of Cape Town. Did you have to test, pass a test to get in?
Speaker 2: No, it, so I think in the final year in high school, everybody in the entire country writes the same exams. And many countries have such a system, I think England, France. And it's sort of a bad thing. It pretty much dictates your future, whether you go to university, what job you'll get and so on. I did very well in mathematics. So that automatically qualified me to go to university.
Speaker 1: So this, were you operating with the "O" levels and the "A" levels?
Speaker 2: It's that type of thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, I was very good manipulating symbols and--
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask you about your optimism at age 17.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You say you were an optimistic fellow at one time, but you had forgotten all about that. So what were your ambitions and ideas at age 17? What were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I was just (unclear), yesterday, I-wonder if this is going on film. Anyhow, I met one of our students, and, a graduate student. And the job market today is pretty tough, and they got (unclear), right. And I felt almost obvious talking to this girl. She was completely optimistic (laughter). At that age, you --there's no obstacle (laughter). You don't think very far ahead. You're convinced that the world is yours to conquer. I'm, it's--I gather some people are just born with this attitude. I can't really account for it. I had no doubt that I would do well.
Speaker 1: Now, did you graduate with special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--as I said, this is national exams, and I did well enough in that too.
Speaker 1: Did you have science fairs when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You participate in anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what's the highest level of math you took?
Speaker 2: It did not include Calculus--it was the high school level, no calculus.
Speaker 1: Trigonometry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were no--one of my teachers (unclear) apologized that the--that he couldn't, that I ought to learn some Calculus, but he didn't know any himself (laughter) or something like that.
Story_ID: 25934
Speaker 1: Was there scientific equipment in high school?
Speaker 2: You had--there were certain subjects. It's a very rigid curriculum and you have to do some science, some literature. You don't have much choice. The problem with the whole country, everybody in the country taking the same exams is you get trained to pass the exams (laughter), which is not the same as learning. And so if you have poor teachers, they would even try to--I'll tell you a really terrible story about the--part of those exams, you have to read a Shakespeare play. And, I mean they have certain criteria what every person to pass high school ought to know. And our teacher told us, you'll never understand this. I'll tell you the story (laughter). And then he tried to anticipate what questions we'd be asked on these exams, and then to help us prepare in case--so he had the whole suite there. We--he looked at many, many past exams, and so it was "Romeo and Juliette", he'd know exactly which questions would be asked (laughter). And really, it was that type of education.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's--yeah, so, but did you have any--I know a lot of people we've interviewed here in the black schools down South, they didn't have a lot of equipment in the science lab. They didn't have a microscope, no sinks, no beakers, no, you know--
Speaker 2: Nothing, right.
Speaker 1: You had nothing there too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They have nothing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good question 'cause, it's a different, it makes a difference when you have no equipment. So did you take chemistry and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never liked it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but was it--did you have a chance to do anything in chemistry that--or biology?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, not--also, I didn't particularly care for those things. My father [Peter Philander] put, so his father gave him education, and he went to become a teacher. My brothers, there was a lot of pressure to become medical doctors. That was the next step up, and I'm quite sure I would have killed large numbers of people if I'd gone that route. I have (laughter) no talent. I'm not very interested in things you do with your hands, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if they had, even had any, any laboratories in the school for you to do anything scientific in?
Speaker 2: Nothing interesting. I look at what gets done here with the science fairs and competitions, and this is amazing. At the white schools, they were doing--
Speaker 1: Now, did you like to take things apart or put things back together again or--
Speaker 2: Not really. I was surprised the, so quickly then so I had to solve quadratic equation two, a parabola. And I was actually astonished to discover that if you hit a tennis ball, the trajectories a parabola are fun, that something that you write on a piece of paper is actually relevant to something you can observe. This struck me as, I thought of these symbols I was pushing around as some kind of game. I never really appreciated up until the late stage that this is relevant to things you see around you. And I suppose that's where the lab thing comes in. There were no labs to show that this was the case.
Story_ID: 25935
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher prior to university in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the other thing I did was to learn to play piano. And I completely play music all--and I still play the piano to this day mainly, but it's a kind of cheap therapy for me. And I had an absolutely marvelous teacher, had a enormous influence on me. And it was mostly, he was a white fellow. And he taught--you had to go into a special place. But he took me under his wing, and to this day, I still--he gave me a lot of music books, and introduced me to [Ludwig van] Beethoven. That's why we--I usually start the morning, I play the piano, and it's mostly the standards these people set themselves. With Beethoven, it's actually incredible. And 200 years later, it's hardly anything that people will pay attention to (laughter). I find you can--(unclear) does he, today's scientists will write papers, and you're expected to publish so many. And you compete with other people. What amazes me is that they did it for themselves, for their own satisfaction. And in Beethoven's case, after a while his contemporaries didn't actually understand. It took subsequent generations to appreciate. This impresses me no end that he did it for himself. It wasn't peer pressure. It wasn't for money, and the one I'm most impressed with is, [Johann Sebastian] Bach--Beethoven thought of himself as a genius, and he was really (unclear) of it. Bach thought of himself as just a worker, had to write another cantata for next Sunday. And he was a genius. But he didn't act as if he was one. He was just doing a job. Anyway, my music teacher made me aware of these things. And he had a huge influence.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Hartley, H-A-R-T-L-E-Y.
Story_ID: 25936
Speaker 1: Tell us how you got into University of Cape Town [South Africa]. I mean did you have counselors? Did you have a choice or what?
Speaker 2: No, it had to be a place at home. It was the only one. A year afterwards, Apartheid took another step, and they created several, at least half a dozen in one year, universities for different groups, for colored, for Causas (ph.) for Zulu's. Those places still exist, but I was fortunate I got in the last year it was possible to enter.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, well, what was it like? You talked about it for a moment, but, so you were allowed as a colored person to go to class--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --but not to participate in any--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --extracurricular activities. So did you--you lived in Cape Town--
Speaker 2: With my parents, yeah.
Speaker 1: With--
Speaker 2: With my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 25937
Speaker 1: So you were University of Cape Town [South Africa] still 1962--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --were there any--now, what was your major?
Speaker 2: Mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any special teachers there or anyone that who kind of looked out for you?
Speaker 2: Not--really, at this stage I became very absorbed in science. And my brothers would claim that I acted as if I was out of way of Apartheid (laughter). There was a group of us, especially in the third and fourth--a group, meaning precisely four students who graduated with special, were majors in that field at that time. And we actually didn't really mix social. I think I did, they were all white, the other three. But we were very friendly working together on these problems. So it was a miniature version of a scientific community. The scientific community works in that manner, except those that don't give you a social context. But I've (unclear), I was so surprised that I was as capable as they were, and they'd gone to very special schools. And they subsequently went to--most people from there go to England to continue graduate school. So that was mostly a period of learning mathematics. There was not much more to that.
Story_ID: 25938
Speaker 1: In the, what amazes me about the U.S. education system is here you don't decide on a major until you're a sophomore, in your sophomore year. So incredible freedom what you can study. Example, there I entered--the first year I took mathematics, Physics I. The next year, I took Physics II. The third year, I took mathematics, Physics III (laughter). Clearly, at matter of education. You learn strictly. You decide at the end of high school what you're going to do the rest of your life, and you train strictly in that field. This is of relevant because by chance when I left, I got into Harvard [University], and I would--the freedom I was given there was, to me was amazing. And I--I could sample all sorts of courses and other things. And then the most interesting thing about that was all the other students had an enormous range of interests. So it went on being very natural to me suddenly being exposed to probably, completely different environment.
Speaker 2: Now, was the South Africans university similar to the British system or--
Speaker 1: Very similar, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, so they're--
Speaker 1: They're very focused. The moment you enter you know exactly what you're going to do.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see, so did you do some sort of a senior project at University of Cape Town that--
Speaker 1: Not really. I went to--and they're various scholarships you apply for to go and study overseas, and those are mostly given on the basis of your performance as an undergraduate. I did one letter to the American Embassy to inquire whether they--because most of the things in Africa were for Great Britain. And they were incredibly helpful. And so they assisted me in applying to various places.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't, so when you applied for, when you thought about going to school in the United States, there was no, there were no restrictions? I mean what kind of restrictions did they have on travel when you were--in '61' [1961]?
Speaker 1: Not really. They were probably eager for anybody who has promised to leave, was always my impression. They'd rather have this person outside (laughter) the country and stay there.
Speaker 2: But they--would it be possible to come back and forth a lot if you left or would--
Speaker 1: I did go back once, while I was a student. And after that, not again, I think. And then I got married, and my wife is from Argentina. And it would have been impossible to go back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 25939
Speaker 1: So this is 1961 when you graduate from the University of Cape Town [South Africa]. Now, you were saying earlier that you saw yourself--when you think back at yourself, you saw you as kind of a melancholy person or discouraged or something you, right? Or you see yourself that way before you talked to your friend?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it's not so much, I tried to forget about that period that I thought of it as a dark one, that my life really only started when I came here. And then talking to her, exchanging emails, I realized it wasn't quite that bad. I was actually quite optimistic and cheerful when (laughter) I was there. I sort of wanted to forget that that was the case (laughter). So, from that perspective--
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any personal encounters with the Apartheid system that were, you know,--
Speaker 2: Not really, getting (unclear) for passes, there's something, nothing major.
Speaker 1: So did colored people have to carry passes too?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think they're--no.
Speaker 1: And was there more freedom for coloreds than blacks, in terms of going around, moving around the city?
Speaker 2: Not really. Again, there was, part of the time you couldn't live and not live. So they had their own property, they could (unclear). Schools where you couldn't go. The schools for the coloreds were probably slightly better than the ones for the blacks. As I said, when it came to picky discrimination, it just--it was just either white or black.
Speaker 1: I know we have a lot of stories about people going to the movies here and the blacks always sit in the balcony down South.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that a similar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the balcony would actually be a privilege. There'd have to be a separate movie house all together. What surprised me, what, in some incident, we had a card, and my brother and I went--Drive-In movies were the new thing. And we decided we'd, and you're seeing sitting in your own car looking at some screen in the distance. But, no, they would not let us in.
Speaker 1: So did you go?
Speaker 2: No, they wouldn't let us in.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)(unclear) in your car.
Story_ID: 25940
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's a note here that I have that the University of Cape Town [South Africa] was nicknamed "Moscow on the Hill" for its opposition to Apartheid. Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's, I heard the current president of the University of Cape Town gave--give a talk to the public on the problems he faces as the president. And, for example, when I was there, it was 99 percent white. Now, it's half, 50 percent black, 50 percent white, but he says they--and they have people in the same dormitories. They cohabit the students in the same dormitories, but they don't actually live together. And so it's pretty much still segregated. He says when he talks to his faculty, they feel that they did their better in the in the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s]. That's where the Moscow on the Hill comes from (laughter), and that they're not particularly interested. I mean that they've done--and so it sounds a bit cynical, but the opposition they offered to Apartheid is a bit like having your cake and eating it. They were benefiting from the privilege of Apartheid, and had the luxury of being, were able to protest against it. And then at the end of the day, they went back to their privileged homes. So they're very proud of this. It was, according to the standards around there, it was really left wing. There were protests, and they're very proud how they opposed the government. But as I said, they had their cake, and they ate it.
Story_ID: 25941
Speaker 1: Also in 1962 just before you graduated, Nelson Mandela was imprisoned, right? That's the beginning of his long imprisonment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--I didn't go back until the late 1990s for the first time. And I was quite shocked when I got back. I'd read in the newspapers about it had ended and so on. And suddenly there's been big changes, but at another level, really little has changed. There's still--and I found myself quite angry. And I had to keep on reminding myself that I left the country when Mandela went to prison. I had a very privileged life. He was in prison. He comes out and he's forgiving (laughter). There's no way I could do that. And I was genuinely upset and angry when I went back and saw. And to have endured what he did, and then come out and be generous, is not something I would have been capable of.
Speaker 1: Did you know anyone that knew him?
Speaker 2: Not directly. The closest I got is, there's a couple I met, and the husband works for NPR [National Public Radio]. And he spent two years in South Africa making audio for NPR, a documentary on Mandela. And he actually met Mandela, and that's closest I came.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were people in your family or in the colored community thinking about the ANC [African National Congress] in those days?
Speaker 2: They, they--within the colored community, and, as I said, most of the educated ones were in the teaching professor. And so they created, there were two groups, political groups formed with positions on Apartheid. They were much more involved in those than the ANC as such.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are the other organizations that were evolving?
Speaker 2: I forget, it was teachers, something, something.
Speaker 1: Okay, the educators' group?
Speaker 2: Yeah. They represented all the colored educators.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: And they had political positions on various issues.
Story_ID: 25942
Speaker 1: Alright, well, tell us about Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the big, the biggest surprise, I obviously had to take some courses. And my capability was comparable to that of the others. So that came as a major surprise to me, that having come from this high school--as I said, I was very unsure. And when I went to the University of Cape Town [South Africa], how would I stack up against the others. But then that's still a very small pool, and Harvard's much, much bigger. And so I was quite astonished that I could compete with the others. What I'm most grateful for is just the freedom I was given, the--in South Africa even they, somebody teaches a course. The exams at the end, they--it's really a regulated system. They would actually bring in professors from, sent exams somewhere else, to check that this is, meets certain standards and so on. At Harvard, most of the courses should be--I shouldn't say this, but what I know, this is what professors talk about. (laughter) What interests them.
Speaker 1: So they're not teaching to a standard. They're teaching to whatever they say in the class?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, what's his name? Larry Summer got into trouble--professors mostly teach the book they're currently writing. Just this complete freedom. The other amazing thing is the diversity, the students, I feel like American universities compared to a college, and your biggest learning experience is from your fellow students. Now, it's, the same is here. You learn most from the others. I mean you spend far more time with them than you do with the professor. And so I feel students should choose a college on the basis--they should go and visit and see what the other students are like (laughter), if you get along with them, if you could--that's by far, the most important thing. And so Harvard has an amazing collection of people from my perspective. And so in Cape Town [South Africa], I couldn't socialize at all at university. So all of a sudden, I was thrown into that environment. And I spent, initially, a great deal of time. I don't know if you know, Cambridge, there's a movie house called the "Brattel" (ph.) that shows horror movies. And so I figured there's severe censorship, that they even banned a movie called "Black Beauty", and it's actually about a horse (laughter). The title is suspicious. So I spent a lot of time in the Brattel seeing movies (laughter) that I would never have been able to see there. And I took courses in all sorts of things that were not directly related. And as I said, the place was incredibly generous.
Story_ID: 25943
Speaker 1: Who are some of the personalities at Harvard [University] when you got there? Now, when you came over, the--this is 1963, was--this is the Fall of '63' [1963], right? That is--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --John [F.] Kennedy was still president--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was shortly after that. Yeah, he assassinated shortly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and he was assassinated (unclear). But he's a Harvard man, and he--I think he even, even though it doesn't need boosting that much, he boosted the profile of Harvard for a lot of people that didn't realize--
Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of that aspect--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Harvard man, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like there's a Harvard man, but I didn't, I assumed that Harvard was always Harvard (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it was, but a lot of, I think a lot of poor people that don't think about college didn't think about what Harvard was until the president--
Speaker 2: I see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was from there, and they made a bigger deal out of it, I think. But, so do you remember--
Speaker 2: You know, it may sound odd, my closest friends I quickly made were Indians. And it's simply because India is a colony of Great Britain, and so education actually had a lot in common. We learned the same problems with [Rudyard] Kipling and these other people (laughter). We had almost the same exams and the same kinds. So actually, I shared a lot with them. The, even though I knew no Indians until I went to Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting. I would have thought--so the Indians in South Africa kind of kept to their own community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's so segregated that, yeah, there is not much. (Unclear) to this day, my friends are the people I befriended and the ones I keep constant contact with, the people I met there.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: It was just the, it's something that spoiled me and that, for what happened much later, what happened much later is I went to South Africa a few years ago, and started getting involved. It was only at that stage that I appreciated how unusual my acceptance was at Harvard. But when I went back to South Africa, everybody knew exactly where I belong. I was back where I had been, when I was given this complete freedom. And somebody said one of the most difficult things next to getting into Harvard is getting out (laughter). They accept you, they're not going to acknowledge they made any mistake. You're assured--to me, education I've become quite convinced, is all about self-confidence. And I would submit Harvard, Princeton [University], most of these places do an excellent job at boosting self-confidence.
Story_ID: 25944
Speaker 1: I have a story. It didn't happen while I was there, and I think it happened subsequently. On graduation day at Harvard [University], the group of students was asked a very simple, scientific question. And so these people are in caps and gowns, and they've just had the most expensive education money can buy. They were asked why summer is warmer than winter. And you could see it on YouTube, and the guy goes onto the camera and--(unclear) they give interesting answers, but it's mostly wrong (laughter). And so it--
Speaker 2: Is this recent, recently?
Speaker 1: In the '90's [1990s], I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: If you punch into YouTube, "why summers are warmer than winters", something like that, and anyway, the, a big scandal. And science education is terrible, and to this day, you can go to NSF [National Science Foundation] and you can get funds to help with educating laymen about basic science. And when I got to South Africa, where they're also concerned about education, I told them about the story. And I said, their interpretation should be really different from the American one. In America, it's a scandal. These students go to a prestigious school, and they don't know basic science. See, from an African perspective, take note that each and every one of those students continues with a at least financially successful career, which implies that it's actually not important to know why summer is warmer than winter. It didn't handicap them in the least. What did they gain at Harvard, that given 10, 15 minutes, they would have found out the answer. They had the self-confidence. They don't stuff their heads with facts. You have to produce, which I feel is wrong with the (unclear) education system in South Africa and training to pass this one exams. You try to anticipate the questions and it is not the learning experience. Anyway, so this ignorance of these Harvard students to me is actually a sign of the success of the place (laughter), that it's quite interesting to listen to the wrong question--the wrong answers they give to this question. And (unclear) thinking (laughter), along (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Even if wrong.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but in general, it's being prepared to face questions you hadn't seen before and deal with them. It takes a lot of self-confidence. And that I feel is a major problem and certainly, it's the harm that Apartheid did was to destroy self-confidence, tell people they're not capable. They shouldn't bother, begin to work for a mine. And you asked me earlier, if it was some phrase I'm fond of. At Harvard, you know, "Why not?" You propose something and it's very (unclear). I don't know if people actually discouraging you. Give it a try. They, to me (unclear) say what Bill Gates did, to--and so many people want to get there and have this degree from this place. Bill Gates left. He has amazing self-confidence. He's, he knows what he wants to do. And he does it. But I feel that attitude is the same for America. It's a country, "Why not?" It's a country that encourages to try things.
Story_ID: 25945
Speaker 1: What did you focus on at Harvard [University]? Did you get a Masters, just a Masters or did you go get--did you move on--
Speaker 2: I got a PhD.
Speaker 1: --did you go straight through to PhD?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: And it was very likely--I'm basically a child of Sputnik. And so the science today is actually very different in the U.S. At that time, it wasn't just Harvard, the whole country wanted more scientists. I mean nowadays, we have trouble attracting students to science. At that time, because of the Cold War, because of Sputnik, science was a desirable thing to do. And scientists were indulged. They were lots of opportunities and experiments and field programs. So today is actually not the same. Today funding is very tight. Congressmen want to know, what have you done for me lately? (Laughter). Scientists are not exploring things, about making mistakes. It's almost essential to have an education process where you're allowed to make mistakes. That's how you learn. Nowadays, you have to play it safe. And so I feel what we've suffered, the U.S., the education side, this insistence on producing, showing what you've done for me lately, discourages tackling difficult questions. You play safe, and you have to write so many papers and so it, that wasn't the case in the '60's [1960s], '70's [1970s], dealing right with the Cold War. It all changed radically when the Cold War came to an end. So I was really lucky in that respect that I came at that time.
Story_ID: 25946
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers at Harvard [University] or--and, well, who was your advisor, first of all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a fellow, he died a few years ago, Allen Robinson. And, again, at some--they gave me a scholarships for the first few years, and then you have to find a project to work on. It was in, time when I left South Africa, it--not the slightest idea that there are people who study the atmosphere or the ocean. I used to think the atmosphere, for the weather is just random. What's there to study? It's a chaotic thing. And so I got there, discovered people actually applied mathematics to these topics. He introduced me to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright--
Speaker 2: But again, there was a whole community--at the time, oceanography used to be a really descriptive science. People (unclear) measurement and so on, and then it became a branch of applied mathematics. People applied equations (unclear), why is there a gulf stream and so on. And it was a very exciting period, and it wasn't just Harvard. MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] is close by and there's (unclear) Woods around Cape Cod. And so again, I got exposed to a scientific community, all these people. They brought together people, made measurements with people who solved equations. And so, and then again, you get introduced to a scientific mode of operating. It's a, it's a bubble. These people are really driven by science. They, you almost become a jetsetter, you know, meetings across the globe. You see the same people at all these meetings. You get, I know of colleagues, I know their wives, I know their children. To me, one of my biggest accomplishments since coming to the U.S.--I came and I was very aware that I'm alone. I now have people I can visit in Boston [Massachusetts], Seattle [Washington], Los Angeles [California]--these are all scientific colleagues. But, again, they're a social network. And that was--and it doesn't stop there. I have close friends in Tokyo [Japan] and Venice [Italy] and Paris [France]. And this is what science did for me. So in some sense, I take enormous pleasure from that component, that, as I said, Harvard is very welcoming and so forth. On the other hand, if you're a foreigner, you--I was very envious that somebody would go to Cleveland [Ohio]. They have an uncle there or they go to Nebraska and there's a aunt. I mean I had nobody. Now, I feel I actually have--not relatives, but I have close friends. I can inquire about their children and so scientists (unclear)--I'm not sure it exists in business or law. But in science, we get somebody to come give a seminar. We go out to dinner with him. He may stay at my house if he's a friend, and so there's actually a very close, social network in science.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, well, tell us what you were learning about--so when you came, you were a math major, strictly, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you got your PhD in mathematics and--
Speaker 2: But applied to the oceans.
Speaker 1: Applied to oceans, okay. So, and it was Allen Robinson that got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there's a friend over at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]. Even when I was at Harvard [University], I spent quite a lot of time at MIT, Jewel Charney, who is a Professor of Atmospheric Science.
Speaker 1: George--
Speaker 2: Jewel Charney, C-H-A-R-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other thing about these people in, again, South Africa is very ironical. There's a professor, and you call him "professor". I would call Allen Robinson, "Allen". Then it took me quite a long time to get used to calling my superiors by their first name. I would call Jewel Charney, Jewel, and, the--but it's, anyway, it's another wonderful thing about the American system is really relaxed and at ease (unclear). You're almost encouraged to ask questions, almost the opposite of the system where, if you ask a question, you must be dumb (laughter). So it was just this freedom. These people were genuinely keen on mentoring their students, welcoming them to the community, making them feel members. It's a wonderful environment.
Story_ID: 25947
Speaker 1: Can you explain to us how mathematics is applied to oceanographic science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so [Isaac] Newton wrote down some equations, and on the basis of those could predict how planets move around the sun. It's basically laws of motion. And exactly the same laws apply to a fluid. They take a bit more complicated shape, but in principle we can write down equations that express certain laws. And on the basis of that, solving them, I can explain, say something like the gulfstream is a puzzle because it's this river in the ocean. And it sticks to the East coast of the U.S. for its North wind. If you ask why is there this, it's the winds over the ocean. But in the winds, there's no river. The winds blow fairly uniformly like to cross the Atlantic. Why is, the response of the ocean takes the form of this jet? And so the puzzle. And then there're many more such jets. And so the other thing that happened while I, during the time I got involved in the searches, the field of oceanography is quite specialized. You have people there on ships making measurements. Then you have people who try to explain the measurements. However, I just explained to you one challenge is how do the winds that are quite uniform, this special structure, how do they generate the narrow jet? In solving that problem, I don't ask myself about the winds. The winds are given. And if we want to understand why there are winds, I go to somebody else. I go to a meteorologist. And the peculiar thing is the meteorologist will explain to you why there are winds, and why they blow this way and not that way, and will take into account that the ocean has a certain temperature. But he doesn't ask him why it has that temperature. The waters of California is quite cold. The water of Miami [Florida] is a lot warmer. Meteorologists will take this into account. So it becomes so specialized that (unclear), the oceanographic institute where people study the ocean, the closest atmospheric scientists at MIT is about 90 miles away. The same is on the West Coast. There's an oceanographic institute at Scripps [Institution of Oceanography] and La Jolla, close to San Diego [California]. And when they form, you know, (unclear) California systems, they decided not to duplicate small fields. So that's the only one that initially had oceanography. Atmospheric science, they put somewhere else, put it at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. And it becomes a chicken and egg, and then I got into this phenomena, El Nino because it's, if you ask an oceanographic why does it happen, he'll say it's because the winds change. If you ask a meteorologist why did the winds change, and he'll say, oh, it's because the ocean changed (laughter). And so there was a whole new field. You have to put these two pieces together. And I was very lucky to be at the beginning when people first pointed out this is a "chicken and egg" argument. You have to, they say now you have to permit interactions between the ocean and the atmosphere. You have to allow those to interact. So there's an entirely new field opened up. Previously, it was you're either strictly an atmospheric scientists or you're an oceanographer. And what's fascinating about it, is they have different cultures. The oceanographer is a descendent of Magellan. They have beards and boots and they brave the elements. They go on ships. They're on their own. The meteorologists are very practical minded. They have to predict the weather tomorrow, and they seem rather tedious nerds. So you have to bring these two different cultures together (laughter) to explain how the ocean and atmosphere interact. And now it's gone even further. If you want to know about climate, you have to bring in all other branches, the solid earth, the plants, the CO2 from the plants. So the whole field becomes more and more integrating. And, but it started in the '70's [1970s], asking why the ocean and the atmosphere, how they interact.
Story_ID: 25948
Speaker 1: What was the title of your dissertation and why did you select it?
Speaker 2: It was (unclear)-I don't even know what it was about (laughter). At the time, it was changing, oceanography was changing from (unclear) descriptive to more theoretical or to both to descriptive and theoretical. And people discovered at the equator, there is a very peculiar pattern. The winds of the equator in the Pacific, blow from East to West, the trade winds. And then somebody by accident, I think they actually had long-line fishing gear that they threw out, discovered that the winds were blowing from East to West, the ship was (unclear) from East to West. But this line they--was going the opposite direction. And so it turns out, just below the surface, there's a very intense eastward current flowing, and it's, so the Pacific is about 15,000 kilometers wide. This kind of tells you exactly where the equator is. It's precisely on the equator, across the full width of the Pacific. And it's only about a hundred kilometers wide. So it's like a ribbon. So there's a big puzzle why you're seeing this current. I got involved in that and tried to explain.
Speaker 1: Well, what were your--how did you measure, I mean how did you examine the current first of all?
Speaker 2: So there were, people (unclear) measurements would come back and (unclear) seeing, how intense it was, what depths it was and so on. And it's a bit tricky to explain. One intriguing thing about the equator, everybody is convinced that it is a special line. I'm sure you're convinced there's something special. And usually people will tell you, if you flush a toilet in the Northern hemisphere, it'll go this way, in the Southern hemisphere, it'll go that way. It's a question what's happened to the equator. And then the evidence, supporting evidence would be hurricanes in the Northern hemisphere are strictly anti-clockwise. In the Southern hemisphere, it's strictly clockwise. So there is something, must be special about the equator. And, indeed, there is. Now, it's more amusing to tell you about how people are convinced it is special, and how they get misled by this. So, yet, if you go to YouTube, and I have my students you know, if you punch in equator man, if you go to the equator in Kenya or just about anywhere in the world, in Kenya, in particular, there's a big sign put up when you cross the equator. So lots of (unclear). And this sign is put up by some local natives, and you stop, and they demonstrate for you this Coriolis force thing. They have a bucket of water, and it goes this way. And you have your picture taken with them you give them a tip. And it's a complete hoax. On that scale, you need something on the order of a hundred kilometers or more before you can see this effect. You don't see it in--
Speaker 1: In a bucket?
Speaker 2: --a bucket of water (laughter).
Story_ID: 25949
Speaker 1: But recently, and this I the part I particularly like, and I have my students watch it, they took a BBC woman, went there, and she made her little documentary. So on YouTube, you can get lots of little radios that tourists have posted. They're very impressed they've witnessed this thing. So the BBC woman goes, and she goes with her own camera crew. And she gets out of the van at the equator, and she tells the audience she's been waiting since childhood to see this, from which you conclude that this is a highly educated person. She's, since childhood, known about the Coriolis force. Then when it's over, she makes a most amazing statement. She turns to the camera, and she says, I know this is a load of rubbish, but what can I say? I'm impressed. So it's completely inconsistent. How can she be impressed if she knows it's a load of rubbish, that this guide had a hoax? And I think it's actually, gets to the heart of the matter why we have trouble communicating science to laymen, that to this woman, it was like seeing a magic show. You can go and see a rabbit being pulled out of a hat and you know it's--you're being fooled. But you enjoy it. And so scientists are so obsessed with being objective, they take the magic out of what they do. They determine to be objective to have a sequence of very logical statements, and they almost deny that what they do is most amazing, and the phenomena they deal with. And so even all sorts of simple things that we sort of take for granted, there's lots of concern over global warming. And everybody knows about the greenhouse effect. And the greenhouse effect is literally like magic. There are little air molecules, you don't see flying around yet. They have a certain structure. There's something called photons, little bits of light. And these things interact, but they only interact in very special ways and only with certain gasses that have a certain structure. And if you look into the details, you'd say, it's magic, and this should work. Anyway, my point is we scientists deal with amazing things and by trying to be too rational, too objective about it, they actually destroy the magic. I feel we should be able to acknowledge this is amazing, and nonetheless, introduce people to the science of what it is. I don't think the science destroys what is astonishing about these phenomena. But I went a while ago to a meeting--it was a strange meeting. I was the only scientist, where the goal was to discuss why it's so difficult to convey global warming issues to laymen. And the meeting was actually organized by anthropologists. And so they discussed scientists if they wanna thrive. And they know (unclear) is obsessed with being objective (laughter) and that to the point, when they write papers, they never use the first person because this would give the impression that something--and you almost scold your students if they use the word "I". Never say "I" did this. I mean it's not just you. It's, and they give these logical, so at this meeting, there was one woman who said she went to a small village in Germany, Heidelberg University to ask the scientists there, global warming and so on. Then she went to the big city of New York. And she told the audience, I was actually amazed, they said the same thing (laughter), completely--one group speaks German, one's a small village. And there was no diversity (laughter), not even in the mode in which they explained what was going on. But anyway, so to outsiders and this woman with the Coriolis force, I think they have a message for us, that we shouldn't destroy the magic of science, that some things that's--and in particular, we shouldn't, we should acknowledge there's lots we don't know. And we're quick to have answers for everything. This is a thin ice, but the global warming, I'm very concerned, but I think it's a big mistake to pretend we know exactly what's going to happen. I think we're going to be surprised (laughter). And it's, the scientists are trying to be so self-confident and so rational. We're dealing with this amazingly complicated system. We're doing something dangerous, it's like playing with fire. We pretend we can tell people exactly what's going to happen and they--instead we should be telling people how amazing the planet is and how we should be taking care of it.
Story_ID: 25950
Speaker 1: Now your PhD dissertation was on fluid dynamics, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Explain what are fluid dynamics for those that are uninitiated and what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Yes, so as I said, it starts with [Isaac] Newton. If I had a ball rolling down a slope, an experiment (unclear) or I have planet going around the sun. I can, Newton had a general law which tells you what governs the motion of this planet. And so something, there's a force acting on it. It's gravity, and everything follows. Now, fluid would be, almost the infinity of objects. They're all subject, again, to a force. If I had bucket of water with the water flowing out, it will start swirling. And I could--so it's as if it were a planet going around a sun, except there's lots of little particles now. But it is no different from, it's just that it's taking the isolated particle and making that particle up to a new. So the fluid is just a collection of huge numbers, a huge collection of individual particles, each subject to this. So essentially that's what fluid dynamics is. It's simply applying the principles of mechanics to a collection of fluid, collection of particles that you call fluid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And the students at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] used to call the ocean wet air. So it's exactly the same principles that govern that, govern the ocean. The only difference is the air is compressible. I could take all the air in this room and put it in one cup. Water is not, so that makes a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you studied the current in the Pacific, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The current along the equator. Is there a name for that current?
Speaker 2: It's called Equatorial undercurrent.
Speaker 1: Equa--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It, I was just saying how impersonal scientists try to be that the fellow who discovered it is actually a guy called [Townsend] Cromwell. For a while, it was named Cromwell. Then the scientists objected, that they don't name things after individuals. They changed it to something impersonal, Equatorial Undercurrent (laughter). There's this obsession with being objective (laughter).
Speaker 1: The objective tribe.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So the Equatorial Undercurrent, it flows from--
Speaker 2: West to East, first to the East.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: It then turns out, there's something called a wave guide. Waves will actually get trapped. Again, it's, if I had a string between you and me, I could give a pulse here, and something will propagate to you, and I could actually send you messages by doing this. So this thing would be a wave line. I could use it as a guide for waves to travel. If you're in a fluid, they can go in all directions. But it turns out the equator is a wave--and this has to do with a Coriolis force vanishing there. Because of that, there are very special waves that travel strictly along the equator. And that gives rise to this current. And it's a big part of El Nino, but anyway, it flows like magic in the middle of nowhere. If you had, if you didn't know where you are, but you had an instrument to measure currents, you'd be able to tell when you're on the equator. This current knows exactly where the equator is. So it's quite different lines of longitude (unclear). There's nothing special about those. But the lines of latitude are special. And the equator is a very special one.
Story_ID: 25951
Speaker 1: You did a post-doctoral fellowship at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology]?
Speaker 2: That's right. It was the same family, it was the same group. I did know these people beforehand. I used to MIT, I liked MIT--I still like MIT a lot. It's a very nerdy place, (laughter), obviously, there's a--MIT environment was truly God-awful. You would walk into a building. You could spend your life at MIT and never go outside. And you can walk underneath Massachusetts Avenue and to various cafeterias. And it looked like you're in a submarine. There'd be all these wires in the ceiling and so the first time you go there, and walk around these inside corridors, and in winter, it's actually much better to walk inside (laughter) than outside, but I thought that was part of the reason that people were so friendly towards each other, the physical environment was so awful (laughter). MIT's a place of, to me, of very friendly people. They, and again, some of them are, this fellow [Jule Gregory] Charney was very famous. His door is completely open. If you had a question, you could go in. It was just that atmosphere.
Story_ID: 25952
Speaker 1: Who are the leaders, in fact, like who is the leader or is there a person, a particular person that you would say is the father of computational oceanography?
Speaker 2: There's actually here at, in Princeton [University], there's a federal lab associated with university. And they do research that gets used by the weather service to predict the weather, to predict El Nino and so on. And so many of those people are here. And it has an interesting history that in, during the second World War, or shortly afterwards, people built the first electronic computer. And there was a fellow from Neumann [University] at the Institute for Advanced Studies which is very close by. And once you have this powerful machine, you have to do something with it. And he decided that would be useful to see if you could predict the weather. And so it actually started in Princeton [University] that they--he then formed a group to undertake using this machine to make weather forecasts. And when he died, the group dispersed. Some went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and some went to the University of Washington, in Seattle.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: [Jule Gregory] Charney--oh, oh, this one is from Neumann.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: [John] Von Neumann.
Speaker 1: Von Neumann.
Speaker 2: V-O-N--he's a very, very big name in science.
Speaker 1: V-O-N--
Speaker 2: N-E-U-M-A-N-N.
Speaker 1: --U-M-N--
Speaker 2: N-E-U-M-A-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, von Neumann.
Speaker 2: Yeah. If, yeah, he's one of the giants of twentieth century science and not far below Einstein. And, anyway, clearly a brilliant fellow. But he took an interest in--he helped develop this computer [ENIAC] and took an interest in how do you, can you use this to predict the weather. But out of this came, there's again this business of what--little learning's a dangerous thing. Once they have the machine, they ask themselves is it possible to predict weather indefinitely into the future? Can, is it impossible to tell whether December 21st, 2015, it will rain or snow. And that led to the discovery of Chaos. You cannot, and this whole business of the butterfly that flaps its wings (unclear). That whole field came out of attempts to see, out of this effort to see. So one thing, as I said, leads to another. And that's what the essence of science. You do something and it will go often quite unexpected directions.
Speaker 1: And the Chaos theory is that a butterfly flaps its wings--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --or whatever you do effects everything else.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So the problem with, the reason you can't predict weather is you need to know the weather today to--and then use the computer to see what will happen next. If you make a tiny error in your description of what's going on now, it greatly amplifies. So if you miss a butterfly that flaps its wings now, that will inhibit your ability to predict the weather.
Speaker 1: So it sort of, kind of makes it impossible in the long term to do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --that kind of prediction?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, but as I said, that all came from this effort to predict the weather by means of this computer. You then had to consider, so one of them decided to investigate if you could predict the weather forever.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so, and this was--the computer was the--was this the computer that was used to, by Project Matterhorn and all those different--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They may have used it, but I think it was (unclear). Somebody wrote a book about that whole effort recently.
Speaker 1: Oh, the super computer--
Speaker 2: Yeah, of that first computer and what led to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's some disagreement about exactly who should get credit building this thing. I think some people in (unclear) Pennsylvania were involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright--
Speaker 2: Of course, the theme all of this is that whatever you do in science, it's opened ended. It leads to more and more things.
Story_ID: 25953
Speaker 1: So, in '71' [1971], you came over to Princeton [University]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And now how was, is this the same of people (laughter), once again, the same--
Speaker 2: Pretty much, they--it's almost incestuous. So I've never in my life applied for a job. At that time, my advisor at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] said I needed a job, and he made the telephone call (laughter). Maybe it's less so now. There are far more people, and so there's--but still the weight of an advisor, of a knowledgeable person, who your mentor is, is a big factor.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so you came over here as a research associate in 1971. And you continued to write about, papers on the flow properties of a fluid between concentric spheres. And there's in the "Journal of Fluid Dynamics". Well, tell us about that one? What is the gist of that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's actually, it comes back to the equator so the spheres have an equator. And if you look, something will happen special there. However, it's just part of a bigger, you have to look at the whole sphere to see why this happens at the equator. You have to give it a context. And so it--in the spirit of scientists being ultra-objective, I--they refrain there from even mentioning this (unclear) (laughter) of the equator. But that was the motivation for that (laughter), that was also the application. So this (unclear) two contending spheres (laughter). Anyway, the anthropologist in that meeting I went to would be amused by this type of (unclear) (laughter). You try to take all the magic out of it, so you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 25954
Speaker 1: Well, on a personal level, by this time I was married. And my wife is from Argentina.
Speaker 2: Now, where did you meet?
Speaker 1: At UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. I went with this fellow, [Jule Gregory] Charney. He went on sabbatical there, and I went along. And she was a student there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she is, she's Spanish speaking. She wanted to go back to South America. And me coming here, we applied, and South America is very unstable. It was at that time, especially Argentina. On various occasions we had jobs and were fired before we could get there. There were coups and so on. It (laughter) got to the point I told so many friends that we were moving to Argentina, that if they hadn't seen me for a while, they would ask how I was it. And the simplest answer was, that we actually--it was wonderful, even though we'd never gone (laughter). Otherwise, I had to tell a long story about the coup (laughter). But at some stage there was a big international experiment being organized to study the tropical Atlantic. As I said, this was the days of Sputnik and so there were funds. And it was so big, they created a group to help with the organization of this thing. And so we moved to England for two years. I was involved there.
Speaker 2: So this is 19--
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], '74' [1974], somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], '74' [1974], okay. Okay, now, this is the first time you'd been to England, right?
Speaker 1: Lived there, yes, the first time I lived there.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is--so where did you work in England?
Speaker 1: At the main nautical office. The main thing I learned in England is the easiest country to be an immigrant is the U.S. You're accepted. You're a part-- and England is an interesting experience. It, we lived in some village, and I would go to the--there was butcher. And whatever I--it didn't matter what the weather was, our conversation started the same way every time. I didn't matter it was rain or snow outside. He would tell me that where you are from, the weather must be very different. And this established that I was not from England (laughter). And then we proceeded, (laughter) but it's, in some sense we were in Paris [France] also for a while. And those countries are much older, and immigrants are far fewer, far between. And so it's understandable, they have a social structure. And you're viewed as an outsider. And the U.S. in that sense is unusual. Everybody else immigrant. And so you, here you get accepted much more readily. Over there it's actually much more difficult.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you say you worked for the meteorological office of--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --of what? Was it government office or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, the weather services in every country are run by the government.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In many places, it's run by the Air Force because they have the greatest interests. These people were our hosts. It was international group. And so the, it involved a lot of travel. The headquarters were in Geneva [Switzerland]. That's a place, how they call the World Meteorological Organization is. But the group in England hosted the managers of this program.
Story_ID: 25955
Speaker 1: I know you took quite a bit of interests in El Nino, and you've mentioned in this interview a couple of times. What in the world is El Nino, first of all, for those who don't know?
Speaker 2: Oh, from an atmospheric point of view, it's the Eastern Pacific is quite cold. If you go to the Golopigus Islands or if you go to Peru, you probably need a body suit to go into the water. And every so often, it turns warm. And this has a big impact on the atmosphere. So you're in the tropics of rains where the surface is very warm. The air rises, and then the air sinks in the cold regions. And so the whole atmospheric circulation, the strong influence by the sea surface temperature patterns. So when Peru is very cold (unclear). Those parts of the world are deserts. And then during El Nino, they warm up. And that rearranges atmosphere, and so you get flood and the whole globe is affected in North America has severe storms and so on. And so from a strictly atmospheric point of view, it's the change in the ocean. And then you, as I said, you can ask the oceanographers well, why did this change? And they'll say because the change in the winds (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you ask the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it turns out, it's a little like, if I give you, if you tell me you're thirsty, and I'll give you some salty water, you'll be asking for more water. And so it's a feedback. It turns out if you ask why is the Eastern Pacific cold, it's because the waters blow from East to West and they definitely pile up on the warm point in the West. However, if you, for some reason slacken these winds slightly, some of the warm water flows back. This causes the winds to slacken even more. And, as the feedback goes on. And so in, the question, and so you'll--oh, I'll try this out on you and try it on the (unclear) make sure it works. If you're in a place with a shower and the plumbing is poor, you turn on--you want it warmer, but it takes a while for the plumbing to respond. So after a while, you're much too warm, and then you turn back, and it takes--after a while you're much too cold. And what's going on this, you respond instantaneously to this water. The plumbing has a much longer time. It takes a while to adjust, and because of this difference, there's a constant oscillation back and forth. You never really get the right temperature because you're either too warm or too cold. In the case of the ocean atmosphere, the atmosphere is quick. Change the sea surface temperatures, the winds know immediately. The ocean is very ponderous, very sluggish. So if there's a change in the winds, the atmosphere, the ocean takes a while to adjust by which time the winds have changed. It's very much like the plumbing thing. The plumbing case, you are the atmosphere, you adjust quickly. The plumbing is the ocean, and it takes forever. So that's why it keeps on going. So El Nino comes around every three, four years. That's how long it takes for the system to--so it's genuinely, you cannot explain it as strictly atmospheric or strictly oceanic. It requires both. So you have to take a model that you use to predict the atmosphere, coupled that to a model for the ocean, and then you can do this. And so we had this sort of group effort--what Cane and Zebiak did was actually to build the first model that did this. But the mechanism was explained beforehand and so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so alright, okay, so this is in '88' [1988]. This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I take credit for introducing the term La Nina--you know about La Nina. It's, basically, if you have this oscillation back and forth, you're never in a mean state. You're either the one--you're in two complimentary states. The one is called the El Nino, and for a long time, people thought El Nino was the departure from some ordinary state. And I pointed out that's actually not true. You're either above or below. You're never in the middle. And so we gave the name La Nina for the opposite of El Nino.
Story_ID: 25956
Speaker 1: Now, do you know Warren Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, tell us something about him, and how you met him?
Speaker 2: He's a pioneer in developing the models. So (unclear) started as a model for predicting the weather. And they usually run--run means making calculations, to tell you what happens over the next five days or so. The next challenge is can you run for several years, and we know you can't predict the weather, but can you get the seasons right? So right now, I can't tell you what the weather is going to be in say, five days from now. I can't tell you with certainty that three months from now, it's gonna be hot (laughter). So that's a different problem, is the climate. And what (unclear) to this engaged in the climate side. And then it's not possible to do with this, just the atmospheric model. You have to couple it to the ocean and take--it's another scale up. Anyway, that's where a lot of it fits in.
Story_ID: 25957
Speaker 1: Was it 1991 that Nelson Mandela was released?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had elections '93' [1993], I think.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: He became president in 90--'93' [1993], he became president, yeah.
Speaker 1: How was that? Just tell us how you felt about that? You know, here you're looking at something that you never thought was gonna happen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean not that it's really happened, but I mean you were explaining before, it hasn't really happened, it sort of happened?
Speaker 2: No, it was amazement. What astonished me the most is that it was peaceful. I was quite sure that we'd have civil war. And during those years--so I think they lost about a million people, immigration, all white, all young and it's part of the reason for a severe shortage now of technically trained people, with all the young, white youth. The whites that stayed behind were the older people. But a million of the youth left.
Speaker 1: Did they--are you saying they left because of the end of Apartheid--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A fearing of, no, a fearing a civil war.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened is a miracle, and if you--the conditions that these people should peacefully--it was Mandela's influence. There were factions. You've seen the movie "Invictus"?
Speaker 1: I've heard about it. It's about the soccer--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the rugby game.
Speaker 1: Oh, the rugby game.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, the movie itself is not that wonderful. It's a bit boring, to me the rugby scenes. But the, it's a movie more about symbols. And rugby is a symbol of oppression, because it's a game played strictly by white youth. And so the ANC [African National Congress] want nothing to do with it. And Mandela persuades them--he transforms this symbol into a symbol of unity. It'll be good for the country if they win an international competition. And it will unit--and it was the same reasons that they hosted the World Soccer Cup thing in 2010. It's from some symbolic, and I sort of try to do the same with science, that they should have their own projects, their own things for symbolic reasons. You shouldn't tell people there. They should aspire to come to Princeton [University]. They would have something there. And scientifically too, you can have amazing projects there because there are problems you can only study there. Right now, South Africa has announced a big project called square kilometer ray. And it's a ray of radio telescopes. They can do both. And I would argue the last thing South Africa needs are more astronomers. But it serves a symbolic purpose. They have unusual skies. You can see the Southern stars that you don't see from this hemisphere. And it gets a lot of attention. And it tells investors that they're interested in high-tech things. So many benefits come out--anyway, symbols matter. And so there were, the rugby games that Mandela persuaded the ANC to support, and it lowered tension, and it was a benefit to the country. That happened, '94' [1994].
Story_ID: 25958
Speaker 1: One of the scientific topics that is, seems pressing today is global warming.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are your, did--when did you start thinking about that and what do you think about it now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a real problem for everybody on the planet that it's become very polarizing. And so people either want--and since I got interested in that one aspect, and so now I've got an interest in the history of science. And you can claim science is about argument. It's about debates, if you've--I'm a scientist, you're a scientist. It's your obligation to challenge whatever I say. That's the way science progresses. In this case, it reflects your politics. If you--and it's most unfortunate, it's almost harming science. And so I'm concerned about that. You're not allowed to question. If I say I'm skeptical, it must be because I work for the oil company (laughter) or the other extreme. And then in, I started going to South Africa, and then I realized there's another facet to this. And there's a big ethical issue related to global warming. And it's related to the present versus the future. If you have a lot of problems right now, and I tell you that I also see these problems in the future, and you have limited resources, how do you decide which are more important? And in the case of South Africa, if you have people literally have nothing, they don't know where the next meal is coming from, I think it's cruel to tell them that the future's gonna be worse. You're really obliged to tell them things are gonna get better (laughter). And so I simply don't agree with my colleagues that go from here, from rich countries to give advice there. And it's all about how terrible things are going to be (laughter). And that's not even their cause. I mean we have this--anyway, I'm in disagreement on this issue. I think, I think it's a rich country's problem. What I tell people there, the liberation of poverty, the key is education, like China, India, it's education that's enabling them. And in the same sense that the Cold War for me was educational opportunity. It gave me a chance to come here. Global warming can be seen as an educational opportunity. If you're so concerned about the planet, find out about it, and learn how it works. And the goal is not so much to produce more geoscientists or earth scientists. It's just to train the population. I have some students now monitoring temperature. If you're so interested in global warming, measure it every day. After a few weeks, your interest is the graphs, the statistics, what's the variance, what's the mean? So it becomes a vehicle for actually this Excel program of Microsoft. You can teach them some basics. So I see it more as a vehicle for promoting education. And forget about gloom and doom. There's too much--tell them they're on an amazing planet, which is the case. And they should try to understand it. So I have difficulties with my colleagues who insist on the gloom and doom. I think even the Americans have had too much gloom and doom (laughter). It's awfully idealistic, but I think if you tell people they're lucky to be on this amazing place, I'm astonished the attention NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] gets for the discovery of planets around other stars. They, every time they see something, it's in the news. To me, we live on the only planet that's known to be habitable. And every time they find a new one, it just reinforces how amazing this one is. And we should be capitalizing on that, and our committees are completely failing. So we take it for granted. Most, you know, everybody--we expect an educated person to know how the body functions. And the human body is an amazingly complicated thing. But everybody knows about the heart, the lungs, the liver, hygiene, diet, exercise. Very few people know why the planet is habitable. They don't know the ABC of that. And instead of threatening them, things will get worst, explain to them how lucky they are to be--I'm afraid I'm not having much success with this (laughter). I've told people don't respond unless they're threatened (laughter). But, anyway, I beg to disagree.
Speaker 1: Are there any good arguments out here against the concept of global warming? I mean--
Speaker 2: Not scientifically. It's not a scientific issue in my opinion. There is gonna be a problem, but the problem won't really be 50 years until--it's some time in the distance. And so the question is, you--especially, for the poor country, what do you do about--how much of your resources do you reserve for dealing with the problem in the future? There is one counter argument that some people will make. A hundred years ago--today, we're a lot smarter than we were a hundred years ago. And it's called a discount rate, so advances have made (unclear) whatever. So if a hundred years ago, you were told you must spend "x" dollars to prevent, the problem essentially ends. You should discount it because you're going to be a lot smarter. What should that discount rate be? See, there's no agreement on it. So it's an ethical issue on that. But the thing that's so polarized, nobody brings up these issues that actually ought to be discussed. Anyway, it's--
Story_ID: 25959
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking you about the book or the article, 'Where are you from? Why are you here? An African Perspective on Global Warming'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, it's, I was on the editorial board of a book that appears every year. And it has some of the articles for recent developments in science. But the first article, they usually ask an older person to reflect on his experience. And I was a bit taken aback because in choosing this older person, you can choose somebody's that either too old or too young (unclear), just the right one. (Unclear) And I'm considered ripe so I was asked to write this. I chose that title because when I came to the U.S., there's a question I was asked very often, "Where are you from?" And I had to explain. There was a question I was never asked. However, when I went back to South Africa, I was asked the second question (laughter), and the second question was, "Why are you here?" And to the South Africans, I was amazed that, I mean in the U.S., people don't ask that question because it's assumed you want to be here. There, they couldn't understand why I would come from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to be there if I could be--they were generally puzzled, why are you here (laughter)? Why, (unclear) to me, it's all part of the colonialists attitude that they have such a high opinion of some other place. And they can't perceive that they themselves are in a place people would like to be. And so to me it's a colonialist attitude. Anyway, so I wrote about this, that yet I was never--I was always asked, "Where are you from?", but I was never asked "Why are you here?" I go back there when I have (unclear), and they ask me "Why are you here?" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't really--this isn't really a scientific article about--
Speaker 2: No, it's a reflection on--
Speaker 1: It's a reflection, okay. All right.
Story_ID: 25960
Speaker 1: What are some of the--just as somebody in the atmospheric science of, what are some of the problems in Africa in terms of the--well, I know I've always read about the spread of the desert, you know, and knew that Sahara was a place you could graze animals shortly before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --the, you know, the time of Christ or whatever, you know.
Speaker 2: Ten thousand years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and so what are the dynamics of that--(unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, again, an open question. We don't actually have answers. Cape Town [South Africa], well, one of the things I did when I was there is try to make the students aware that (unclear) a very unusual place. And the evidence for Cape Town being unusual is actually quite straightforward. The plants in the world, all the plants are divided into six kingdoms. And some of them are big, the Boreal Forest is one. And it stretches from North America to Europe and there're a few others. There're only six. One of those six is in Cape Town. So there's a most peculiar set of plans that have evolved there. And so the question is, why is Cape Town--so you need many micro-climates to accommodate this great diversity of species. Why does this, why is this place favored with all this diversity? And the answer is quite fascinating. If you take Miami [Florida], which is humid, wet, lots of rain. It's next to a warm ocean. It's perfectly flat, and you take Los Angeles [California], which is arid, it has mountains. It's next to a very cold ocean. Now, suppose through plate tectonics you would deform the continent and you put Miami next to Los Angeles. The result would be Cape Town. So Cape Town's the only city with a warm beach and a cold beach. The Atlantic side is cold and it has a mountain in the middle, depending which way the wind blows, one side of the mountain is arid. The other side is, has forests. You have enormous diversity of climatic zones.
Speaker 1: Is it because it's right there at the tip of Africa?
Speaker 2: Exactly, so, and it's--so, for example, you could say Peru and Brazil are similarly different. But you'd have to have cut up the continent and put, put Peru next to Brazil to get the same the same. So it's, and then you have to go back in time. So how long has this been the case and how did the spot evolve? It becomes a fascinating scientific study. And so it, there's all sorts of problems unique to that place. And then if you go South from there to Antarctica, it's basically, almost unexplored ocean. And most of the CO2 we put into the atmosphere, goes into that ocean, the plants there. So there's lots of opportunities for scientific research there. And the, you can't divorce it from the past, going back thousands of years. Earlier, you asked about Milankovitch cycles. So climate, as we've had ice ages, we have climate. All of that suddenly becomes part of the story, and what I told the students, they're not only in a very special place, they're in a special place at a special time, that the present is actually an unusual moment in the history of the plant. We humans showed up some time ago, but it's just the last few thousand years that we suddenly took off. And most of the time, there were ice ages. We had the moment in between. So we had this very--that's why I'm saying the global warming thing is very dangerous. We have lots of evidence, things change. We have ice ages. We go out of ice age. And we don't understand why, and we decide to interfere with the system. And that's why I think we're bound to be surprised by what's gonna happen. We understand it so poorly. We can't, at the moment, can't explain to you why there were ice ages. We just, embarrassing, and I pretend I can tell you what's going to happen fifty years from now. You know, it all comes back to being a more modest, there's a lot more we don't know than we know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so being involved in oceanography or geosciences at this point in time is it like being a pioneer--you're a pioneer?
Speaker 2: Exactly, a very exciting time, yeah. The, and it still goes back to that Alexander Pope, "it's dangerous--little learning is a dangerous thing." You discover there's more and more things to discover.
Story_ID: 25961
Speaker 1: I don't know. Would you think--it just occurred to me, we may know more about micro-science than we do about--
Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --geosciences? I don't know.
Speaker 2: The pathology side is amazing. I would argue that you cannot actually study the geosciences without some knowledge of biology. It's sort of amazing how much you have to know to figure out--there are things like the CO2 [carbon dioxide] we put in the atmosphere, you could ask, where does it go? And most of it goes into the ocean, and it's microscopic, things you don't--you can only see in an microscope, they're responsible absorbing. We have plants growing in the ocean, but they're really tiny things. And we don't actually understand how they do it or--and much of this is happening South of South Africa, between Antarctica. Anyway, there's lots of exciting and open. But it's almost an explosion--I mentioned to you when I entered the field, oceanography was one topic. Atmospheric science was another. Then I was fortunate and the two had to be merged. Now, it's a much, much bigger merger. We have to get together with biologists, with all sorts of people to piece together, and so it's an even more exciting time at that stage.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I heard or have seen a program probably on public television about maybe the possibility of the poles reversing. Is that--
Speaker 2: It has happened, in a magnetic sense, yeah.
Speaker 1: Magnetic field, yeah.
Speaker 2: Again, we have no idea why--we know it has happened in the past. And the danger is all sorts of things flying out there in space, again, it's really energetic rays, cosmic rays and things from the sun. And this magnetic field steers them away. So when it reverses for a little while, there's no magnetic field. And then we become very vulnerable. And it's thought that in the past, there's been extinctions, global extinctions on such occasions with the magnetic field. Anyway, we live in this amazing place that we don't understand very well. And we take it for granted, and we interfere with it.
Story_ID: 25962
Speaker 1: So, did the science enable you, do you think to appreciate the planet more?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the science, (unclear) if you ask why I became a scientist is the big thing in science is you question everything. And I grew up in a country with such an absurd political system that it was almost a relief to enter the thing where you can question everything (laughter), that you're, in fact, encouraged to question. And the biggest recognition you get is if you show somebody else is wrong (laughter). So you're better off in a system where there's very rigid laws and are completely absurd. You're not allowed to challenge. So science can become an activity that allows you to challenge, and--
Story_ID: 25963
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a project you're working on now that some, I mean a favorite project you're working on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, absolutely involved with South Africa and I'm now trying--I'll say (unclear) I'm going, the big, South Africa has a big scientific enterprise. It started under Apartheid. It's all white scientists. There are no black. And so at fifteen years since Apartheid, and the government is really concerned, how do they attract students to science. And so I'm trying to persuade them to launch a big project, invite others to participate (unclear) outside. But the focus is there, why is this such a special place? Why it's one of the six plant kingdoms there. Put the focus there for the same reason they put money into the astronomy project. The problem is, there's really a lot going in South Africa, but it's very fragmented. And the fragmentation works to the advantage of the privileged people who have already parted the system. It's very difficult to attract novices outside, is because it's operating at a very specialized level. So I'm pre--and I tried organizing something, bottom up, meaning getting the scientists to agree to do something special there. It simply doesn't work because then I have to join forces and opportunities is no longer restricted to the privileged. They do some control. So from their perspective, it's defensible to have a system that works to their advantage now. Why should they change it? So I think I'm making some headway. This way, (unclear) this (unclear) government, this kind of thing can only work, top down. So it's a bit like [Nelson] Mandela persuading the ANC [African National Congress] to support the rugby team. So I did actually get in contact with the minister of science and argue that he should just declare there is such a program and invite people to join. Don't ask them are you interested? If you start bottom, who's interested in starting this thing? Nobody is. If you declare it's going to happen, I think it much more likely that they will turn around. So anyway, that's where we are, and then the object will be to find out why that is a special place at this special time (unclear) the planet. And it boosts self-confidence there in the most unusual place, I would submit. They can, instead of joining--I've become quite skeptical of big, international programs. They invite the Third World to join, but they become cogs in a very big wheel. You need your own wheel. And so, I would like to see them announce such a program and then invite the foreigners, outside world, to come and join, invite the locals to join. But it's going to be similar to [Nelson] Mandela with the rugby team. It's going to take a lot of self-confidence to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, that's my hope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25964
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done as a scientist in your career, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I mentioned, you know, this meeting I had, the students organized for me and (unclear). What surprised me about this meeting, I work in a very narrow, specialized topic. Not many people will show up for this. And so we had reserved a room for twenty, thirty people. And 200 showed up, plus their wives. And so it pleased me. Anyway, that's my biggest accomplishment.
Speaker 1: That's something to be proud of. When you look back on everything again, is there any major thing that you would go back and correct or change if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, changes, I'm all for change (laughter), wouldn't have a chance though (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true (laughter).
Story_ID: 25965
Speaker 1: From your perspective, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: The, there are African, as I said, I came here, I've lived in this bubble or cocoon and then the last several years, I've been much more involved with South Africa. And now, I'm actually much more sensitive to the needs of basically blacks, that it's not sufficient to just be part of other people's enterprises. And in any community, there is a small, just statistically, a small group that will be exceptional in some activity. So in athletes, it's been demonstrated over--exactly the same would apply to science, to anything. And so I feel even the whole country is suffering from not having the black youth exposed to these possibilities, to these opportunities. It's not just for the sake of the black youth. It's really for the sake of the country, amongst them, as I said, statistically, there is some fraction that is unusual, some difficulty. And we deprive ourselves from their capabilities by not giving them a chance. So for that reason, I feel special efforts such as the one you're engaged in, is very important.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if we can do something to get that museum in Detroit [Michigan] open (laughter)--that's really quite shocking--
Speaker 1: Right, you're talking about the Detroit Science Museum that recently closed down--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: And the city's basically in receivership now. It's really a horrible situation, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's a place that's really needed in a city like Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So we got a waste of talent going on when we don't tap--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, and educate all our people, we lose.
Story_ID: 25966
Speaker 1: Now, tell me something about your family? Now, you have children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One son and two grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Now, is your son in science?
Speaker 2: No, he has a world that I don't understand at all. I basically had one job all my life. He's in Silicon Valley. He tells me if he stays more than two years in a job, he's doing something wrong (laughter). It's a world I don't understand. And I don't know how it operates. I'm amazed the years at this university, if we have a vacancy, it ties up the whole department for a year. We interview people. You talk to them. Finally, we choose somebody, and we get letters and commit every--there's no self-confidence. I can't imagine a business operating in this mode. And Silicon Valley, well, doesn't operate (laughter) (unclear) at all. Anyway, the--it sounds very exciting, but it is a world very different from mine. And we--it's not one in which I would know how to operate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 25967
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Actually, I never thought of that. I should be retiring. And some time ago I went to a meeting, I think it was Hamburg, [Germany], and there were two fellows about ten years older than I am. And I told myself, that's how I should be. So they behaved like grandfathers. They were very concerned about everybody's well-being. Do you have the right doctors, the right this, the right that? They sat in the front row, applauded long and loud and then paid compliments to the speaker. And I told myself that's how I want to be when I grow old. And I can't get myself to behave that way (laughter). If they say something I'm obliged to say it's wrong (laughter). So I'm not the, I can't answer your question yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Okay. My pleasure.
Story_ID: 25968
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me and my two brothers and I would guess it's about 1948, somewhere there, maybe '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: What are your brothers' names?
Speaker 1: Peter in the middle, and Damius on the left.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's myself in front--
Speaker 1: Alright, just go ahead and tilt the thing back so it gets the light.
Speaker 2: And the myself in front, my father on the left. Okay, he's farther in the middle and uncle on the right.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them, please?
Speaker 2: My father's Peter, the grandfather is Samuel, and the one on the right is James.
Speaker 1: Philander, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and I think, judging by my size, that was 1948, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: That was real recent. I have no idea where.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's my wife with two grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay, the grand children's names and your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Wife is Ilda, (ph.) and the grandchildren is Rose and Jasper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, somebody's gonna be typing these up, and they want the, you know, so when you describe it, just kind of describe everybody's name.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the three brothers, Peter on the left, Dennis and myself.
Speaker 2: And that's a grandson.
Speaker 1: Okay, they'll need names.
Speaker 2: Oh, Jasper and my wife Ilda.
Speaker 1: That's my father on the left, Peter, my son, Rodrigo and myself. He got his name when we were on the verge of moving to Argentina (laughter). We never got there (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's my father and myself. I have no idea where that was taken.
Speaker 1: The place is beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it sure is.
Speaker 1: Ah, there is, for the science clique.
Speaker 2: In Venice.
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear) I'm sure they've (unclear) some confidence (laughter).
Speaker 2: If you wanted Cane, Cane is in the picture somewhere [of Zebiak and Cane]. You mentioned Cane and Zebiak.
Speaker 1: This is my grandfather, and there's actually a date on the back of this. I think it's 1899.
Speaker 2: There's a date on the back?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1899. Savio (ph.) John George Philander.
Speaker 2: That's it.
