Story_ID: 637842
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Shannon Henson.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Norma, N-O-R-M-A, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, Pratt, P-R-A-T-T [HistoryMaker Norma Pratt].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January the 17th, 1945, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am president and CEO of Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: May 21st, tw- 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the conference room of Rodgers Travel headquarters office in Wayne, Pennsylvania, outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 637843
Speaker 1: Before we get started, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: A pa- favorite food?  No, not really.  I--I'm generally and very easily to get along with when it comes to food.  I eat most anything.  I was raised that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I tend to go towards browns and blacks, and browns, yes.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Definitely the summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well the first vacation per- place that I ever went outside of the country was Jamaica, and I still love Jamaica.  It's beautiful, very tropical.
Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, not that I can think of just at this moment.
Story_ID: 637844
Speaker 1: All right. Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separate from your father's [Fred Russell, Jr.] side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My--my mother's maiden name was Mildred Ann Newberry.  Her married name was Mildred Newberry [sic. Mildred Newberry Russell].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her pr- her date of birth is July 21st, 1912, and she was born in Hawkinsville, Georgia, which is on the outsi- outskirts of Macon [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side.  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing occupationally back in history?
Speaker 2: Well my--my mother, we'll start with her.  My mother was a business owner.  She had a business called Mildred Russell's Fashions [ph.].  And she was a designer--dress mak- she didn't actually make dresses, but she was a seller of dresses and she had her own business in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  My mother's--her mother is Alice Johnson [Alice Lester Johnson] and she was a cook.  But she was educated, had a beautiful handwriting, as a matter of fact.  She was an educated woman and she worked in private family as a cook.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: She did go to some kind of normal school, I think they called it back in those days.
Speaker 1: That's like a--
Speaker 2: It's like a high school, a little--
Speaker 1: --community college.
Speaker 2: --just sort of like a community college.  She--she did that, she had a beautiful handwriting.  She was very intelligent, but she earned her living as a--as a cook.  She was a tall woman.  She was about maybe 5'10".
Speaker 1: Do you know what school she went to?
Speaker 2: No I do not.  It--it was somewhere in Hawkinsville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well I'm not sure exactly where it is.
Speaker 1: But you think it was in Georgia?
Speaker 2: I, I, I think it was probably in Georgia.  My mother, on the other hand, went to high school, I believe in Virginia someplace, some school, some boarding school called maybe St. Mary's [ph.] if--if I am saying that correctly.  It was a Catholic boarding school my mother went to.
Speaker 1: And this is in Virginia?
Speaker 2: I believe it's in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now what about your grandfather, do you know anything about him?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, I didn't know him and my mother didn't know him either from what she said.  But his name was Julius Newberry from that same area of Hawkinsville, Geo- Georgia.  And only thing I know about him, he was also very tall, maybe 6'8".  The story is that he was too tall to get into the [U.S.] military back in those days because I--I think they had a height restriction.  And she did not know him very well.  Be- before that, on my--on my mother's side--my mother's--my mother's--my grandmother's maiden name was Alice Lester.  And, and there's--and they have--there's a lot of Lesters and Newberrys still in that area.
Story_ID: 637845
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about that side of the family, of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the most important story, there is one major story that I found out as, when I was grown actually and that is my [maternal] grandmother's brother was lynched in that area [Hawkinsville, Georgia].  And the story was that he was dating a very beautiful black woman there that one of--that the police sheriff also admired and he told--the sheriff told my great uncle that if he continued to date her that he would--he would kill him.  Well the family, as often happens back in those days, they spirited him away.  He left that area, the family got him out of that area.  He came back seven years later I guess thinking all of that was over and he went by to see this young woman, and the next day he was found hung.  That's the--that is the major story of my great-grandmother [sic.] and her brothers and sisters.  She had another brother by the name of Ruel, Ruel Lester who tur- he went to college and he was an accountant and he had a very well established accounting firm in New York City [New York, New York].  And then the other brother, I believe was Hen- there was one brother named Henderson [Henderson Lester] and I'm not sure the other brother's name was lynched.  So there were four of them.
Speaker 1: So you're not sure of the brother's name that was lynched?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure whether it was Henderson or another brother.  They also ha- probably had a sister and I'm not sure her name either.  There was, I think there were five of them.
Speaker 1: That's a, that's a pretty sad story and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is a sad story.
Speaker 1: Do you know about what year that would've happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess he was a young man.  I think my grandmother [Alice Lester Jonson] was born in the late 1890s, so I imagine they're all, you know, around, you know, within five or six years or ten years be- in that period.  So I really do not know.  Their mother was named Mariah [Mariah Lester], I know that.  And that's as far back as I know.
Speaker 1: So could be around 1900 this happened (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe around 1900 yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: In and around there? All right. Great-grandmother's name was Mariah?
Speaker 2: Mariah, M-A-R-I-A-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's all I knew of her.
Story_ID: 637846
Speaker 1: Is there a story about the f- why the family, you know, moved from Georgia to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know that be- well Uncle Ruel [Ruel Lester] moved to New York [New York] and my [maternal] grandmother moved to Philadelphia and I really don't know when that happened or--or why it happened.  And they ended up living in an area of Philadelphia, at the time it was called Eastwick.  It's--it's now by the airport [Philadelphia International Airport, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It's an area down at the airport that's now that wildlife preserve.  When they moved from Georgia they--they tried to get so--get as much country living, so they moved to the outskirts of Philadelphia in this area called E- Eastwick.  And they had land there and they had gardening and so forth.  And my step-grandfather, his name was Robert Johnson, who was married to my grandmother, Alice Johnson [Alice Lester Johnson], he's the one that taught me how to garden, which I--I still do, out there in Eastwick when I was a small girl.
Speaker 1: Robert Johnson.  He didn't play the guitar or anything (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so (laughter).  There's a story about him as well.  He--he said his first remembrance was working in the fields.  He doesn't know his parents, he did not know either of his parents.  He didn't--he doesn't know anything about his background at all and as a--his first remembrance was he's a little boy picking something in Georgia.  And he used to--and that's basically all I know about him.  He was rather uneducated, but with a lot of wisdom.  The main thing I remember about him was when I was a teenager, maybe thirteen or fourteen years old and visiting them, I--I was in some type of trouble at school and my parents [Mildred Newberry Russell and Fred Russell, Jr.] were discussing it with my--with my grandparents, and he stuck up--took up for me.  He said, "Oh one of these days she's going to be, I just know it, one of these days she's gonna be someone special, she might even get to work as a clerk in a store."  Which he thought was a very big thing.  And--and I'll always remember that when everybody was kind of not my best friend at the moment, because I don't know exactly what happened, I can't even remember the incident.  Why I was the topic of discussion, but he was the one that told everybody that I was gonna be just fine.  And I'll always remember that.
Speaker 1: A clerk in a store.
Speaker 2: It just goes to show you how sometimes a nice word here and there can mean something to people.
Speaker 1: Well, taken from this story, what happened to your great uncle is not--it's not a stretch to say things were not good in Georgia, so whatever brought them to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: It may have been connected with that, you know, because they all moved away about that time.  And I don't--I really don't know the sequence of time, but they all and that branch of the family ended up moving away.
Speaker 1: It doesn't seem like a place you'd want to stay anyway.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And that's the worst that could happen to you, I mean there may be other thing, you know, that maybe the extreme end of a whole lot of things?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, which I do.  And they didn't, you know, the older people didn't talk about it.  I didn't learn about that until I was practically grown and my mother told me the story.  They kept secrets, it seems.  You know, they didn't go talking about everything like people do now.  They, they wrote letters.  You know, I have some of my grandmother's letters that, that she wrote.  But they didn't seem to--there were certain things that they just didn't seem to talk about.  And that's probably why we don't know a lot, because they didn't talk a lot about the things that happened to them growing up.
Story_ID: 637847
Speaker 1: Your mother [Mildred Newberry Russell], did, did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, my mother did not go to college, although I believe she finished high school at this boarding school, this Catholic boarding school.  The interesting thing about my mother is that later in life she said, she thought it was her calling that she take care of people.  When she was sixteen years old, she was the one that was sent back, I do believe, left school to go back to Georgia to be with my grandmother, Mariah [Mariah Lester]--her grandmother, Mariah, and she was the one who took care of her until her death.  Later in life, she took care of her mother [Alice Lester Johnson] until her death, it was about ten years when she got ill.  And I was the one that ended up taking care of her, which is also a ver- my mother, which is also a very interesting story in that, I was living in California and doing extremely well financially, my husband [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt] was and his job got moved back to this area.  And he came to stay and stayed with my mother while we were preparing to move.  In September wh- when I got back with the children, he hadn't found us any place to live so he was still staying with my mother.  So we all ended up staying with my mother, myself, my husband, my two sons, Askia [Askia Hamilton, Sr.]  and Zeid [Zeid Pratt, Sr.], the dog, the cat in a small house with one bathroom and we were all squeezed in there together.  For some reason, we just could not seem to find a place to live.  And, and I--I've looked back on it now to know that God wanted me there to, to look after her like she looked after her mother and her grandmother.  Just after Christmas, we moved there in September, and just after Christmas, two or three days after Christmas she had--she got very ill.  She died about four months later.  So we were there at the house, and we--and we of course stayed there and took care of her until her--her death.  But it just seems to me that living in California with these big time jobs, my husband was at the time the vice president and treasurer of Atari, so you see that was a very big job and we had lots of living, very--not--I guess we were living pretty good and, and--but somehow we ended up back in my mother's small three bedroom house with one bathroom because God wanted us there to look after her, which we did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Atari, we were just talking about Atari.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: And--a few minutes ago, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Where you get--well my husband was--
Speaker 1: Mr. IT [information technology] guy or (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We're just talking about it.  But we'll get to that--
Story_ID: 637848
Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Fred Lee Russell, Jr. [Fred Russell, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: F-R-E-D, L-E-E, Russell, R-U-S-S-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 30th, 1916.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his side of the family, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Oh I can--I can trace him a little bit further back, it gets a little bit vague, but I do know some things about their side of the family.  He was the--the son of Fred L. Russell, Sr. [Fred Russell, Sr.] and his wife Estelle Grant [Estelle Grant Russell].  And he was born in Indianapolis, Indiana and he went to the famed Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Now this is--yeah.
Speaker 2: Everybody went to--everybody black went to Crispus Attucks High School, which as you know was the school where the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] founded that school just to keep the black kids--so the black kids wouldn't have to go to school with the white kids.  But of course that school has a wonderful history.
Speaker 1: Now was Crispus Attucks the original name of the school?
Speaker 2: As far as I know it was the original name of--Crispus Attucks, of course, you know is the, the first person killed in the Revolutionary War.
Speaker 1: Right. A black man?
Speaker 2: Who was a black man and that high school was named after him.
Speaker 1: Now, you said the Klan founded it?
Speaker 2: That's what--that's the story that I've always heard.  That in Indianapolis at the time, it was, you know, it was a very racist place as well, just as--just as bad as any southern place could be.  And they had for some reason, I don't know, they had to have a school, a high school for black kids.  And that's--and they built a school and to keep them segregated from the--from the white students.  And that's the high school that everybody until--even up until my generation, all the black kids went to Crispus Attucks High School and it was about the time, just a little after my generation where they started going to the other high schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the school that [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson made basketball history there?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It is.  And there's a video out--there's a video that was made about his time at Crispus Attucks where they won state championships, the first black school to win state championships.  The first black school to actually play basketball against the other schools in the area and they won state championships for several years I believe, while he was there.
Speaker 1: This is--what you're saying is important, 'cause black schools weren't allowed to play the white schools for many years?
Speaker 2: Right, and when they did start--th- for some re- around the time that Oscar Robertson was there was the first time that they got to play white students.  And they also, that's when they ended up also the state champion with Os- my father loved him.  You know, they were very proud of him.
Speaker 1: I think George Crowe was a star there too [sic.] I think.
Speaker 2: I don't know the other people.  Was that a relative of yours?
Speaker 1: No it's not, but I was always interested in his name, but I--he was a big icon in Indiana.
Speaker 2: I--I don't know about him.
Speaker 1: He went on to play--he played basketball and went on to play for Major League Baseball.  I think he got hurt or something.  He was like a big star at the beginning of the '50s [1950s]--late '50s [1950s].  Now this is, what you say about the Klan, just for anybody watching this who thinks it may be just a rumor, the actual--the governor of Indiana at one time was the grand dragon in Indiana.
Speaker 2: That's probably where that, you know--
Speaker 1: This was Stephens [sic. D.C. Stephenson] and they made a TV movie ['Cross of Fire'] about him a few years ago.
Speaker 2: Well see, that's probably how they--I've always been told that the high school was established by the Ku Klux Klan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but probably not officially by the Klan (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe not officially.
Speaker 1: --by a, a person who was a government official who actually was in the Klan.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's, so that's probably what Stephens--S-T-E-P-H-E-N-S [sic.]--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Story_ID: 637849
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about his--
Speaker 2: His pe- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) his father, Fred Russell, Sr.?  And (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't know much about him, although I found that he was a very fair skinned man and when I saw his obituary many, many years later, in fact not too long ago when his eld- when his daughter, my oldest--my aunt died and I got all of her pictures and the obituary.  It said in his obituary that he was--he was a member of the biracial club of Miami.  He ended up living in Miami [Florida], working in Miami.  So I imagine that he is a bi- well he said he was b- biracial.  I don't know too much about that.  I've met his sister through the years who used to live in Seattle, Washington.  She used to send us a case of apples every year for Christmas.  Her name was Josie [Josie Russell (ph.)].  But other than that, I don't--I personally don't know very much about and I never heard anything about his parents.  So I don't know his mother, his father, never heard anything, I do know of a sister.
Speaker 1: So you don't know if his father or mother which one was white?
Speaker 2: I do not know, no I do not know.  I--in fact I didn't know he was biracial until I read his obituary.  He died when I was fairly young so I don't remember maybe in the early '50s [1950s], I was just maybe less than ten years old when he died.  So I don't know very much about him.  I know that he was a chauffeur, a chauffeur for a wealthy white family.  And that's how he ended up going to Miami because they moved to Miami and he went to Miami as well.  He also opened a drugstore there while he was there and my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] moved there--went down there--used to go down to Miami and work, where he met my mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] as a matter of fact, she was working down there as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so while he was working for this white family he opened a drugstore?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father used to go down to work at--in the drugstore.
Speaker 1: Now was that in the famous part of Miami, was it Daly City [ph.], I think it's called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do not know--I don't know--I do not know in what part of Miami it was.
Story_ID: 637850
Speaker 1: I do know that my--well my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] during the Depression [Great Depression] years, and he did not--he was not able to stay.  He had--he had lots of story about how he couldn't barely eat in Tuskegee.  And one of his main stories he used to tell us how he used to have to get off the sidewalk for white folks.  He would--if he was walking in town, the town of Tuskegee [Alabama], then he would--if--if people were coming down the side walk he'd have to get in the street, and this was--he graduated from high school I believe in 1933, so it had to be around in that time.  And he was very, seemed to be a little bitter about that.  You know what I mean, that he had to get off the sidewalk for folks in Tuskegee.  He--he went to school about two or three years there, but he was not able to finish because of money considerations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so as bad as it was in Indianapolis [Indiana], it wasn't as bad as Miami [Florida]?  I mean in Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: In Tuskegee, that's where he went to school.  Well he never had a story like that, you know--
Speaker 2: About Indianapolis?
Speaker 1: --about Indianapolis, at least I never heard anything.  In Indianapolis all my family over there, they were tennis players, not basketball players.  They--they--they enjoyed playing tennis, they all played tennis.  And I had one aunt that was a ste- some type of champion of tennis.
Speaker 2: Now did you--
Speaker 1: One of his sisters.
Speaker 2: Did your father have any stories about George Washington Carver?
Speaker 1: He never said anything to me about that.  You know, he wou- he said--would tell us stories about he was so poor that he would steal potatoes from people's yards and he would bake them on his radiator, you know, at school.  And I mean, they--it was during the Depression, he--he really didn't have any money at all and that was the reason why he--he never finished school.  He did become a Scroller [Scroller Pledge Club], which is a Kappa that never quite went over.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's the pledge club?
Speaker 1: That's the pledge club, right.  And we have a lot of history about that.  All the men in my family are, if they're college graduates, they're all Kappas because one of my uncles--great uncles, his uncle was the founder of Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.].  In fact we all went to his--in Indianapolis this last summer they had their hundredth bicentennial [sic.], the Kappas did, 2011 in Indianapolis.
Speaker 2: What's your uncle's name?
Speaker 1: His name is Guy L. Grant, which is my gra- which is my grandmother's [Estelle Grant Russell] brother.
Speaker 2: Guy L. Grant.
Speaker 1: I have stories about him of course and the struggles that he had trying to go to Indiana University in Bloomingdale--in Bloomington, Indiana in 19--well the fraternity was founded in--in 1911.  And Bloomington is about, now is about an hour and a half drive from Indianapolis.  So I'm sure and they all--all the black people.  Well they allowed the black guys to go to school there, but they couldn't eat or--they could go to class.
Speaker 2: Could they live on campus?
Speaker 1: No, they had to have a little house outside, which was the first Kappa house.  And--and--and there was eleven--I think there was eleven young men who started Kappa and they all lived in the--in a one house together, off--off campus.  And that was one of the things that the Kappas did when they went there for the centennial.  They went to visit that house--with the Kappas still keep it up.
Speaker 2: It's curious now that I think about it, the colors of Indiana University are red and white.
Speaker 1: Oh I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: And so were the colors of Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 1: So it was crimson and cream, but it's really white, yes, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: I never thought about (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I didn't know that Indiana University was, was, was white.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Bobby Knight [Bob Knight], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Red and white.
Speaker 2: And that's where, that's the school (unclear).
Speaker 1: So maybe that's the way--that's maybe how they came up with their colors, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, interesting.
Story_ID: 637851
Speaker 1: Now your, your father [Fred Russell, Jr.] had some college in Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], but he didn't finish, right?
Speaker 2: His father [Fred Russell, Sr.] was the educated--his--as far as black people went, they either a lot of them were, were educated.  One of his uncles was a--now this is Estelle Grant [Estelle Grant Russell], that's his mother, that's my father's mother.  Her sisters and brothers, there were thirteen of them and they were originally from Albany, I believe or Terre Haute [Indiana], I think might be Albany, that's where they originally were in Indiana.
Speaker 1: Albany, Indiana?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it's Albany, Indiana.  It might be Terre Haute, but they were between the two, and that's where they were from.  They--they got there--the gra- they got there--there's interesting stories about them.  They migrated there from some part of Kentucky right after the Civil War.  And there's a--I have a cousin that did a little research on them and when they arrived in--when they were on their way to California and got only as far as Indiana.  That's how they ended up there.  And from there, of the thirteen of them, we have Uncle Guy [Guy L. Grant] who's the founder of Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.]. He was a dentist.  And he had a brother that was a superior court judge.  He had another brother that was a lawyer.  And that--of that thirteen, they all did--well they didn't all do very well because there's a--there's a little thing going on in that family.  My father used to tell me don't drink because he used to say that--his way of putting it was that our family had an allergy against alcohol.  Don't drink because you were either--and you were either an alcoholic or a sugarholic.  Well nowadays I understand that alcohol and sugar really kind of the same thing.  So in my pas- so the alcoholics didn't fare too well in the family of--of those thirteen sisters and brothers, and anyone that was the sugarholic or could stay away--that stayed away from alcohol, they were all very successful.  So my father used to always tell me, "Oh we can't drink, no." He never drank.  He said, "You--don't drink because it, it'll catch you," he used to say, and--'cause he had uncles and aunts that it did catch.
Story_ID: 637852
Speaker 1: Now in terms of your dad, now he went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for a little while.
Speaker 2: Right, couple years.
Speaker 1: But he didn't, he didn't finish.
Speaker 2: Right, he never finished.
Speaker 1: But did he feel kind of--did he have an aspiration of what he wanted to be that he didn't achieve?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he never seemed to--they're a sort of an ambitious family, so he just never got an opportunity I guess to go back, although he became a very successful person without--without the college education.  He--he just never got a chance to finish.  But he used to say things like--he didn't like the wo- he's got--I have a million stories to tell you about him.  He was so bright, he was a very bright man.  You know, I think about some of the children today that have that hyperactivity, he said he was hyperactive.  But he used to say that, if you didn't have any energy, you couldn't get anything done.  So he didn't feel that it was--it was a bad thing.  Although when he was in school he said he used to look out the window and feel like he just--just wanted to jump out the window, because back in those days they spanked you if you misbehaved in school.  And he was very, he was kind of hyperactive.  His mother was a school teacher and she was a substitute teacher and she used to go to his school and say, "Now the first thing we will do this morning, is you over there, Fred [Fred Russell, Jr.], you come sit here," (laughter).  And so he actually was in class with his mother.  His mother actually taught him in school.
Speaker 1: This is Estelle Grant?
Speaker 2: This is Estelle Grant, right.  She was one of those thirteen sisters and brothers, she also did not drink.
Speaker 1: Or Estelle Grant Russell, right probably?
Speaker 2: Her name--yeah, Russell, was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she married Fred Russell [Fred Russell, Sr.].
Story_ID: 637853
Speaker 1: Should we have your parents meet now, or should we wait until--did they meet when they were teenagers, or did they meet when they were (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  Actually they weren't all that young when they met.  My mother [Mildred Newberry Russell], I think she was about thirty, I'm the second child and she was in her early thirties when I was born.  So, I guess they met and he's a few years--he's four years young- three years younger than her.  So I guess they met in their mid to late twenties in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Did he--did he meet her before he established the--before he acquired the business?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  It was way before.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, let's talk about that then.  Is there a story attached to how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, we used to tease around, they used to tease a lot about it.  As I said my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] was a tennis player, my mother's a very beautiful woman and she--she used to say that she used to come out and play tennis.  And once they got married, she never played tennis again (laughter), that's the story they used to tell you about her.  But she was there in--in--in Miami working in private family and he was working at his father's [Fred Russell, Sr.] drugstore when they met.  And then they went back to Indianapolis [Indiana] to live, where I was born and my sister [Joanne Russell Ussery] was born, before they came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, so they lived in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: They lived in Indianapolis when they were first married for a few years.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was he doing again in Miami, he was there--?
Speaker 2: He was working for his father in his father's drugstore.
Speaker 1: Oh that's right, yeah the drugstore, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 637854
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their mannerisms, their talents, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My, my personality is very definitely more my father's [Fred Russell, Jr.] and I look like him.  My mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] was a very soft spoken feminine type woman that and very nice looking and just--just--just a very--just a very--'cause she used to say to me, "Oh Norma [HistoryMaker Norma Pratt], don't be so common, don't laugh so loud, you know, don't you know--." She didn't understand why I had to laugh so loud and for a time I used to smoke even and she just couldn't get over that, smoking cigarettes.  She would say, "Oh Norma, your mouth looks like a horse's ass when you--when you smoke."  She was a lady, you know, she was a really a lady and he was ambitious and he had a lot of energy.  You know, he worked a lot and he took care of the home and the family, and my mother was able to stay home until she was about--until I was about thirteen.  And I don't--I don't--when I used to come home from school.  When I got up in the morning, my breakfast was on the table.  Wh- we had dinner at the table every single solitary night.  And that's the kind of a home that I was kind of--and my cousin used to tell me, he said when he came to visit us, he said you know, I never had anybody--we had fresh squeezed orange juice in the morning.  You know, she, she was really a housewife type of a person.  But then at the age of thirteen is when she decided to go into the dress business and she started it in the basement of our home and then she was able to buy a building. My father helped her buy a build- they helped--bought a building where she had a, the Mildred Russell's Fashions [ph.] for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 637855
Speaker 1: Now how many siblings do you have, and?
Speaker 2: I have one sister [Joanne Russell Ussery].
Speaker 1: One si- oh, and she was born before you?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was born August the 28th, 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's almost four years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, can you describe where you grew up and who was in the household then, I guess it would be you and your sister, and your mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] and father [Fred Russell, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did, did your grandparents live with you or any cou- uncles or aunts?
Speaker 2: No.  No, we--it was just--it was just the four of us.  Although I can remember one time in my life that--that we lived with my [maternal] grandmother, Alice [Alice Lester Johnson], and I think it was all of us lived there though.  We all lived there and I think it might've been while the--that was part of the period when they were trying to buy their house.  There was also a period, which I remember very distinctly, and--and I guess it was kind of traumatic to me that we also lived with a friend of my father's from Indiana, a family friend and my sister and I lived with her and her husband for about maybe six months, because my moth- both my mother and father were working night and day when they were saving for their house.  And since we had such a sort of intact family, it was kind of traumatic, even though they were very nice to me and I have no complaint, I just wasn't used to being anywhere except with my parents.  So for about six months--a little while we lived with my grandmother and about six months we lived with these folks, and then we moved into our home.  That's--that was their m- their first house that they owned.
Story_ID: 637856
Speaker 1: Can you describe the--did, did you live in one neighborhood in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when you?
Speaker 2: We lived in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: West Phil- okay.  Now, is there a story about why your parents ended up moving to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: How they moved to Philadelphia?
Speaker 1: Because your mother's [Mildred Newberry Russell] family being there?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, there's a little funny story about that.  As I told you, my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] was a very handsome and deb- debonair type of a person and he had a lot of energy, and my mother and that was his home, Indianapolis [Indiana] and she moved there.  And it seems as though she decided at one point that she was coming back to Philadelphia and she left and took the train with my sister [Joanne Russell Ussery] and I, and told him that if he wanted his family he would have to come, and he did (laughter).  Because he--my father's family was a very, you know, one of those families that were, you know, I guess you know, they were--he had all--she had nobody, you know, and it was all his--lots of sisters and brothers, and lots of cousins and lots of everybody.  And--and he was like a favorite son and I--I think that she didn't have all that, you know, she wasn't real happy there.  So after my sister and I, I was about ten months old when we came to Philadelphia.  And he came, and so he made his home in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And well we'd go back every year though.  As he said he would go home.
Story_ID: 637857
Speaker 1: So you lived at--you grew up in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was there a name, a particular name to your neighborhood or they just called it West Philly?
Speaker 2: Well it was--we lived, it's called, well I guess Southwest Philly [Southwest Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We didn't have a--at the time when we first moved in there it was a very nice neighborhood and it was a changing neighborhood, changing over from--changing from a white neighborhood to a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Had it been a Italian neighborhood or a Jewish neighborhood?
Speaker 2: You know my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] used to say, he used to say, now I don't really know, but he used to say I got the impression he said it was a Jewish neighborhood 'cause he always used to believe that--he said, "Old Jewish people if you had the money to do it, you know, they won't stop you," you know what I mean.  As long as you can--as long as you do what you say you gonna do and come up with the resources and do everything that they will, you know, they would sell to you.  Where he said where there are other neighborhoods that they'd lose money to keep--to keep you outta the neighborhood.  They wouldn't let you in even if you had the money.  So I got the feeling it--it was a--the area was a Jewish neighborhood.  Now I may be wrong about that.
Speaker 1: I think you're right from other people we've interviewed (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Said, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, can you describe the house, what kind of house was it?
Speaker 2: It was--it's a row house, in fact my sister [Joanne Russell Ussery] still lives there in that house.  It's in--a row house on a tiny little street that didn't have many cars or anything, so we used to, you know, go up and--jump rope and skate up and down the street.  It was on Alden Street, 248 South Alden Street in West--in West Philly.
Story_ID: 637858
Speaker 1: I went to Hamilton Elementary School [Andrew Hamilton Elementary School; Andrew Hamilton School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; and, and West Philadelphia High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: So just two schools, Hamilton--?
Speaker 1: Well when we were renting before we moved into the house I went to Lea [Henry C. Lea Elementary School].  Lea is a school that's--it's around the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and that's where their apartment--that's where they were renting on Market Street.  I think it was--well it was 40th [Street]--near 40th and Market where the elevated train, I don't know if you know Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but the train used to run so the, the train used to run by the house, right by the house.  Soon they put it underground, but it was a subway but when I was a little girl, the "L" [elevated train] used to run by there, you know loud "L," you know, running right by in front of your--in front of your house.  And that's where we rented.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Lea Elementary School, Hamilton and then the high school was?
Speaker 1: West Philadelphia High.
Speaker 2: West Philadelphia, okay.
Story_ID: 637859
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and--what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up?  Well for me, the sight--my father [Fred Russell, Jr.], as I said, had a lot of energy, so on his day off we always went someplace.  My father always would take us somewhere.  We would go down to Atlantic City [New Jersey] for the day.  And of course you have all the beach and the seafood.  And we used to park in the parking lot and change our clothes right in the parking lot because we didn't have money and my mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] would pack a lunch.  And we would change into a--change from my bathing suits to our clothes and walk the boardwalk and all that.  We used to go in every summer for about two weeks, we would go on his vacation, we would go back to Indiana and stop in Columbus [Ohio] where we had relatives.  And I think that as far as the sights--I was very fortunate to have parents that I did, even though they didn't have a heck a lot of money 'cause this was even before my father went into business for himself, they exposed us to a lot of things, you know.  We went--anytime his relatives came to town we went to Atlantic City, we went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we went to all the si- Liberty Bell.  My father was like a tour escort even then, Liberty Bell, Betsy Ross' house [Betsy Ross House].  All the sights and sounds of Philadelphia.  Go to New York [New York] to see the Empire State Building and all those kinds of things.  So he--so we got around to, to learn and see a lot just because he was interested in a lot of things, and he would take us to a lot of--a lot of things.
Story_ID: 637860
Speaker 1: He used to work at the North Philadelphia Station [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I--and there's a funny story about that that I think you might be interested in.  He used to be a waiter as a young man at the North Philadelphia Station and he said that there was a guy that used to come by there, stopped once a week, come in on the train and he would have lunch.  And he told him one day, said, "If you can remember my name when I come, I'm gonna give you an extra tip, all you gotta do is remember my name," 'cause I guess he thought he was an idiot.  And so every week he would come in and the guy said, "You remember my name?" And he would say, "Oh yeah, your name is--," I don't know his name but I'll say Joe.  "Oh, yeah your name is Joe." And he said, "Good, good." And he'd give him an extra tip.  Well he--he was so angry with this man about doing that--that my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] was brilliant, so he would cheat him on his check.  And he would come home at night and say to--to the family, "Well Joe came in again today.  I got him for two dollars today," (laughter). Because he would be so insulted that he would--his--the check for the bill.  And so of course one day he came home one day like he said, "Well I got caught today."  Joe noticed that his bill was too high.  And I said, "Oh my god, what did you do?"  And he said, "I just pretended like I was stupid and didn't know the difference and I got away with it."  Well you know, you know, people say well don't cheat.  People nowadays, and me too, we raise our children, you don't wanna teach your children how to be thieves, you know what I'm saying, but for him it was different.  You know, he wasn't--he didn't want the man's money, he just was insulted.  You know what I mean, that the man thought he was an idiot and he was showing him that he was smarter, you know, than he was.  And my father was brilliant, he was a brilliant man.  So he would just manipulate the guy just and come home and tell the story and laugh about how he got wha- got--got away with it.  And then the day he didn't, in fact he would look very sheepishly that day when he came home at dinner and he said, "Well I got caught today, Joe came in."  And I said, "Well what did you do?"  And he said, "I just pretended like I couldn't add."  He was--he--he believed it.  So you know, these are the kinds of stories that I got.  You know, I'm from the older generation and our parents and grandparents, these were the kind of things they did and talked about.  The children, nowadays of course thank goodness, don't have to have those kinds of--many of those kinds of stories.  Those--those kinds of things don't happen so much anymore.  They happen some, but not like it did in his generation.  He used to be very angry because he was a very fair skinned man, but his brothers were brown skinned.  And he would come home and say, you know, "I can get a job that my brother can't get."  He was--he was unhappy about that.  He was--he used to say things like when people would be on welfare, he would say, "Why would you put your head in the lion's--in the lion's mouth?"  That's how he would describe it.  He said, "You, you don't wanna be--," because they can stop it anytime that they want to, "Don't put your head in the lion's mouth."  That's what he used to tell us all the time.  I mean don't be on welfare, don't depend on them, depend on yourself, you know, just--because--because otherwise you're gonna get hurt in the end some kind of way.  And then he used to say that he would rather work for himself and make less money than have to work for someone else, and that was his reason for, for getting in business.
Story_ID: 637861
Speaker 1: When he went to Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc.], he did not have money, but he had wits, and very smart.  So the--Dr. Rodgers had sold Rodgers Travel to a man by the name of William Griffin who was a very erudite educated man.  And he hired my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] to run the business for him.
Speaker 2: Now let's go back now.  This is a good time to tell, how old were you when this happened?
Speaker 1: Well let's see.  The business was started in 1949 by Dr.--by Harold Rodgers [C. Harold Rodgers].  He--he sold the business to William Griffin because he went to medical school, that's when he went to me--and so William Griffin couldn't ru- run the business himself, but he had--he had the money and he hired my father to work with him.
Speaker 2: So now what do you think, was that, how long did Rodgers run it, do you think?
Speaker 1: That was in the, I believe, Dr. Rodgers, it had to be in the--in the '50s [1950s].  It started in 1949, so somewhere in the maybe late '50s [1950s] Dr.--or mid-'50s [1950s] or--or early '60s [1960s] is when Dr.--is when Mr. Griffin took over and my father, 'cause let's see, I graduated from high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in 1962 and my father was about just going into the business, the travel business at that time.  Previous to that, he was--he had a--he worked at a--in a credit agency.  There was a--the Afro Americans in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] got together and did some kind of a credit bureau that my father worked in that company and then he went--
Speaker 2: A credit bureau or--
Speaker 1: Some kind of credit bureau.
Speaker 2: --credit union or was it--
Speaker 1: No it wasn't a credit union.
Speaker 2: Credit bureau.
Speaker 1: It was sort of a credit bureau, do wh- it was a place where black people could come to borrow money.  It was--it was--and he--and there was a group of, I guess, a lot of ministers and doctors and people who had money started this to help black people in the West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] area.  And they would lend money to people.  So it's like--sort of like a credit bureau.
Speaker 2: It wasn't inc- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) LendingTree [LendingTree, LLC], is that the one that is around now where people just--there's companies that lend money to people.  He was doing something like that.  It was a business right off 52nd Street and all I know it was--it was called a credit bureau.  Now what was the name of it, I don't remember.  That's what my father was doing at that time.  He was wai- working for those folks and then he moved on to work with Mr. Griffin.  A few years after he started working with Mr. Griffin, he--Mr.--he was able to--he became vice president and partners with Mr. Griffin.  And he opened a travel agency that--we had one on--in West Philly and there was also one in--he opened a second one in Washington, D.C.  That was in the late--that was in the '60s [1960s] and the early '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 637862
Speaker 1: Now you probably know some of the history of Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania], about how--now this is the first travel agency, black travel agency in the United States?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So kind of tell us then the history of the agency about Dr.--who was Dr. Harold Rodgers?
Speaker 2: Dr. Rodgers, his name was Harold--I think it was C. Harold Rodgers, with a D, and Dr. Rodgers was a porter at the TWA section of the Philadelphia airport [Philadelphia International Airport, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he was going to school at night.  And the--the people at TWA, Trans World Airlines at the time, helped him get established as a--as the--as a travel agency.  He, at the time, each airline appointed you separately and it was important that you understand that the reason why I guess no other--that we were the first was because the airlines had to trust you with their money.  If a person was traveling, they would give you money, there weren't the credit cards like they are now and then every week we would have to pay--any money that we collected from our customers for air tickets, we would write the ticket and send the money to the airlines.  So it was very difficult to get appointed as a licensed travel agency because they had to trust you with their money for--we--the client could be traveled and gone before a week later you pay them the money.  And I think that's the reason why there weren't very many travel agencies that did black travel agencies, 'cause the airlines wouldn't trust black folks with the money.  Dr. Rodgers gained the trust of someone with TWA and then TWA went to the other airlines and helped--and helped the--TWA helped establish them with the other airlines at the time.  The ones I remember especially are Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] and United [United Airlines], who's one we had difficulty with, American [American Airlines], Eastern Air Lines back in those days.  Eastern Air Lines was also a very large player.  What we used to do back in those days, because the segregation was in effect, we actually had the market on all the black business for a long, long time.  When Henderson [Henderson Travel Service] came along, they--they specialized in Africa, they did a lot of African business.  We did a lot--we did Africa, but we did a lot of Caribbean and we used to do all the biggest associations, all the fraternal organizations, the great big black churches, all the, the national doctors organizations and all the black organizations, they all did their business with us.  We had the market sewed, sewed up.
Story_ID: 637863
Speaker 1: Now, let me just go back over--the, the white travel agents really didn't wanna deal with black people?  Was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and there was two reasons for that.  My father [Fred Russell, Jr.] used to say that black people's money didn't spend.  However, that is not all of it.  They didn't know where to send us, because now Harold Rosenbluth was a--was a very important travel family in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], huge travel agency [Rosenbluth Vacations, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that turned out to have seventeen hundred locations the last time I we--in their heyday.  And my father was friendly with the Rosenbluth, but these people--if a couple came their--they would call my father and they'd say, "We have a lovely couple here, Dr. and Mrs. So and So, we don't know how to handle them, we're sending them to you."  They did not handle black business for several reasons, some travel agents probably didn't, just didn't wanna do business with black people.  Some people, like the Rosenbluth, they understood that they didn't know where or how to, to do--to operate with them, so they would send them to us.
Speaker 1: Now let me just go back and just clarify another point here, talk about, a little bit about how complicated--I mean the complications of black travel in the United States and overseas, 'cause it seems you gotta set--we gotta set it up for like a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, well for instance.  We used to have a little black book, which I can't find, I don't know where it is, with every country that--that--that vacationers and travel people went during those times.  And we would know the hotels that welcomed black people, we would know the tour companies that welcomed black people.  So therefore, a company like the Rosenbluths that were excellent company and I didn't--and my father didn't find them to be racist at all, but they knew that they didn't know where to send them.  If they sent them to a--the same hotel for instance that--that--a hotel that did not accept black people, then you'd get turned out, they wouldn't accept you, you know, you walk up and they wouldn't let you in even though you may have paid for it in--in advance.
Speaker 1: Okay, for instance, I've, you know, we've--I've read that in the, I guess, that a lot of black people would expatriate to France, a lot of them lived in France they seemed to feel free in France.  But would I have the same freedom if I went to Germany or Netherlands, or England maybe, I mean in those days when (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but by the time in '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], they did travel.  In fact we used to have around the world tours, it's just a matter of which--you just had to know what hotels to put them in.
Speaker 1: As late as the '70s [1970s] you had to know that?
Speaker 2: As late as the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As late as the '70s [1970s].  While after the Civil Rights Movement, then it gradually started changing over, but up until the time of that, we really had the market sew- sewed up.
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of where you're going?
Speaker 2: Well yes.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about that first.
Speaker 2: Europe, all of Europe was easier to go to, not just Paris [France], but Paris was a great place for them to go--place to go.  I hadn't heard too much about Germany one way or another.  I--
Speaker 1: Was there a time when you couldn't--if you went to Germany say you'd have to--there'd be a dilemma about where you can stay?
Speaker 2: Well they wo- they would know where.  See--see the whole key of it was, you had to know what hotel you could put them in.
Speaker 1: I know what you're saying, I guess what I'm really wanting to know what countries segregated black people in Europe?
Speaker 2: All of them.
Speaker 1: Even France?  Maybe I don't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) France probably a lot less than everyone else.  Because they were very--and--and even some of the Spanish speaking countries were less--we had less problems then, then probably Germany and England and places like that.  But they did go there.  If you--as long as you knew where to send people they could go.  It was a very interesting time then.  But they did--you know what they did, they used to have big charters to the Caribbean, they did a lot into--in the Caribbean.  We like to say that we taught black people how to travel, because up until that time the only thing that we did, unless you were a celebrity like a Josephine Baker or, or someone like that, we didn't go.  We went--got in our cars in--or train and drove to home.  That's what everybody did.  They, they did that.  But the--but the wealthier black people, the, the professional black people wanted to do this traveling and they came to us and we, and we found ways to do it.  We did an around the world tour in the, in the late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 637864
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When the celebrities went places around the United States, especially and everywhere, they stayed in the black communities.
Speaker 2: In the black communities, right.
Speaker 1: There were hotels, there were barbershops, there were beauty parlors, there were restaurants.  We had in a lot--a lot of cities we had very self-sufficient neighborhoods where the doctors and lawyers and--and schoolteachers and everybody lived in--in--everybody sort of lived together which kind of helped black people in my estimation because it gave black people someone to look up to.  Because right in their own communities were the people that were well educated and so forth.  And--and it gave the children that were just moving up from the South or something, they were a striving to be middle class.  Nowadays, you can't strive to be the middle class, because you don't see the middle class.  The upper middle class blacks have moved out of the community, so it just leaves the community with all the lower class black people that don't have anybody to, to emulate.  You know what I mean, except for on t- and I think--I personally think that's one of the problems today.  When we were all in the same neighborhoods together, it, it helped the kids and the you--the families that were trying to strive, I mean it was a upward mobility that is not so--is not so much because it's harder to see because everybody was right there together back in those times.  And our--and our business [Rodgers Travel, Inc.] was right in the middle of that.  So we--we did the travel for everywhere.  In fact, after the Civil Rights Movement, our business started deteriorating, because now our folks start going to the white travel agencies and the white travel agencies started advertising for them.  And our business, we no longer had the big charter planes and all those kinds of things.  So I had to find--and this was in my day--I started 1971 at the travel agency.  I had to--it had started deteriorating, and I, very slowly, I had to find another niche because you couldn't depend any longer on the black community.  They wanted to branch out, and you know, and do--and--and--and--and our business was adverti- even now, the same way.  So what I did was, I--I--I do government business, 90 percent of my business is government and corporate.
Speaker 2: Well I don't wanna get that far yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 637865
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't wanna get that far yet, I just wanted to get the history of the company [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then how your father [Fred Russell, Jr.] got involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then how--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, well he got involved with Mr. Griffin [William Griffin] as he worked as an employee and then became the vice president, became part owner with Mr. Griffin.  And then when Mr. Griffin died, mid-'60s [1960s] maybe, then my father bought the travel agency from--bought the other part of the travel agency from Mrs. Griffin.  And as I said he opened--we had one in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and one in Washington, D.C.  He opened another one in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you this now, just I know this is your father who did this, but would you say your father grew this business to what it became, I mean, you know?
Speaker 1: Well you know, I feel very proud.  He, yes, he--he was the one that really established the travel agency as a viable travel agency, he did that.  During his reign was when it became a big well known travel agency, mainly in the black community and we were very well respected by the suppliers like, you know, the airlines and things like that.  It was after that--after he died and the business was--well we didn't have the black community as a captive audience anymore, then we--that's when I--being another generation, and more fortunate--for instance, back in my father's day, he wouldn't do business with the government because they didn't pay timely, and we had to have the airlines money every week.  So if you do business with the government they wouldn't pay you for thirty days and ninety days and 120 days back in those days.  So he didn't belie- he wouldn't deal with the government because they didn't pay timely enough.  By the time I came along, first of all I had more money than they did.  I had a we--I had a wealthy husband [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt] and we could--we could pay the airlines bill even--so the first ac- I don't know if you're ready for this.  But the first account that we got was Scott Air Force Base in Belleville, Illinois which is near St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: So, let me just say that you all got some government--you got some other--you got government accounts, yeah we're not ready for that.
Speaker 1: Not, okay, not ready for that.
Speaker 2: I don't wanna go--and establish what your dad did and how he got into it a point where it was a viable agency (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--well he just was smart and he worked hard.  We did--if you remember the expo in Canada in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Montreal [Canada]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Montreal [1967 International and Universal Exposition (Expo 67)].  He rented a whole hotel and was ship--and, and  we were flying people and busing people from all over the United States, and he had his--he put them in his own hotel.  He rented a hotel for the entire time--the entire summer of the expo, so he did very well.
Speaker 2: Now let me get this straight now, he was the only--was he the only agency?
Speaker 1: Not by that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, by that time Henderson [Henderson Travel Service] had--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact my father--Henderson was along with my father.  Henderson wasn't with Dr. Rodgers [C. Harold Rodgers] in 1949, that's when it originally started.  But by the time my father came along, Henderson yes, they were--they were--in fact they all belonged to an association called Inter-American Travel Agents Society.
Speaker 2: This was a black travel--
Speaker 1: A black travel agents society.  And that how I know--and I knew the Hendersons [Freddye Scarborough Henderson and Jacob Henderson], anybody in travel anywhere around the United States.  In fact, wh- by the time I was president in the '90s [1990s], there were three hundred black travel agencies in the U- that were members of, we called it IATAS, Inter-American Travel Agents Society, ITAS is what we had.  We had a wonderful time, you know, traveling together and all that.  They were all people in travel.
Speaker 2: Now when you were a kid then, I mean you were in--you said you were in high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when your father started?
Speaker 1: I was in high school--I was in high school when my father went into the travel business I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay. So when you were growing up you didn't envision yourself working with the agency necessarily (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, not at all.  I went to Cheyney University [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], and I was going to school to be a teacher.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 637866
Speaker 1: Now believe it or not we take you all the way back to grade school-
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --and, and, and get some other information.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So you went to, to grade school in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you went to, you started at--
Speaker 2: Lea [Henry C. Lea Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Lea.
Speaker 2: And then Hamilton [Andrew Hamilton Elementary School; Andrew Hamilton School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Lea, then Hamilton, now what did you like in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well in grade school, one of the first things that my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] used to tell me when I was in kindergarten and real, real little was he used to tell me when I first started to school I wasn't the best student in the world.  And my--because we didn't learn anything, my--my father was working all the time and my mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] was sort of the housewife type thing.  She wasn't like the kind of person that was hard on, she was loving, I'll put it that way, but she wasn't teaching anything as far as--she passed the culture, but she wasn't passing the education part, that's what my father did.  So when I started school and I was younger than everyone else, before my fifth birthday I was--they tell, I was having difficulties, I can kind of remember and my father used to say, "Don't worry about it, you'll grow into yourself."  That's how he used to say it: "Don't worry about it, you'll grow into yourself, you're just younger than everybody else," he used to tell me, which made me feel good.  I had good parents, you know what I'm saying, I did.  But as I--as I went along in school, as I went along in school of course I got better and better as time went on.  When I went to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]--when I graduated from high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, I don't wanna get you that far yet.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in--in grade school I had a teacher by the na- in fact it was junior high school.  I had a teacher by the name of Miss Naomi Satchel [ph.], and--I think it was Naomi Satchel.  In fact, I ran into her not too long ago at a Cheyney affair.
Speaker 1: Is this at Hamilton?
Speaker 2: That--I think that was at Sayre Junior High School [William L. Sayre Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Sayre, okay.
Speaker 2: --because it was, it was elementary and then junior high and then high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sayre Junior High School and so--
Speaker 2: By that time I was a pretty good student.
Story_ID: 637867
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have a favorite subject, I was pretty all around--pretty much, you know, just an all-around student.  I--I didn't, my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] and mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] used to tell me, "Boy if you would just work at it, you know, you'd really be an A student."  But I just sort of bumbled along and did well without too much effort.  You know, I can get A's and Bs without too much--too much difficulty.  It wasn't until I got in college [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] that I did really, really well.  When I graduated from high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my father he kept--he kept saying to me as I was a senior in high school, "Norma [HistoryMaker Norma Pratt], you have to--where's the papers? We gotta fill out the papers for college."  I never bothered, I was working part time and in school.  I never bothered.  So one day he just came home and said, "Sign here."  He did everything for me.  And that's one of the things that I talk to people about sometimes when I see, sometimes children are not mature enough to handle those things by themselves at seventeen and eighteen years old, and I hear parents say, "Oh, well he didn't get this--do his papers and he didn't do his work and, I mean, this paperwork and all that."  I didn't do any of mine, my father did it all and said, "Sign here, you start Monday," (laughter), you know.  And because I was used to, you know, I--I did what my parents told me, but I somehow I didn't have the initiative or something.  I never--I just didn't do it.  So I ended up going to school and I graduated in June of '62 [1962] and I started college in January.
Speaker 1: Now back to high school.
Speaker 2: Right, back to high school.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Before we speed on to college.  Well, like what did you do in high school?  Were you involved in activities, were you--did you--were you a member of any clubs or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not too much.  No, I wasn't the kind--I worked, I had a part time job and I worked after school.
Speaker 1: Worked where?
Speaker 2: I worked at a supermarket.  I was a cashier at a supermarket and I started working at the age of sixteen.  And I would go--come home from school.  Now, my father was always one step ahead of me.  He knew me better than I knew myse- you know, I knew myself.  He used to tell me, "Oh you better go to get your education because if you don't, you'll starve to death, you know what I mean, because you're not the kind of person that likes this."  So he got me a hard job, he didn't get me a real good, you know, he had friends and he could've got me--he got my sister [Joanne Russell Ussery] a job, for instance, at Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.], a good job.  He didn't do that with me.  He decided that I needed to work hard so I'd go to school, 'cause he knew that.
Speaker 1: Now, now if I'm not mistaken, your uncle [sic. Pratt's maternal step-grandfather, Robert Johnson] predicted you would be a store clerk, this was--
Speaker 2: Well for him, yes he did, you know, he actually did.  I haven't thought about it in those terms.  But--but I never, I knew that he never really meant that.  See for--he had--he never went to school at all.  So he thought that that was a swell thing to be, to be a person that could work for white people in a store.  You know, I mean that's how he, and I knew that he meant that I would be, to his mind, that meant that I was gonna be some--I knew he meant that I was gonna be just fine.  But I did end up in a supermarket working.  But my father's friend got me the job in the super- in the supermarket and I did that after school.  I wasn't much of a joiner, I'm still not much of a joiner.  I have joined some organizations, you know, through the years but I'm not one of those people that went out and partied and played around too much.  I just--I just don't have that kind of personality so I never really did those things.  I was mostly about, by the time I got in high school, I was about--I was going to school and working.  But I didn't sign my papers as I said, so that was--I didn't do all that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any counseling in high school?  Did they talk about college?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any counseling in high school.  I never went to counseling.  I never felt that I needed it, they never called for me to go, you know what I mean, to counseling.  I really didn't do anything.  I was just--I was a--just a average--I did well as in my subjects, but I just didn't have a whole lot of--I didn't have a lot of friends, I didn't--I wasn't a social animal.  I didn't care about what other people did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now the--
Story_ID: 637868
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The schools you went to were, were they mostly black when you went to them or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were changing schools.
Speaker 1: They were changing?
Speaker 2: The neigh- the when I started high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] it was about half of black.  When my sister [Joanne Russell Ussery] started high school four years before me, it was mostly white.  By the time I got there it was about half black and by the time I graduated it was nearly all black.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And your teachers were they--did you--were black teachers in the minority there?
Speaker 2: They were the minority, but there were some there.  There were quite a few black tea- there were black teachers there when I was there.  And I--and I didn't have--I didn't have any problems in high school.
Speaker 1: Did you pursue a college prep course or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in academic course.  I was in the academic course and then my father [Fred Russell, Jr.]--and I also took typing as a--as like a fifth major, fifth or sixth ma--whatever the extra major was at the time.  He wanted me to take typing 'cause he thought it was important that I learn how to type for college or, "You could always be a secretary or something like that," he said, if it didn't work out.  So I was aca- straight academic, you know, Latin and algebra, and physics and all that stuff is what I take--took.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was uneventful, do you know what I mean?  It wasn't like--high school wasn't the highlight of my life.
Story_ID: 637869
Speaker 1: Now during that period of time, Civil Rights Movement is starting to cook, you know, around the country.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did your--it sounds like your father [Fred Russell, Jr.] and mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] would be the kind of people that would keep up with the movement?
Speaker 2: Well, they had very strong views, but they weren't--they weren't, I wouldn't say they were very active in the movement.  They were not inactive, because at home they privately talked about all these things.  My mother was frightened because of her background, as I said about the lynchings in her family, and that's the one--the day of the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] March on Washington, I had purchased a ticket from one of--someone I knew and the fella brought the tickets over to my mother's dress shop [Mildred Russell's Fashions (ph.)], 'cause my mother had the dress shop at the time.  And my mother pretended like she didn't have the ticket.  He--he came in, gave her the ticket and I kept asking, you know, "Did somebody come over here give me the ticket?"  She was afraid for me to go.
Speaker 1: So this--you needed a ticket to, for the--?
Speaker 2: To take a bus.
Speaker 1: To take a bus there, all right.
Speaker 2: To take a bus down there.  My mother was frightened.  And--and the way--I told you she was a quiet, feminine type woman, you know, she wasn't arguing or everything, she just didn't tell me.  You know, (laughter), so when I came in, I said did--his name was Walter Sansom [ph.] as a matter of fact.  I said, "Did Walter come and give me, bring my ticket?"  She didn't know--she just didn't know anything about it.  So I, I didn't get to go, and I found out later that--that he had come and my mother hadn't given me the ticket.  And it was sort of a big discussion around there that night, because my father--there's a big kind of family meeting about that and, and my mother just said straight out, "I was afraid for you to go."  Because I don't know if you remember during that time 'cause I--I'm probably older than you, people were frightened there was gonna be a big mess down there.  They, they, they were gonna have violence for that March on Washington.  My mother was frightened for me to go.  So since I was determined to go, she solved the problem by not giving me my ticket.  My father kind of stayed out of it, but he kind of told my mother that he--that, that if that's what I wanted to do that I should--she shouldn't have handled it that way, that I should pursue whatever happened would have to happen if I pursue--you know, if I wanted to pursue this.  That she shouldn't have taken my ticket, you know, not let me go.
Speaker 1: You were a college student at that point?
Speaker 2: No, I was in--was I a college student then?
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] was the March on Washington, yeah that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and wh- wh- what month was it in?  It must've been, do you remember?
Speaker 1: It was in August.
Speaker 2: Well that was just two--that was the summer between.  It was sixty--summer of '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then I was in college [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], 'cause I started college January of '63 [1963].  I laid out a semester when I, remember when I wasn't--when I wasn't filling out my paperwork.  And in January my father said, "Here, sign here, pack your bag."  And then I went and did very, very well.
Story_ID: 637870
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is at Cheyney State?
Speaker 2: Cheyney State University [sic. Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And that's here in Pennsylvania, right here in?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact I live very close to there now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's between Cheyney and Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] is where I live, and I had a wonderful college experience.
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Fred Russell, Jr.] chose it for you, so we know how you chose it.
Speaker 2: He chose it, yeah, yeah he--
Speaker 1: Did you--when you were on the verge of graduation [from West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what was your--did you have a career aspiration or were you just kind of fuzzy about it?
Speaker 2: I was just fuzzy.  Looking back on it, I don't know what--I guess I wasn't thinking about much of anything, you know what I mean.  I, I started working more, 'cause I was always working and my father would say to me, "Have you--," you know, "When you gonna do this, when you gonna do this?"  And I just never did.  And I mean, if I have a message to tell some of the parents of the day, sometimes your children are just not mature enough to do it, you know what I mean, sometimes you just gotta do it for them.  That's what my father did, he just did it, "Sign here," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what about your sister [Joanne Russell Ussery], did she go to college?
Speaker 2: My sister did not go to college right away.  My sister got married right out of high school, but she did end up graduating from La Salle [La Salle University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in about--while she was in her--in her late twenties.  So she did graduate, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Education was pretty important in my family.
Story_ID: 637871
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], what--this is a black state supported school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a traditional--it's a traditional black college [HBCU], and, and I had a wonderful experience at Cheyney.
Speaker 1: Now who is Cheyney State named after?  I never did know that.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, I don't think it has--I don't think it's named after a person.  It was a Quaker school.  Well, and I think maybe, now I don't know whether the community is named after Cheyney or Cheyney is named after the community.  'Cause the ar- the community area where it is is called Cheyney, Pennsylvania.  And I really don't know that, I need to do some more research to find that out.  But I had a wonderful Cheyney experience.  I--I'm a AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  I still have some of my best friends even now are people that I went to, to college with.  I had a wonderful Cheyney experience, I did very well in college.  And I finished--in fact, that's when I really excelled.  That's when I really came into myself and I worked at it when I went--when I went to school and I had a very good average.
Speaker 1: How would you compare it to high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in terms of the teachers and the students?
Speaker 2: I thought it was--I--I never thought it was--well don't forget, I tried in college.  In high school I just zipped through.  I don't think it's--I didn't find that high school was difficult.  In fact, I didn't find Cheyney to be difficult either.  But I was--I was into it, you know what I mean.  I--'cause I had a goal, because the kids in college were starting to finish, most of them, you know what I mean, and so and I say oh, you know, I--I've started this--on this road and I'm gonna finish, I'm gonna get outta here, and I finished in three and a half years.  It didn't take me four years to finish.  I know nowadays you're lucky if you finish in five or six years, the kids.
Speaker 1: Now you became a teacher, so were you an education major?
Speaker 2: I was an education major, yes.  And I taught for about--from sixty--'66 [1966] when I graduated.  Did I say that right before?  I graduated from high school in '62 [1962] and I graduated in college in '66 [1966].  I caught up with my--I went to school a semester late, but I ended up catching up with my class.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you, who were some of the professors at Cheyney State and were there any that were special to you?
Speaker 2: There was quite a few of them, I'm getting old now, I can't even remember some of those, but there was Wade Wilson and Mr.--Dr. Dockery [ph.], and Mr. Moses [D. Jack Moses] was the music teacher.  There were a lot of--Cheyney was a--sort of like a small school where people was more like family type environment.  There was a Mrs. Starr [ph.] who was our guidance--she was the advisor for the sorority, for the AKAs.  You know, the coaches, I was not active in sports or anything, but it was--it was a g- it was a good time.  My college years were a good time.
Story_ID: 637872
Speaker 1: Now did, did your, your college life [at Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] inspire you to go to the March on Washington, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess it was part of that because it was '63 [1963].  I mean everybody was going, people were talking about it and I really wanted to be a part of it.  I was so upset when I didn't get a chance to go.  That was one of the stressful periods in my life as far as my mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] was concerned.  She was so frightened that something would happen to me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did not get a chance to go.
Speaker 1: I was asking--the initial question I was asking, did your parents keep up with it, not necessarily were they in it, but keep up with it?  Was it a (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah.  We watched it on TV.  We did a lot of talking about it.  My father [Fred Russell, Jr.] did, most especially, because he was--he had a lot of issues with it.  You know, he seemed like, I mean all--all the stories that I've told you about things that have happened to him and the things that he--that he was resented.  He was a brilliant man and never got really an opportunity to do what he thought that he was capable of.  And I think that he was a little bit resentful of the reason why he wasn't able, you know, to do some of the things that he was capable of.  Although he ended up the owner of a business [Rodgers Travel, Inc.] and all that and he did very well.  He ended up doing well, but he struggled, coming along, you know, as a young person coming along.  And he--and he--and a lot of his struggles he felt was racial issues.  He thought he was being held back and he resented it.
Speaker 1: Did he have an analysis of nonviolence, direct action?
Speaker 2: He--I never heard him talk about violence, because he was a thinker.  You know, he--he wasn't--I don't think his nature was the kind that he woul- he was mad all right, but he would--he--he would--he had mental ways of doing things, you know what I mean, rather than physical ways of doing things.  I never heard him really say anything one way or another about like the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and people that, you know, were doing things back in those days that were more physical.  I never heard of him participating in any marches or anything like that.  He felt as though--I think he felt that the way that he would master this was through the financial and the economy.  You know, he--he--he wasn't looking for friends.  I don't think he cared one way or the other what they thought, he just wanted his fair opportunity to do the same thing that he thought that other people could do, 'cause he knew--he felt that he was smarter than the rest of them.  You know what I mean, but he was being held back.
Speaker 1: Now did he have a political--was he in line with the Republicans or the Democrats on things?
Speaker 2: He was always Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was--since I remember, he was always a Democrat.  But he wasn't active that I know.  But he knew everybody in town, but he di- he didn't align himself with any special political people, you know what I mean, that's not--.  He--he was a businessman.  He--he--he was just on the business line of things.  He didn't--he didn't seem to be a political type animal at all.
Story_ID: 637873
Speaker 1: I was wondering if he [Pratt's father, Fred Russell, Jr.] had--did he have to handle travel arrangements for any of the civil rights figures or?
Speaker 2: Yeah he did.  He did handle--in fact, we did Leon Sullivan.  We did all of his travel, and we used to have to try to get him into So- So- Soweto [South Africa], S-O-W-E-T-A [sic.], Soweto without going through South Africa, because he wasn't allowed in South Africa.  And Sow- that country was right in the middle of South Africa at the time.  So we had to get him all kinds of creative ways to get there.  You know, he'd be traveling all kinds of crazy ways to get him in, because he could not land in Cape Town [South Africa] or Johannesburg [South Africa], which was the natural connection to those cities.  He'd have to backdoor it in some kind of way.  So we did a lot of travel for him.  I guess you've heard of Leon Sullivan, who was--yeah.  And so, tha- and I've done quite a few politicians and things in, around the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.
Story_ID: 637874
Speaker 1: I think I was asking you about some of the professors at Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and some activities (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and I named a few.  I had a very good Cheyney life.  I commuted.  When I started, I started as a--living in a dorm my first semester and I did not like it in the dorm.  So I promised my--I asked my parents [Mildred Newberry Russell and Fred Russell, Jr.] about halfway through the first semester could I come home.  'Cause Cheyney, you can commute, it's not far--it's not that far, it's about a hour's drive.  And I wasn't happy on campus, I was bored on campus.  Cheyney is a, in the country, you know what I mean.  There was nothing to do, I didn't have a car back, you know, in those days or anything.
Story_ID: 637875
Speaker 1: It may seem presumptuous, but did you have a significant relationship with a young man in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not at that time, I had a boyfriend in high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But--but when I went to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] I didn't have a--I didn't have a boyfriend until I was a junior, you know, at all.  And I got married by the way, too, when I was nineteen.  I got married when I was a junior.  And all I had to do was promise my parents [Mildred Newberry Russell and Fred Russell, Jr.] that I'd finish college and I promised them, and I did finish.
Speaker 1: So did you meet your husband on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--he--he went to school there, and he--his name is Kenneth Hamilton and he turned out to be a--one of the best coaches in Philadelphia.  In fact, they've named gymnasiums and things af- after him.  He is a pretty renowned basketball coach in the Philadelphia area.  He taught--he was a high school history teacher, but he taught at Ben Franklin High School [Benjamin Franklin High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which is a renowned basketball school.  He also coached in the McDonald's games for high school [McDonald's All-American Game].  He was a coach, you know, on TV and all that.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's prestigious.
Speaker 2: That's prestigious, yeah.  He ended up doing that, but we only stayed married about--we stayed married about seven years.  And as to my teaching years primarily, I didn't find that un- I didn't enjoy teaching.  I thought teaching was very difficult because if you try to do a good job with being a teacher, you had to look at each child as a person and I--I really felt strongly about that, but then that made teaching very, very difficult.
Speaker 1: Now did you teach in the Philadelphia public schools [School District of Philadelphia]?
Speaker 2: I taught in the Philadelphia public schools.  And I kept changing grades, I was sec- second grade, fourth grade, fifth grade, seventh grade, eighth grade, I figured eventually I would find some grade that I--that I liked.  But I found teaching to be very, very difficult.
Speaker 1: And this--you graduated in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Graduated '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: And you started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started teaching immediately.
Speaker 1: Okay. I stopped teaching in '71 [1971] when I sta- when I started working at the travel agency [Rodgers Travel, Inc.].
Story_ID: 637876
Speaker 1: Now what high schools did you teach at?
Speaker 2: I--I taught elementary school.  Let's see--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I taught at Stanton Elementary School [Edwin M. Stanton Elementary School], that's at--that was a school in North Phildy- Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I taught at Leeds Junior High School [Morris E. Leeds Junior High School; Morris E. Leeds Middle School] in the Germantown area [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Mount Airy area [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So you just didn't like it, you know?
Speaker 2: I found it difficult.  I thought it was hard, it's a lot of responsibility.  The children, I liked the children, but if you try to--if you really try to accomplish something in teaching, each child is different.  Do you know what I'm saying, so you have to come at each child in a different way that works best for them and I found that to be very difficult.  When I would leave school at the end of the day at three o'clock, I felt like I had been digging ditches all day dealing with the pe- with the people because I never thought of them as kids. They're people, you know what I mean.  And they all have different backgrounds, different everything.  So I really found it to be difficult and I--and I eventually gave it up.  I can work 'til midnight now and feel better at the end of the night than I did when I was teaching 'til three.  You know, I just--I think the teaching, if you--if you're trying to do a really good job, I think it's a tremendously difficult job, you know, if--if you really put your heart and mind into it.  And I--I'm the kind of person, I like to win (laughter).  So you know, I like to win in this business and I don't like to leave after the school year feeling like I didn't do every, you know, that I couldn't accomplish everything I wanted to accomplish with the kids, it didn't make me happy and that's why I left teaching.  So when my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] offered me an opportunity to come to work for him [at Rodgers Travel, Inc.], I moved to Washington [D.C.] 'cause his--that's where he was working, establishing that business.  He wanted me to come down so he could train me himself.
Story_ID: 637877
Speaker 1: Now did you leave teaching first and then decide to work for the agency [Rodgers Travel, Inc.], or did you start working for the agency and said well I'd rather do this than--?
Speaker 2: No, I--I--I--well, it was he invited me.  Well, I was at a transition in my life.  My husband [Pratt's first husband, Kenneth Hamilton] and I had broken up.  I did own a home, but and--and it was a transition period.  So he--my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] came to visit me one weekend.  This was way--the way he was.  It was just me and my son [Askia Hamilton, Sr.] at the house, and he like breezed in and stayed with me, which he never did when he came to town.  Stayed with me 'cause I think he just wanted to look me over and see if everything was okay.  And he came in and fixed a few things around the house and just kind of checked me out.  That's what I'm looking back on, I think that's what he was doing.  While he was there for one long weekend, he invited me to--he asked me was I interested in learning the travel business.  And he said but I would have to come to Washington [D.C.] 'cause--because he felt as though that he wanted to teach me himself.  He didn't want me--we had a manager in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] office and he was--he was physically in the D.C. office.  And I thought about it for a little bit and I said you know what, I'm gonna give this a whirl.  All my friends were just so upset with me.  They said, "You gonna give up teaching?" It's--you know, "Why?" Because it was steady, you know you had a job, you were off in the summers.  They couldn't figure out why in the world, you know what I mean, would I give up this great steady thing.
Speaker 1: With benefits.
Speaker 2: With benefits and the whole works, and I took my retirement out because when I went to Washington the pay, what--I think my father paid me a hundred dollars a week, I got and it was seventy-seven dollars a week after--and he said I didn't deserve that, because I didn't know anything, I wasn't bringing anything, I was just a trainee.  But I had--but I cashed in my retirement money that I had so far and I rented my house, and so I was making some income there and I went to Washington.  Rented an apartment and I stayed there for two years and learned the business under him.  It was--it was a good two y- it was the best thing that ever happened to me in my life actually.
Speaker 1: Okay now I didn't realize at some point your father then moved to D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he moved to D.C. to open another office.  He wanted to have more than one, he had the office in Philadelphia and he wanted to branch out and open the second office.  And he moved to D.C. because he thought that was a good place, a lot of black people.  Remember at the time, he was primarily--his customers were primarily all black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, D.C. was one of the blackest cities in the country?
Speaker 2: Right, and the people were affluent, black people in D.C.  So that's where he opened his office, it was at Georgia [Avenue] and Randolph [Street], if you know D.C.
Speaker 1: In those days, I remember they said that D.C. was 80 percent black in population.
Speaker 2: Eighty per- right.  So he--and he insisted that I come there.  He didn't want me to learn from the manager he had left here, he wanted me to come there, and I went and I learned.
Speaker 1: Now what about your mother [Mildred Newberry Russell], was she?
Speaker 2: My mother still had the dress shop [Mildred Russell's Fashions (ph.)] in Philadelphia.  You know, because she was kind of--she had her business in Philadelphia, he wanted to open in D.C., so they were sort of back and forth.  You know, he was--you know he would come--that's why I said he never stayed with me when he came up, when he was here on the weekends he was with my mother.  And then he died in 1980, but I had been working with him for--well I started in '71 [1971], so I had been with him for nine years.
Story_ID: 637878
Speaker 1: What was the state of the business [Rodgers Travel, Inc.] when you came aboard; and, and what led up to the, the government contracts I think that you said kind of changed the course of?
Speaker 2: It did.  The wh- wherever my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] was, that was the office that did well.  When he was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the Philadelphia office was--was booming.  When he went to Washington [D.C.], that office was booming.  So when he died, he was actually working in the Washington office.  I had come back to the Philadelphia office and was working, and I think that's probably what his game plan was altogether, bring me down there to teach--teach me down there with him, bring me back to Philadelphia so I could run the Philadelphia office eventually, because the Philadelphia office under managers were not doing--we were losing ground.  And the Washington, anywhere he was, was doing fine.  After--so I wo- I worked under a manager, but when my father died in 1980. My sister [Joanne Russell Ussery], by the way, had gone down to the Washington office after I left, she went down to the Washington office and so she was--when my father died, she was running--she started running the Washington office and I--I was--took over the office in Philadelphia.  And we did fine, you know what I mean, we did fine.  But I realized that I--that we were gonna have to change because as I said before, our business was being dispersed, you know what I mean, it was concentrated anymore.  And I started to look around to see what else that I could do.  And I joined this organization called--at the time it was called S-T-A-G, STAG, Society of Travel Agents, Travel Agents in Government [Society of Travel Agents in Government; Society of Government Travel Professionals].  And I started hanging around down there at the conferences, I just started going.  Twice a year I would go to the meeting, meeting people.  This organization was made up of all the travel agencies, they were all white.  All the travel agencies that--that did business with the government.  And, oh boy, thinking about these things.
Story_ID: 637879
Speaker 1: About that time my husband moved to, to, to California, 'cause I said he was working for--at that time he was working for Atari.  He started out working for Commodore Business Machines [West Chester, Pennsylvania] and that's a very interesting story there--
Speaker 2: Now this is another--this is a second husband?
Speaker 1: Second husband.
Speaker 2: All right, now tell us how you met him?
Speaker 1: I--I met him hitchhiking actually (laughter).  Back in the day we used to do things like that you know.  I was--I was going to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] as a graduate--I was going to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as a graduate stu- student.  He was going to Cheyney because he had gone into the [U.S.] military, he was in Vietnam.  He was a very bright kid that--from North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], bad neighborhood, but he got kind of picked out because he was so bright.  So he went to all of the special schools for the smart kids.  And he graduated from Central High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then got a scholarship to Temple.  But those were back in the days of the Civil Rights Movement and he was very involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  So he was wearing a skull cap and had a big beard, and he was playing chess and writing poetry and marching.  As a result, remember 'cause I don't know you might not be in those years, but in Vietnam [Vietnam War] if you didn't have a C average you got drafted.  And he ended up getting drafted because he was, as I said, writing poetry, playing chess, he was a chess champion, and--and marching and all those kinds of things.  He got drafted, went to Vietnam.  When he got to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], they--he got pulled--they went through test scores and things, and these guys were all being shipped to--actually that was the stop off point before you went to Vietnam.  And as he was standing in line, the general came out and said "Pratt [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt]," you know, "where are you?"  He ended up working in--he never got to Vietnam.  They pulled him out of line, because of test scores, you know, he was bright.  And he ended up, as he said, processing the men to Vietna- Vietnamese--to Vietnam and processing the bodies out.  He's the same person he would process in, 'cause he worked at the general--in the general's office doing those kinds of things.  Five months later, that same guy would come back in a body bag, it really changed his life.  So when he came back to finish college, he went to Cheyney and he got--never got anything under a four point [grade point average] after that point, you know, he was dead serious, you know, about school.  Then he went to Wharton, University of Penn [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Wharton--
Speaker 2: Wharton business school?
Speaker 1: --business school.  And, and he was working for a company by, I don't know if you remember a company called--it was one of the big five, I think it was five, accounting firms, called Ar- he worked for a firm called Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP].
Story_ID: 637880
Speaker 1: Now by that time we were--by that time I had met hi- met him.  I was going to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], he was going to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], and my--my car had gotten--something happened to my car; and my girlfriend that was also going to Cheyney picked him up in a parking lot.  Back in those days, we used to--all you'd have to do is stand in the parking lot and he was standing in the park--he didn't have a car--standing in the parking lot looking for a ride.  He lived in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So she just happened to pick him up because she was coming to North Philly to pick me up from Temple.  He was in the car when--when she--when she pulled up to pick me up and that's how actually I met him.  As I said, we met when he was hitchhiking.  I was teaching.  He was--he was just finishing up school and then he went to graduate school.  We were dating the whole time he was in graduate school and all that.  He--he started working for--we--when he got--after he got married--after.  Well see, he went to Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP] and I--he and I married at that point.  Well the interesting thing about this story is that at Arthur--at Arthur Andersen he started working for a company called the Commodore Business Machines [West Chester, Pennsylvania].  Do you remember the Commodore 64?  That's where he worked as an accountant for Arthur Andersen.  Well there was a guy by the name of Jack Tramiel who just recently died.  Jack Tramiel was a Jewish guy, he was a concentration camp Jewish guy that developed that Comm- the VIC--the VIC-20 [Commodore VIC-20] which is the first personal computer and the Commodore 64.  He was working as the accountant and he noticed him as being bright and all that, so he offered him a position to work at Commodore and leave Arthur Andersen.  So he did that and that was really the start of his--of his career.  Now the stor- what's interesting about Jack Tramiel was that he's from Poland and he was in one of those concentration camps in Poland, and the first black person he ever saw was the black G.I. that carried him out.
Speaker 2: Now this reflects back on the Black Panthers, the black tank unit that got to the concentration camps first, 761st Tank Battalion?
Speaker 1: It might have been them.  What's the concentration camp Dac- something that starts with a D--
Speaker 2: Dachau.
Speaker 1: Dach- that's where he was I believe and all his whole family was killed.  But he was sixteen years old so he was comparatively young and I guess strong.  So he--but by the time the war was over, he could barely walk and this big G.I. guy, an African American, carried him physically out of there.  He never forgot that.  So of course, he didn't ever forget it.  He'd never seen--even seen a black person before in his whole life, and he told me this himself.  So when Greg [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt] came along, as he saw how bright and all that Greg was, he--he kind of made Greg, you know, he kind of mentored him.  And he was with him through the Commodore 64 years, and then when--when Jack Tramiel bought Atari, he took him--that's how we got to California, he took him with him.  He tur- his highest position was vice president and treasurer of--on the board.  An interesting story about Jack Tramiel, he only died--he just died a couple weeks ago.  Jack Tramiel--Greg had the ambition of--he wanted to be one of the first black presidents, CEOs of a major corporation.  But Jack told him that he couldn't be that.  He said, "You cannot be a black--the first black head of a major white corporation." And he said, "I can't either."  He said, "Neither one of us are right."  He was a little short Jewish guy with a thick accent, Greg was black, and the--and they were running the comp- you know what I mean, they were actually running the company.  He said, "We need to go out," this is what Jack said, "We need to go out and get us an Anglo American guy 'cause we're taking this company public," and all that.  He said, "I'm not right and you're not right either."  So he went to be the chairman of the board and Greg sat on the board as treasurer.  But they hired somebody else to be (gesture)--
Speaker 2: The face of--
Speaker 1: Right.  Because he realized, but--but that hurt my husband's feelings a little bit because he said, "I can do this."  He said, "I know you can do it, I can do it too, but we ain't right."  And he was a wonderful--you know, he was a--he was a--he was a great guy, they made a lot of money.  He did very, very well.
Story_ID: 637881
Speaker 1: Now to get back to me.
Speaker 2: Now this is Greg Pratt?
Speaker 1: Greg Pratt.
Speaker 2: Pratt.
Speaker 1: Greg Allen Pratt [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He d- he and I are not together now either, but he lives in Bowie, Maryland and still doing well.  You can look him up, he's still doing great.  But what we did, when we moved to--to get back to how we got in the government.  Greg was making a whole lot of money then.  So I was living in California and there's another story I got that leads into this.  I didn't want to leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I was living in West Chester [Pennsylvania] at the time.  I had my--my business and I wanted to continue with my business.  But Greg had moved to California and we were married, and we're supposed to be a family.  I'm living in Philadelphia and he's living in California.  So after a year or so, he came back--he came and he said, "Okay you gotta make up your mind what you wanna do.  You know, are you coming to California with me or you gonna st- stay here and run your business?"  It was only a small bus- for his comparison.  Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc.] was a small business.  So, I went to California.  But you know God works in mysterious ways.  I sat there and I thought that the travel agency couldn't do--work without me.  I thought that it couldn't operate without me.  I went in everyday, you know, and.  So I--in fact, Rosenbluth [Rosenbluth Vacations] was an example to me.  I said well I had read that Rosenbluth was--also a Philadelphia corporation and the grandfather was a friend of my father's [Fred Russell, Jr.].  I said, how do they run seventeen hundred locations?  Mr. Rosenbluth [Harold Rosenbluth] ain't at seventeen hundred locations, he probably hasn't even been to them all.  You know, he's probably never even set foot in them.  So I said now if he can do seventeen hundred locations from a distance, I can certainly do one.  That was really a turning point in my business life.  Because I had to figure out a way how to run my business without being there.  And I did.  In fact, the--I've had fifteen travel agency offices at certain periods of time.  Now that's dwindled down and I'll tell you why.
Story_ID: 637882
Speaker 1: But at that point, that's when I wrote my first proposal for government.  Scott Air Force Base [Illinois], and I believe it was--it was in 1991 and I believe that was when Adam--oh my god, what was the general's name that--
Speaker 2: Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].
Speaker 1: Colin Powell I think might have been in charge around that time.  And the [U.S.] Air Force wanted to--wanted to use small businesses.  Women owned, minority owned, and they--and they were one of the first branches of government that was trying to give women and minorities, and small business, in general, a chance.  So Scott Air Force Base was a $10 million a year account.  And I wrote the proposal.  My husband helped me write the proposal too, and we sat down there and wrote our first government proposal, keeping in mind that I had been going o- going to these meetings [of the Society of Travel Agents in Government; Society of Government Travel Professionals] in Washington D.C.  I'd probably had been to ten of those meetings just meeting people, just trying to understand the acronyms and things.  You know, 'cause government has all that stuff that I didn't really understand.  And I got to meet people and know people and--and understand the nature of that business and I wrote the--I wrote the proposal when it came out for bid.  They went out to bid for small business.  So I was the first African--I was the first minority woman business [Rodgers Travel, Inc.] to win a government account, and that was in 1991, I believe, maybe--maybe 1992, during that period.  I won that.  It was a--it was a wonderful time, but you--as I said, it wasn't a credit card account, they didn't have that then.  So I had to have seven hundred thousand dollars a month in order to sponsor that.  Well, Greg [Pratt's second husband, Gregory Pratt] didn't ha- Greg didn't have that much.  You know, he came ov- he ga- gave me about four hundred thousand.  So I was about three hundred thousand short and after I won it.  You know, you--you know how you say to yourself, now you wanted this thing, now can you really do it?  He gave me the four hundred thousand dollars, Greg gave me four hundred, because most of his money was in stock and all that.  So, so he was able to come up with four hundred thousand dollars to give me, and one of his--Jack Tramiel--actually was Dick Sanford [Richard D. Sanford] I think, which was one of the other guys in there [Atari] lent me three hundred thousand dollars.  Can you imagine that, you know, looking back on that, I said, you know, somebody has enough money to just give you three hundred thousand dollars based on the fact that you say you're gonna do this.  I got three hundred thousand dollars for sixty days and I paid him back the entire three hundred thousand dollars in--in the sixty days.  Because at the time, we were making 10 percent commission.  So it didn't take me long to be able to--at the time, the airlines don't pay commission now.  But at the time, the airlines were paying 10 percent commission.  So 10 percent of $10 million a year of course is a million dollars.  And after two months, I had got enough profit that I could pay--pay him back.  And that was the start of it.  But I could last thirty days, but I couldn't last thirty--I couldn't last thirty days and one second (laughter), you know what I mean, I had to have.  And--and the government was very kind to me and that's why I don't--I'm not angry with the government.  You know, when you--you get--you know, you hear a lot of things about the government, but you know what they did for me, they started paying me every two weeks instead of every thirty days, and they made sure I got paid every two weeks.  That got me out of the--they made sure that I succeeded.  They did not want me to fail as I was the first woman minority business, you know what I mean, to get a government contract in travel.  So I--basically that's the phase of--and that's how I actually got started.
Story_ID: 637883
Speaker 1: So right now, last year we did $63 million in travel.  That's not my profit, I wish it was, it's very--we have a very, very, very small margin because we don't make a commission anymore and we--we--we make a transaction fee on every ticket, that can be as low as three or four dollars a ticket.  So you have to do a huge volume in order to stay in business.  Right now we have seven loc- eight locations.  We have three in Arizona, we have one in Florida, we have one in Georgia, and one in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the business [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] has changed from just--from dealing with the personal needs of black travelers that could not be satisfied by the black travel--I mean the white travel agencies?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To getting the bidding for minority contracts, you know, from the federal government, from--and getting contracts from private industry, you know?
Speaker 1: Right.  So we have--we have a portion of the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we have six [U.S.] Air Force bases right now.  We have a missile defense agency which is in Huntsville, left the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], they just moved to Huntsville, Alabama.  We have a security clearance.  You know, you see very few people around here because they're all out, most of--this is just the accountants are here, the management is here.  But the--and we have a couple agents that work here in this office, but most of our office, we have over thirty employees and getting less employees because it's getting more electronic, we don't need the people any--as much.  Everything is computerized.  You don't even hear phones ringing because if you--before you leave I'll show you that how we--we have a screen that we monitor every call--every phone call that comes in, where it's coming from, make sure the people get service.  We just do that through electronics.  Randy [ph.], I think you met Randy when you came in, the IT [information technology], you know, IT person, he keeps all that moving and going, so everything is computers and the phone system.  We have people working from home all over the United States, that way we can do the different times zones, and it's working out very well for us.  So, basically that's what I do now.  But that's what it's moved from.
Story_ID: 637884
Speaker 1: We do have a leisure, when you first came in you--did you see the section, sitting--when you first walked in the door, there was a couple people sitting in the leisure area.  This--Wayne [Pennsylvania] where we--where we're working now is a very affluent Main Line.  You've heard of the Philadelphia Main Line, well that's where we are.
Speaker 2: That's where people's aunts and grandmothers went to work for the shopping days.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's exactly what they (unclear).  And I've had problems--I've had a couple problems since I've been here, but for the most part I haven't.  You know, people have been great.  You know, things--times have moved on thank god.  But we have, there's a lot of people with a lot--I moved here.  I bought this building, we had always leased and rented.  I bought this building two years ago because it was cheap, you know, because of the econ- the real estate market was so down, I was able to get it at a good reasonable rate.  And this--this community around here are travelers.  We're American Express [American Express Company] so that people have confidence in, you know, when using American Express.  And I moved out here to try to redevelop our leisure.  Our leisure has almost entire- we probably don't do 2 percent in leisure business any more, but we're building.  We're building our leisure back because basically even though the government and corporate is--pays the bills, the leisure part is what we all love.  You know, that's why everybody comes into travel for the leisure part of this business.  And I--and we're trying to re- I, I, I took my attention away from the leisure 'cause it was--first of all it was hard business, I couldn't get any white customers and the black peo- customers were leaving us.  So, I moved out here to reestablish it, to get the high or higher end customers.  To get--we have--most of our customers over here are white and we're--and it's building.  Because people are not into that so much and all of my government, well not all of them, but my government accounts, that's very mixed.  So we're no longer a travel agency [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] for black people, we're a travel agency for all people (laughter). We finally got there.
Story_ID: 637885
Speaker 1: In this, the age of computers and smart phones and such, now why do we need a travel agency?
Speaker 2: Actually the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] said that not too long ago, and we were very--and--and--and of course the travel community was a little bit upset about that.  However, when you're going online you're coming to us or somebody like us [at Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania].  Somebody is issuing the ticket, it's not just magic in the air, you know what I mean.  When you go out--when you go online and use cheaptickets.com or travelocity [travelocity.com] or--or any of the websites that are there now, there's a travel agency issuing those tickets.  Because only travel agencies have a license with the airlines.  Remember that the airlines--the airlines are making you responsible for the money, you understand.  So they--so even though you put your credit card, travel agencies are still the only business entity that has a license to issue tickets for the airlines.  So cheaptickets and all those places that you go online, there's a travel agency behind the scenes, they're issuing tickets, making a fee.  So basic- but you have to do a heck of a lot of volume of business because the fees are small in order to make ends meet.  That's how travel agencies make their money now.  So that was another reason why I had to find something of a high volume type of a business. Sometimes I--I think about my father [Fred Russell, Jr.]--they--my father would just be so happy to think that people were lining up to get--to buy tickets from us, and they do that, because we have the contract, and they're not allowed to go to anybody else.  And as long as we do a good job with them, then everybody at these air--
Story_ID: 637886
Speaker 1: These six [U.S.] Air Force bases that I have right now are required to come to us.  Now we also have a responsibility, we have a responsibility to report to the government.  So I have reporting people.  They need to know the trends, you know, where they're going.  We also are responsible to make sure that they follow the government rules, 'cause the gro- the government has rules that they follow and they have contracts with different airlines.  We call them a city pair contract.  So basically every year they go out to bid and say well who, which one of you airlines want the--want the contract from JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] to Los Angeles [California] or JFK to London [England], or any place to any place in the United States.  And then they bid on it.  So the government basically makes 70 percent less than the--for anybody else's ticket, than the higher price ticket and they're unrestricted.  So they don't have all these, you got a ticket in twenty-four seconds, in twenty-four hours, and all that.  The government doesn't have that, because they're the largest customer of the--of the airline industry.  So they basically have 70 percent off and they're unrestricted, they can book anytime that they want to and they can cancel anytime that they want to without penalty.  So, and we're the ones that have to enforce that some--you know, sometimes, you know.  We have--if--if you as a government employee call and decide you wanna go first class or something that's not allowed, it's up to us to--to remind you of the rules.  So we basically, I mean there's tons, I don't know how many thousands and thousands and thousands of government people traveling every day.  The government depends on us to make sure that the--that the government travelers are doing what they're supposed to do and be surprised, most of the government employees are diligent about trying to save the government money.  You know, we--they'll take a connecting flight or they'll go a little bit out of their way to save the government money.  They--you'd be surprised that they really are pretty good about it.  You know, there's a lot of stuff on the news about the, you know, the five hundred dollar toilet seat, I don't see that in my--in my business [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania].  We're not the ones that benefit from that, the travel industry and I--we're required to get the best fares that we possibly can under these government contracts and we do that.  So that's why, that's why the government needs us.  Corporations use us for the same reasons, because they can't just let their people out loose on the Internet.  You know, if you're--if you're gonna book something on the Internet, we can get two tickets or three tickets sometimes for the cost of what you're getting for one ticket, especially if you have frequent flyer miles and you wanna stick with one carrier, you know what I mean.  So, and that's--and that's our job to tell people well if you take American Airlines, if you take United Airlines, which is the contract carrier, your fare will be three hundred dollars instead of thirteen hundred, or whatever it can be.  And--and--and we'd be surprised that they really do try to do that.  So basically that's what we do.
Story_ID: 637887
Speaker 1: Our leisure, we're still building.  We're in a neighborhood for it, I have the staff for it [at Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] and I think that leisure is coming back.  How many of you've been on--both of you, have you been on the Internet and got tricked, going on there to see, great historic hotel in this way or that way.
Speaker 2: I was the victim of a trick that someone in the office fell victim to.
Speaker 1: That did what?
Speaker 2: Someone in the office booked a trip for me and put me in a bed and breakfast, which was actually a basement.
Speaker 1: Right.  Because you know why, you go on the Internet and you don't know the hotels, you don't know.  And--and that person probably didn't mean to do that, but it said great historic hotel in a--in around all the historic district or something, you know what I mean, or best location in town, probably was.  The problem was it was a dump.  And travel age--and--and people are beginning to understand that.  For a very modest fee or no fee, because we get commission on like hotels and things like that, and tour packages.  You can come to an expert and know that you're going--that you're spending your money and going to a decent place.  And they'll describe to you, this is what this is, you know what I mean, this is what this is, this is what this is, this is how much each one of those cost and you can make up your mind, because you have the infor- proper information before you pay your money.  And--and there's some hotels we won't even put you in.  'Cause people will come in and say, "Oh no, all I need to do is lay down, I'm gonna be traveling around, I'm gonna be doing--," some hotels we just won't do.  Say if you want that hotel, then you need to go online to get it because we're not gonna do that 'cause they'll get mad.  So when they see it, the money looks good, but when they see it--when they get there, you know, it's gonna be a dump.  So, we--I find--it's my prediction, that people that are traveling, and--and traveling is not easy anymore and it's not fun at the airports, right.  I mean, come on, whe- when you first started traveling all of this, the adventure started when you walked out of your house.  In fact, the adventure started when you went to your travel agency and started planning the trip.  And then when you walk out of your house with your family and friends or wherever you're going, your vacation has already started.  You go to the airport and that's all part of the adventure and all that.  Now, it's a chore, everything is just a chore.  Your vacation doesn't start until you actually get to where you're going.  You're--you're smashed in, you know what I mean, all these seats in there, you can't breathe.  It's--no- nothing to eat.  Pay for your bags.  It's not like it used to be and the people want to be--don't wanna be hassled.  They wanna make this experience as--and we can show people how to do it as--as--as pain free as possible.  Like for instance now, they're have a--there's gonna be--they're starting to do it in some cities, where you can--if you're--you can pay maybe a hundred dollars a year to get prequalified.  So all you have to do is put your thumbpr- thumbprint or your eye thing, course big brother is watching you big time; however, they can do it anyway, and then you can--you can go past the security line.  That's what's starting to happen now.  We advise people of this kind of thing.  We give them their travel insurance so that if you go to--there's some countries that you don't wanna get sick in, you know, you better get home just as fast as you possibly can, because regardless of what everybody says about the United States, this is the best place to live in the world still, even with our problems.  I mean I've been to ninety, almost 100 countries and I've never found a country that's better to live in than what we live right here in the United States, even with all of our problems.  The, I'm sure you've been to, you know, plenty pla- different places, and I don't know if you find that to be true, but I have.
Story_ID: 637888
Speaker 1: Now how did, how did ni- 9/11 [September 11, 2001] affect the travel industry?  I mean and your business [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, it got real strict.  You know, that's when this--all this security stuff came along.
Speaker 1: I thought I'd try to establish that.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I just sort--yeah.  The bombing of the World Trade Center [New York, New York] and with the airline problems.
Speaker 2: The air- oh my god, that's when all this started to get so strict.
Speaker 1: In 2001.
Speaker 2: Two th- two th- yes 2001, absolutely.  It's been good for the airlines though in a way.  Well the airlines are making money now, and I don't know what's going--American Airlines in my estimation made a mistake when they didn't join up.  Well you know how all these airlines are combining together.  So, we--we used to have, you know, twenty or thirty airlines, we have four or five now.  And American should have joined up with USAir [US Airways] a long time ago. Now they're trying to do it now, but they should've joined up because--because by the time you--.  They're making money and I don't know what's happening to American to be honest with you, 'cause they went into a bankruptcy thing, but all these airlines are making money through baggage, ex- the cost for the bags and not feeding people.  I mean you can go all the way across country and not get a meal.  And they're doing--and they're doing that.  And--and we have at least, when was the last time you've been on airplane that had any empty seats.
Speaker 1: Yes, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because they have reduced the number of flights.  So if you used to have ten going from city A to city B, now you've got three, four.  So every seat is taken on every airline, and they're--so they're doing all right now.  Which is--which is a--I guess, which is a good thing.  But this, but the public has suffered quite a bit.
Story_ID: 637889
Speaker 1: Do the black fraternal organizations, church groups, professional organizations, are they start- do they still use black travel agencies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not much.  They don't use--yeah, they do use travel agencies, but they don't use minority travel agencies, not often.  I'm not saying it's an impossibility, but not often.  But I think eventually they will come back to--maybe, you know.  It doesn't matter whether they come back, because my bus- you know what I mean.  It doesn't matter because I--because Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] is everybody's travel agent.  You know, I, you know, there's a time that you have to realize that those times are gone.  Everybody is mixing more and more, as far as the regular people in the world, in the United States, they're mixing more and more, and they're not and--and--and the way my marketing head says, I don't care who they are, I'm willing to do anybody's.  I can't depend on it, because I won't be in business.  Because they wanna use anybody, they wanna use to--people don't--people don't, most pe- most African Americans don't--they don't travel, they don't go to somebody just because they're black, you have to have some other reason to go along with that other than just being black.  The loyalty is not there, they're trying to get the best deal or the best situation that they can find.  And that's where the United States is.  Actually, there's--Caucasian Americans travel with us too.  Do you--you know what I'm saying?  Because now it's a little slower for them because they don't--it's a little slower but they're beginning to understand too, that all they want is the best price and the best situation for themselves and I don't think they care a heck of a lot either anymore.  It's getting more and more that we're--we really are becoming more homogenous as a, as a country.  Slowly, but it's coming.
Story_ID: 637890
Speaker 1: Now in 2011, you were named the Eastern Pennsylvania Minority Small Business Person of the Year?
Speaker 2: Yep, I sure was.
Speaker 1: So that's quite an honor?
Speaker 2: It is quite an honor.  You know, I giv- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, to give it to a business people think is dying, so, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, we're not, you know, we're not dying we're doing very well, but I told you because of the niche that we have [at Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania].  And that we also have arrangements with corporations.  A lot of corporations have respon- they either have self-imposed responsibilities to do business with small businesses, and women owned businesses and minority businesses, or they have requirements that if they have or if they're government contractors, then they're required to do so much business with women, small--and small business.  Now small business can be white males too, as long as they're small business, and minority businesses.  A minority can be a big business and doesn't get--you have to be small, that's the thing.  Now, what is small?  Compared to American Express [American Express Company] and Sato Travel [CWTSato Travel], we're like a drop in the bucket.  And even though that sounds like a lot of money that we grossed, you know, over the year, I guess American Express does what, I don't know, 6, $7 billion or--in travel or I don't know what the amount is, some kind of huge amount.  So we're a tiny--and we have to compete with them, so that's why they give us a little special considerations.  All women, all small businesses and all minority businesses and, and just a small business, could be white males too.
Story_ID: 637891
Speaker 1: So I've heard you say now the agency [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] can handle a trip as detailed as Reverend Leon Sullivan's backdoor trips to Soweto [South Africa]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during the '90s [1990s] when he couldn't really go through the country that Soweto is in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to get to Soweto?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you have--that being said, and I know you said you specialize in the Caribbean at one time for African American travelers, is there a special that you have now for--for travel?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, well, actually we--we only hire strong international agents because everything is moving toward international.  Almost any normal person can learn how to do domestic travel.  But it's very difficult still to do international travel.  Because we do [U.S.] military work, we do quite a lot of the Arab nations.  We send an awful lot of our military people and government people.  We do--we do the headquarters of EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] for instance.  And the headquarters of EPA they go to all kinds of strange places doing all kinds of strange things about the environment.  We gotta get them there, you know, we got--we have to get them there.  We have to get people at Alaska where way up in the Antarctic and places like that.  We--we have to figure out ways of getting them there.  Sometimes it's so remote that we get them to a certain point and the military have to pick it up from there and take them.  So that's--we do a lot of international because the world is much smaller now and people, and it's not just Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Paris [France], that's almost like going to Philadelphia to California, you know what I mean.  It's--that's a easy thing.  But when you're going to all kinds of countries and stopping different places, because they have to--they go out on the road and they might go out on the road for a month going to ten different countries and, and we have to--it's difficult, it's complicated and, and you have to have skilled people to be able to figure that stuff out.
Story_ID: 637892
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite travel destination that you like to handle [through Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania], or?
Speaker 2: No.  We--we've--we'll send anybody anywhere.  If--if you wanna go, we can--we send anybody anywhere that they wanna go.  And--and we'll give them the best price, because nobody wants to spend, including me and you an extra nickel on those airlines.  You know what I mean, nobody, you know, like if you might go into Saks Fifth Avenue and you're willing to pay an extra fifty dollar or a hundred dollars because it's Saks Fifth Avenue, you know what I mean.  You know, you're gonna have to pay a little bit more, Neiman Marcus or--or one of those Gucci or something.  But nobody wants to spend an extra dime on the airlines and I do think it's a mistake that the airlines are making when they are--or they're not paying attention to customer service.  They're not--people don't say I'll pay an extra fifty dollars to go on this particular carrier because I like them, they're good to us.  You know what I mean, they--
Speaker 1: I think they were hedging their bets on that at one time.  I mean a ticket to go somewhere with United [United Airlines] or American [American Airlines] was more than--than Southwest [Southwest Airlines Co.] or some other?
Speaker 2: Right.  Actually Southwest--actually Southwest has very good customer service, but they don't promise you stuff they're not gonna give you in the first place.  That's how they came out--they said I'm gonna tell you from the beginning, we're not gonna give you any food, come prepared with your own lunch or eat at the airport.  We're not gonna, you know what I mean.  But they don't charge for bags now.  The last I heard that they--unless they started that recently, they have not--they don't charge for--for baggage even now.  Southwest was honest with you.  You know, don't pretend that you're gonna be, you know, you having all this great service and you don't have it.  They--they and that's why people like Southwest.  They have nice planes, you know and a lot of people like Southwest.  I like Southwest.  The seats seem to be a little bit bigger, you know, that's important too if your people are tall or people that are fat or even if you're not, if you're sitting next to somebody that's hanging over (laughter), just hanging over the seat.  Southwest gives you a little extra.  The people are friendly, generally.  They have a younger staff if you--if you look at them, you know.  They have a young, you know, when you get old like me and get cranky, you know.  The old stewardesses and stuff get cranky.  They're nice, I mean it's--it's all right but it's not--it's not like, we have pictures of years ago when people would go on planes.  We have a picture of, I think it's Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] or TWA [Trans World Airlines], where everybody is standing out in front of the plane with their little--with the women with the hats and the gloves, you know, you used to get dressed up and go there, and everybody and then they take pictures of--of the group, you know what I mean, before they get on the airplane.  And it was just a wonderful time.  Now it's just transportation, you know, just getting there.  And you don't--and only the very, very rich people that can have their own planes get any kind of, you know, decent treatment on airplanes now, I think.  It's like a cattle car.
Story_ID: 637893
Speaker 1: So you think that--but you see the future of travel agencies being fairly bright as people come back for the service that they can't (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think the leisure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Leisure travel is coming back for the reasons that, you know, that I stated before.  People want the service.  And if you've got five thousand dollars to spend on a trip, you got five thousand and fifty dollars, it's not gonna make that much difference.  You wanna make sure your trip is--you know, if you have to pay a few muc- a few more dollars it's not gonna bother you 'cause you know--I think most people getting more and more towards that, you know you're gonna get, and then you have somebody to come back to.  That's another thing, you get over there and you got a dump.
Speaker 1: So as you--
Speaker 2: You can call me and I--, "Get me outta here," (laughter) right.  And we [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] get you someplace else.  But we know our hotels and most travel agencies do.  They know where they're sending you and they match you up with--with--with your destination.  If you were going--if you call me and say you're going to Jamaica and you know, I'd start asking you questions, you know.  "Have you been there before?"  "No, I've been to Aruba."  "Well what hotel did you stay in?  Did you like that hotel?" 'Cause we can make comparisons.  "At Aruba I stayed in XYZ hotel."  "Did you like that?"  "Actually I thought it was a little bit too quiet."  Well see, that's, now you going to Jamaica this time, I say, oh they like to have fun.  You know what I mean, they wanna be someplace where.  So--so you got people.  You see, a person can judge what you're saying to them and send you someplace where you would be happy by just questioning you about how you enjoyed the trip that you were in before.  Where you'd gone before and that kind of thing.  We can just do a better job for you.  And--and leisure travel is a happy time still.  If you came in with your family to me, you know what I mean, you're--you're looking.  Everybody's stressed and have all these things, now you talk about your vacation, you're gonna have a fun time.  It's--it's a--it's an enjoyable job to do people's vacations.
Story_ID: 637894
Speaker 1: Okay, now and now do you have any good stories about celebrities or anybody else that, I mean or, or about a trip that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Well not really, because we do so ma- like for instance in the government, you know we do all the generals and the big shots.  Every now and again, the big shot generals and things.  I get a little, as the old folk said, a little besides themselves, you know, what I mean.  'Cause they--'cause people obey them like, you know, they have a lot of power, put it that way.  But not really, even the celebrities and things that we use and I don't even, actually I don't even know who we do.  'Cause, you know, we do, I guess we do a couple thousand tickets a week and I don't know who they are most of the time.  Oh, we do the black theatre festival [National Black Theatre Festival].  Have you heard of that?  The black theatre festival in North Carolina?
Speaker 1: In Winston-Salem [North Carolina], yeah.
Speaker 2: Well Sylvia [HistoryMaker Sylvia Sprinkle-Hamlin] and Larry Hamlin are my--did you--I don't know if you saw my second son [Zeid Pratt, Sr.], he was walking around here [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania], a tall one, that's their godparents.  So I--so we do--sometimes we do their travel and they have a lot of celebrities coming in and most of them are very nice.  You know, most--we don't have any trouble with celebrities.  I don't have any trouble with celebrities.  So and most of my celebrity workers do black theater.  Have you ever been down to the black theatre festival?
Speaker 1: I haven't.
Speaker 2: Go.  It's wonderful.  You know, it's--it's a wonderful experience.  I wouldn't miss that.  That's one thing I don't miss.  Sylvia Sprinkle--Larry died a few years ago, but Sylvia Sprinkle is doing a fabulous job, nothing's changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed her about two months ago.
Speaker 2: Did you?  I'm gonna call her up.  She's my--I tell you, she's my son's godmother.  She used to live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Did she tell you that she lived in Philadelphia?  And that's she was, she was--her first real job after--after she went to Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was at the Free Library of Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And that's when I met her.  You know, so that's my best friend (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't--I didn't know that so I'm gonna--I'm gonna call.  So where did you go.  You know she's the director of the libraries ha--
Speaker 1: We went to the theater.
Speaker 2: Oh you went to the theater, North Carolina black theatre guild [North Carolina Black Repertory Company].
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's the director of the county library [Forsyth County Public Library, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, she that's--that's what her job is.  You need to go there next time, next--next summer.  Not this summer, next--it's every two years, next summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You'll enjoy that.
Speaker 1: All right, everybody tells me that, so I'm (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh really, it's really worth going.
Story_ID: 637895
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, and all the successes you've had, is there anything--major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Actually, well there's always things that you could do.  As far as the business [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] is concerned, no.  I've been blessed to make good choices and I'm all right as far as the business world is concerned.  I don't mind working hard and I like to win.  You know, the difference between me and a guy is, that when I was growing up, women didn't have the opportunity too much to be--we didn't have the competition like the guys do in being competitive in sports stuff.  So I guess I--I'm kind of, of a competitive nature, I just like to--I just like to win and this is where I find that--that helps me to satisfy the need of being--of doing a good job, you know.  If there's anything that I would do differently, some personal--personal things, not with the work, I would probably--my two husbands [Kenneth Hamilton and Gregory Pratt], I'd still do that again, probably, both of them (laughter).  That would be all right.  But my physical health, I think I would've done more to take care of my physical health a little bit better.  At one point in my life I was really heavy and I have come down, but you know, I'm always watching my--we, you know, I have--I could do better in that area, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things, personal things.
Story_ID: 637896
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well I guess I do have--I do have some concerns.  I'm very concerned about our black men, our black young boys and men that the young people that don't seem to have--they don't know--haven't evaluated where their positions are in life and, and how to be a success.  And they find--and I think they all want to be a success, which is easily--you can tell because they'll--there're like Joe Kennedy with their marijuana and stuff that they're selling.  So they do want to be successes but they haven't analyzed the world that they live in.  So they don't know what they can do and what they can't do.  They don't understand where they fit and--and I'm very concerned with that because and I probably came that--that's probably because of the breakdown in family and boys don't have men to--successful men in life that know how to maneuver their way through life.  Our--our boys don't--especially the boys, that's why I have a concern about for the--for the young men.  But the young women, I think I have a concern for the young black women, because black women don't seem to understand that they do need men (laughter).  I think you can make your own living, but--but men and women, and that men and women are different, just by nature.  And so I worry about our black women because there're so many of the young women don't seem to think that they need a man for--to be the other half of their family.  You know, because they haven't had a father and their mother didn't have a father, so they don't.  And I really believe that a woman, a young woman learns how to be a wife by having a father.  They practice on their fathers, you know what I mean.  When you're--when you're a little girl, you learn how to get along with men because they learn how to get along with their fathers.  You know, they know what--you know a man-female relationship, you know, and--and trusting and all that.  And I think that we don't have that, and that's what's wrong with the women.  And our men, as I said before, just though they don't understand how to be a success in life, they want to, but they go all about it, you know, in the wrong--in the wrong way.  They believe what is going on in TV instead of eval- looking and evaluating.  And there's always a few that can figure it out, but so many of them don't seem to be able to figure that out.  And I guess that's my main concern about that, you know, the young people now.  I don't think we're on the right track, both the men and the women for different reasons.  I--I--I don't think that the women, I think in general--in general, white and black communities, especially in the wh- the white community for this particular concern that I have, especially we wanna make men women and women men.  You know, what I mean, in other words they don't seem to understand that a man has a different nature then a woman has, and we need to accept that instead of start trying to change the men into women (laughter), you know what I mean.  And--and that's what I kind of see that's happening, that we're just different but we're meant to--to come together and have their--have our--both have our sides and have our strengths.  So and I think the white community is primarily doing that, you know.  Just a couple stories that I could tell about how--how women just don't understand the nature of a man and--of the male part of our species.  I think--I think most the women--the men have a better understanding, kind of, but they--but they don't know where they fit in this world and that's what I have a prob- you know, that's what I wish could change for our black young people.  I think they believe what they see on TV, which is all just make believe, you know.  And the boys get themselves in a lot of trouble, and the girls just give up and say well I don't need a man for anything anyway, which is not true.  You know, I don't think a woman can raise a man, you know what I mean, because we just don't have the right natures to raise a man.  Men need to raise men (laughter), the boys into men.  And if we could straighten that out I think that, that--I think that would help our race quite a bit.
Story_ID: 637897
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I haven't much thought about it you know, because I have a lot of successful friends, you know, and all that, and my legacy.  I think that I've--I think I have two great sons [Askia Hamilton, Sr. and Zeid Pratt, Sr.] that so far haven't been the financial successes that my generation, you know, is easier to do; however, they're good people and I'm happy about that.  They're really good people, they're good fathers and I watch that.  You know, I--I'm always watching that.  I have two--both my sons are unmarried and they each have a son [Askia Hamilton, Jr. and Zeid Pratt, Jr.], but they are really proactive in their--in their sons' lives and they're good, good dads and they--they--they're in Little League and they're good men in the community and all of those kinds of things.  So that's the legacy, you know, I seem to be better at making money, but they are really good guys.  You know what I mean, they're good men and they're--and they're gonna be--and I think I've done a good job raising them into being decent people.  Not that they don't make mistakes, we all have, but they're--they're decent people and I think that's probably the legacy.  Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania], I don't know what's gonna happen to it because both my sons seem to have different interests then I do.  And--and this company may--I might end up selling it or selling it to--what I'm thinking about doing is have some kind of an employee--that's how my father [Fred Russell, Jr.] got his opportunity by being an employee and maybe the employees, I have some ideas about how the employees can continue this legacy on.  I'd like it to continue to be African American.  And I've got a couple good African American employees that are excellent at what they do, but they don't have money, enough, to do it, but there's ways that, you know, we can structure deals to maybe to make that work.  So I hope that Rodgers Travel becomes.  Rodgers Travel has a life of its own.  I'm not the first owner of Rodgers Travel.  You know what I mean, I'm the third owner of, of Rodgers Travel.  So Rodgers Travel sort of has a continuation of its own, and I'd like it to still continue.
Story_ID: 637898
Speaker 1: Now were your sons' fa- fathers involved with their lives when they were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both of my sons had their fathers.  I was married to both of my husbands and so they were raised by their fath- you know, they were raised, one--my second marriage [to Gregory Pratt], I was married to for twenty-seven years.  And--and my first marriage, even though I was only married about seven years, he's [Pratt's first husband, Kenneth Hamilton]--was around and still around, you know what I mean.  I'm still very good friends with his whole family.  You know, I still participate in the family, you know, in their family activities.  Of course they're my son's family, you know what I mean, so they're my family too and they've been very receptive to that.  So no, I haven't had those kinds of--of--they've had their fathers, you know, so, so they're good men.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause we always ask about family too at the end.  Now did your father [Fred Russell, Jr.] get a chance to see both your sons?
Speaker 2: Yes, but not to--my father died in 1980, so my youngest son [Zeid Pratt, Sr.] was born in 1977.  So he got to meet--know as a little baby, little child.  And my oldest son [Askia Hamilton, Sr.] was born in '69 [1969], so he was about ten or eleven years old when he died.  So, he--my father died young.  He--he was dead by the time he was my age, I'm sixty-seven.  My father, I think, died in--when he was about sixty-two, you know or sixty-three.  So he didn't live as long as--as I wish he had.  My mother [Mildred Newberry Russell] died at the age of eighty-three.  So she got a chance to know them.  And--and my mother got the opportunity to help me raise them.  You know, she was so refined and dignified you know, and they talk about her now.  I mean you know, she was the kind of person that, oh she was just into children, you know what I mean, she was into children.  She--she--nothing was more important, you know, to her and then children, which I didn't do a very good job with that actually 'cause I've been working, you know what I mean, but she helped me with my children.  You know, she's the kind of mother that you know, made what you wanted to eat.  You know, (laughter), she was a good, you know, so she gave my kids a little bit of that so they know about.  And--but they accept me too for what I do, you know, but I'm not quite as--like my mother was, another generation, so.
Story_ID: 637899
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No I think I've talked--I've said about everything that I can think of.  So what's your last question?
Speaker 1: It's similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know you're asking me questions I haven't much thought of.  Actually I think I will be remembered, that's one thing that I'm pretty sure of.  I think I do have an impact on, on--my--on, on, on lives.  And I--and I try to make a good impact, you know, on people's lives.  I try to be a good citizen and a good family member.  And I think that with my grandsons [Askia Hamilton, Jr. and Zeid Pratt, Jr.] for instance, I think that they--you know, I have a great relationship with them, one's fourteen and one's twelve.  One is more of a scholar, and one is more of an athlete.  And we have a lot of fun and do a lot of things.  I travel with them a lot.  I take them a lot of places.  So, that's it.  Did I answer that question?
Speaker 1: Yes, I suppose so (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You suppose so.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 637900
Speaker 1: This is a picture of, of myself and I believe that was taken when I was living in California in the--probably in the--no, maybe not.  Probably in the--I go--probably early--around 2000 I think.  And it looks like a picture I was taking for some kind of promotional.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay. Wait a minute, I got to put my glasses on here.  Let's see.  Oh we were definitely on some trip somewhere.  Do you know where that was, that was in Egypt.  We were traveling in Egypt and that--that's somewhere around the rui- some of the ruins in Egypt.  Probably in the--and I don't really know exactly, I've been to Egypt several times.  So maybe about ten--about the '80s [1980s] you think?
Speaker 2: That's what it looks like.
Speaker 1: And that's our Rodgers Travel [Rodgers Travel, Inc., Wayne, Pennsylvania] shirt that we have there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well let me see.  That was on one of my many travels.  I've traveled to about 100 countries and I don't know exactly where that was.  But I had the same sunglasses on that was on the other trip, so about--perhaps that's Egypt.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Well, this is in 1984. That was in 1984.
Speaker 1: Well that's in India, that's the Taj Mahal [Agra, India].
Speaker 2: Say it again into the mic. They can't hear you.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--1984.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh this is a--this is a picture of--at STGP [sic. Society of Government Travel Professionals], which is, they changed the name from STAG [Society of Travel Agents in Government] to STGP, which is the a--the organization for travel managers that work with the government.  And this is my best friend in travel, Jackie Alton [ph.] on the left and these were some of the recipients of--I was the announcer, I believe, of the recipients of these people who got awards that year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: That's also--oh you know, that one is in--that's India, the same picture as the other one, see I have the same outfit on.  That's also India and that was about at least twenty-five years ago, 'cause I think that was the last time I was in India and it was Delhi.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's when I used to teach the travel class and that had to be probably in the '80s [1980s].  When I was teaching the--we used to have outside sales people that I used to do a class every year and these are some of the members of the class and the lady in the back is Lossie Dickerson [ph.] and the man to the far right is the owner of the--I mean the manager of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] office back in those days.  His name, he's dead now, his name is Irving Early [ph.].
Speaker 1: Again that's Irving Early on the right and Vivian Hunter [ph.] on the left, they used to be agents that worked at our agency when we were doing primarily all African American work.  And then we also have Faith Thompson [ph.], who basically just--she worked with us for many, many years and she just left us maybe about five years ago.  Oh what year that was, that looks like that had to be in the '70s [1970s] at one of our offices.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Again, this is India at the Taj Mahal.  This is a group of travel agents that I was traveling with.  Back in those days, this is called a familiarization tour when the airlines or--or the promoters of India would get us all together and show us all around so that we could go back and be familiar with our clients.
Speaker 2: Oh this is one of the pictures that I was mentioning earlier where this is actually an Eastern Air Lines, which you know is out of business.  The person on the far left is my father, Fred Russell [Fred Russell, Jr.], and all the rest of these people are members of groups of a--of a group and this had to be, be--well this had to be in the '70s [1970s].  And I don't know where they were going, but this is a perfect example of how everybody used to dress up with their hats and pocketbooks and gloves, and how the airlines were so cordial and considerate that they actually let you stand outside the airplane to get a picture taken.
Speaker 1: This is the Washington, D.C. staff.  And these are, and I don't know very many of those--these folks' names, but there's my father in the far right corner, third from the end in the back.  And--and this--this lady right here in the front was the manager of the Washington, D.C. office at that time.  I can't remember her name.
Speaker 2: This is another trip, this is a bus trip, we used to do quite a few bus trips.  This could've very well been an Atlanta [Georgia] bus trip, which we used to do a lot of Atlanta bus trips.  We don't--and it stopped about the time when those children got killed [during the Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders].  The business just fell off.  But we use to do--remember that.  The--the--we used to do a lot of the Atlanta trips or it could've been Montreal [Canada].  The Philadelphia Tribune by the way, is the local black newspaper in Philadelphia that took that photograph.
Speaker 1: This again is a picture, a photograph by The Philadelphia Tribune and it's the Middle East tour of 1966.  And again, everybody's all dressed up standing outside the airplane.  And then we used to give a copy of this picture to all the members of the group.
Speaker 2: This picture is very interesting because the mayor of Philadelphia is in this and that's the--and some congressmen are in here, represent- city representatives are in here and right in the middle, down front, is my mother, Mildred Russell [Mildred Newberry Russell].  And this was at some affair that Rodgers Travel was--was giving.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you remember the name of the mayor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Green [William J. Green III].  That was, his last name was Green.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And which one is he?
Speaker 2: He's right--right in the center, right in the middle.  I can point, right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay this--let's see.  This was--this was back in 1991 and--and this was--periodically the newspapers would come to us to talk us--to us about what was the latest trends in travel.  And this was a photograph taken by them that was in the, I believe it was in The Philadelphia Inquirer.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is one of--this is our general man- myself and the general manager taken in 1994.  She's still our general manager. She has been with us for about twenty years.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Brenda Fain and she was out today or else you would've gotten a chance to meet her.
Speaker 1: This was a newspaper that we used to do a quarterly to send out to all of our persons and each--and each time that we did it, this was our forty-fifth anniversary edition.  This--Alice Jones [ph.]--Alice Jones was one of our outside sales, and each persons- and each quarter we would highlight one of the people from our staff.  And we always had a president's corner where I would give my remarks.  And inside were just destination information.
