Story_ID: 613605
Speaker 1: I'm Jacques Lesure, the interviewer.  The videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ken Page, K-E-N, P-A-G-E, no I.  My family gets irate about that.  No I, just G.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth and birth date?
Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri, January 20th, 1954.
Speaker 1: And today's date, please?
Speaker 2: What is today?  April 4th 2008.
Speaker 1: And our current location.
Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: And your--
Speaker 2: Downtown.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation.
Speaker 2: Entertainer I would say.  I'm an actor.  I'm a writer, director, anything they'll let me do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Basically an actor.
Story_ID: 613606
Speaker 1: We have a few more questions that we call our People magazine type questions.  We'd like to know your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I hate to say it, but it is fried chick- no, no.  You know what?  I take that back.  My favorite food is pork fried rice.  How about that?  My mother [Gloria Page Gilstrap] said she couldn't get enough of it while she was carrying me, so I guess it's a birth mark.  I could eat it every day and then fried chicken, preferably together (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color?  Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Egypt.  I haven't been there yet but I'm on my way.
Speaker 1: And is there a phrase or a saying that is a favorite of yours?
Speaker 2: Phrase or a saying.  Well, I'd say I have to quote my grandmother [Q.T. Page (ph.)] and she said, "No fools, no fun."
Speaker 1: Can you elaborate what you think that meant?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know what it means.  I know (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you don't have any fun people, no fools, fools meaning in the sense of a good time, no fun.  No fools, no fun.
Story_ID: 613607
Speaker 1: Well, let's go into your background a bit.  Let's start with your mother.  What was her name or is her name?
Speaker 2: Her name now is Gloria Gilstrap [Gloria Page Gilstrap].  That's her current married name to my stepdad, Garvin Gilstrap.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Arkadelphia.
Speaker 2: Arkadelphia.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about her life as a child growing up, her life?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  One of five siblings, actually.  One had died early on.  She's the baby.  She grew up until about age six in Arkadelphia and then she spent a year or two in St. Louis [Missouri].  She came to join my grandmother [Q.T. Page (ph.)] there and then she went back to Arkadelphia and stayed there through high school graduation and then moved to St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she share any special stories about her childhood growing up with you?  Did she share anything that stands out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Just that I've, I've found out as I started to go into the arts that she actually was in plays in high school and she played the maid in some play or something, talked about how she stole the show and so forth.  But, I think she was fairly outgoing, cheerleader, sort of extroverted, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe your mother from your perspective?
Speaker 2: Strong, self-willed, innovative, particularly coming through the '50s [1950s], sort of a bohemian (unclear) and, you know, that's a whole 'nother story, but, you know, very much ahead of her time I think in a lot of ways, specifically coming from the background that she came from and then St. Louis which I think, you know, you probably know was pretty much of a hot spot in the '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].  There was a lot of clubs and music and everything coming out of St. Louis--excuse me--and she was very much involved in that scene and--
Speaker 1: And she--
Speaker 2: --innovative, yeah.
Speaker 1: And she had some siblings, siblings.  Could you give their name and birth order where she falls in?
Speaker 2: My mother's the youngest.  After her is my Uncle George Edward Page [George Page (ph.)], then my Aunt Margaret Ross [Margaret Page Ross (ph.)], and then my oldest aunt, Lizzie Page [ph.], and there was a child who died, Hazel Page [ph.].
Story_ID: 613608
Speaker 1: You also mentioned your [maternal] grandmother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Her mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Q.T. Page [ph.].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Arkadelphia, Arkansas.  She's--
Speaker 1: Q.T. meaning?
Speaker 2: Q period, T period.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.  And she's still with us.  She's ninety-six, ninety-seven.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about her life as a child?  Has she ever share any of her stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I'm very fortunate.  My family was pretty oral on our history.  You know, we really got to hear a lot.  But, she's an only child and she was raised by her aunt, my great-grandaunt, May Ross [ph.].  Her mother died when she was, I think, four and my aunt raised her from childhood and she was an only child.  Her dad was around, you know, but when his--when his wife died, he left and left her with my aunt to raise.  And she married my grandfather at I want to say at thirteen or fourteen.  She had her first child when she was fourteen years old.  And to quote her, she was done by the time she was twenty.  She had had the last baby already by twenty-one, twenty, something like that.
Speaker 1: Describe her personality for us.
Speaker 2: No fools, no fun, extreme extrovert.  I think probably had it been another time and other circumstances, to quote her actually, she would've gone into the entertainment business, very wise but not in that sort of grandmotherly way, more worldly wise.  And she said I--she met no strangers, means no strangers, so very extroverted, very engaging, wise, warm, generous, really great qualities, great qualities.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, I only saw him once.
Speaker 1: Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: George H. Page.  I hear a lot of stories about him but I only--I remember--my memory of him is--
Speaker 1: Now, now this is on--this is on your mother's [Gloria Page Gilstrap] side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My memory of him is going to Arkansas at one point when I think I must've been about five or so and him riding me around on his shoulders.  And the one thing I always remember is there was a chestnut tree or walnut tree or something and he said that he was going to buy me one one day, "I'm gonna buy you one of those trees one day."  For a long time, I kept waiting for it (laughter), but that's my fondest memory of him, but I didn't get to see a lot of him because I lived at St. Louis [Missouri].
Story_ID: 613609
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee Jones [Robert Jones (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know the name of the town, but he was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And, likewise, do you know much about his life growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't and I can't get him to tell me.  I always ask him.  I say, "Well, what about--?" You know, he--there are uncles and aunts that I have that I didn't even know I had 'cause he just never has mentioned it.  I didn't really grow up with him but, you know, we have a great relationship, but he's never mentioned a lot about his childhood and things, so.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe Robert Lee Jones from your perspective?
Speaker 2: As we say now, laid back.  I think I get my basic temperament from him.  Earthy, easy going, I said laid back.  I'm trying to think of another phrase for--very common sense, very actual life application, you know.  I asked him, recently we were talking, he said--he said, "I'm not gonna die.  I'm just gonna stick around until I dry and blow away."  You know, that's his sort of take on life, to just sort of take it as it comes and, yeah, that's how I would describe him.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know his mother or father?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandfather.  I never met his mother.  I think if I'm not mistaken, she died shortly after I was born, but my grandfather, Benjamin, I do remember, very tall.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Jones [ph.].
Speaker 2: Benjamin Jones.  He was about they say like 6'5", 6'6".  My dad's like 6'4".  Very deep voice, I remember.  You know, and I was little at the time, but I--it was the impression of him and he would always pick me up and throw me in the air, that I remember as well, something--my grandfather's picking me up, there you go.  But it was way--I just remember being so high up, you know.  And I remember he called me cup cookie.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's what I remember about him mostly.  (Adopts low pitched voice) "Hey, cup cookie," you know (laughter).  Yeah.
Story_ID: 613610
Speaker 1: So let's go further into your life.  Let's look at your--what--what's the earliest childhood memory you have?
Speaker 2: I think the earliest thing I can remember is being bathed in the kitchen sink, oddly enough, and I don't know why that sticks out, but--
Speaker 1: What age would you think that would have probably been?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, that had to be only a month old, maybe a year at the most, something like that.
Speaker 1: And you recall that?
Speaker 2: I do.  It's the only thing.  I mean, it's isolated, but I remember being in the sink.  And I think I remember it more because as I got older, not being in the sink (laughter), you know what I mean, and I couldn't figure out like why I wasn't still going to the sink, you know, why they weren't bathing me in the sink.  But, that's my earliest memory, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, before we come forward, did--I want to ask you, did your dad [Robert Jones (ph.)] that you know of have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there's a few, but I don't know them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oddly enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we come forward and you can recall your earliest memory being in the sink.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Story_ID: 613611
Speaker 1: Now, in your household, where, where did you gr- live in St. Louis [Missouri] at this point?  Now, now at this point, you were in St. Louis--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so, so, so where--so, where did you live in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: What's called downtown.  It had been the old Irish neighborhood called Kerry Patch [St. Louis, Missouri], but it had--you know, Irish people had migrated to other areas and it was at this point a black community, and it was in what would--they would call downtown, see, and it was--always liked to say it was only a few blocks from where Josephine Baker grew up, which it actually was, about six or seven blocks away.  But, a poor area, you know, it was the poor section until I was eight and we moved to a little better section, but it wasn't even far from where I originally grew up where we moved to after that, but.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have any siblings yourself?
Speaker 2: I have, well I call them my brother and my sister.  They're half-brother, half-sister.  I have a brother on my mother's [Gloria Page Gilstrap] side and a sister on my father's [Robert Jones (ph.)] side.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Elliot Gates [ph.], all kind--all kind of names.  I told my mother, "This is a lot of names, Ma."  Elliot Gates and my sister is Denise Gray [Denise Jones Gray (ph.)], which is her married name.
Speaker 1: What were some of the--now, can you recall the actual street you grew up on and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the address?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 2028 Carr Street.  That was my [maternal] grandmother's [Q.T. Page (ph.)] address and then my mom and I, we moved out of my grandmother's house.  We lived at 2024-A.
Speaker 1: And what age would this have been when you left grandmother's house?
Speaker 2: About six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613612
Speaker 1: Prior to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven.
Speaker 1: --six year--prior to that move, can you tell us about the sights and the sounds of the neighborhood, the smell of the neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri]?  You can use any of those--both those--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --addresses growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Growing up in your early years.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know, it, it was--I'd written a bit of poetry about it, actually.  It was interesting because, you know, we--I'm fifty-four, so it was at the time when everything was still fairly visceral.  You know, you had the wagon with the vegetables.  You had the wagon with the ice cream.  You had the tamale man's pushcart.  People still came around and, and sold their wares, you know.  So, with that, came the sounds.  There was the bell of the ice cream man and the--there was some sort of like a cow bell that the vegetable man had on the back of his wagon and you hear them from blocks away.  So, everybody would say, "Oh the vegetable man.  That's--is that the vegetable man's bell or is that the ice cream man?"  So, everybody would come out and prepare themselves to buy from these trucks and so forth.  And the--there was a, a woman and man who came around with a barbecue truck where I guess they had already barbecued, but they had everything on the truck, so there was that smell and all that.  And in the neighborhood, very much a community, you know, one of the things unfortunately I think we've lost as we've gone on.  But at any rate, there was always sounds of children 'cause all the kids played together all the time.
Speaker 1: Who were some of those children?  I mean, friends of yours, playmates, can you recall any the names of the people?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure.  There was Fat and Tiny (laughter) who were twins, two twin girls.  It's really Yvette [ph.] and Yvonne [ph.], but we called them Fat and Tiny 'cause one was skinny and one was heavier than the other one, Fat and Tiny.  There was Cheryl [Cheryl Gorman (ph.)] and Penny Gorman [ph.] and Tony Gorman [ph.] and the Pulliam [ph.] family.  There were about 103 of them, you know.  The Johnsons, there was Jeddy [ph.] and Junior [ph.] and Francine [ph.] and my--the kids I played with the most were the Reed family.  There was Skeeter [ph.], Sovonia [ph.], and Ronny [ph.] and Farland [ph.] and Darlene [ph.] and Bernadine [ph.].  There were a lot of kids around.
Story_ID: 613613
Speaker 1: Now, was this a, a primarily African American community?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How was St. Louis [Missouri] overall at this time period?
Speaker 2: Well, it's hard to say as a kid.  You don't know much about it, you know.  I guess the difference for me was I had cousins who lived in a different area of the city and I would go visit them and they lived in what would I guess be considered sort of the middle class, you know, black area, which had just not so long before been a white area that had just sort of turned over and become black.  So, it was a very different kind of upbringing than what I was experiencing, you know.  It was grass and trees and backyards and, middle class.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So there were a lot of children there, lots of play time and, and you would go visit your cousins on occasion.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what did you feel when you went there and saw the difference?  And these were African Americans also, but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so, so--what--describe your feelings.
Speaker 1: Well, I loved it.  You know, I really enjoyed it.  Of course, I can't say that I thought it was better because I was happy where I was.  My [maternal] grandmother [Q.T. Page (ph.)] was there, I had cousins around the corner.  The whole basic nucleus of our family was where I was growing up.  My aunt had married and moved away and had two children.  They were in the other area.  But, but it was a lovely, you know, environment to be in.  You know, it really was idyllic '50s [1950s] Beaver Cleaver kind of, you know--except we were black.  That was about the only difference.  But--and I grew up Catholic, so there was a big connection to Catholic school for us at the time.  And my aunt and uncle were devoted Catholics so, you know, there was always sort of--we went to Mass every Sunday when I was with them and they had a big house.  It was a three bedroom house and full basement and backyard, so there were a lot of places to go and sort of be on your own.  In my neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri], once you went out the door, you were engaged.  There was somebody else, you know, was right there.  There, you could sort of be in your own world and--very different, very different, but very balanced for me that I got to have both.
Speaker 2: So, what was life like in your household [in St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: Gr- up until the time I was eight until my mom [Gloria Page Gilstrap] and I moved away, and then even we only moved upstairs.  My [maternal] grandmother [Q.T. Page (ph.)] was over there downstairs, you know.  It was great.  It was really great because, because my mother was a single mother, I think I benefited from that thing of it takes a community to raise a child.  You know, I had all kinds of relatives who were within doors and blocks of each other, so I had all of that as a world to grow up in.  And in the house because my grandmother was very receiving of everybody, there were always people in and out, you know.  I mean, the, the week, of course, was like anybody's work week and as a kid, I wasn't as aware of what was going on.  I just knew it was, you know, TV, 'Popeye' ['Popeye the Sailor'] and 'Ozzie and Harriet' ['The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet'] (laughter), you know, to watch on TV and then people came home.  That's how it was.  But the weekends were always party and barbecue and, you know, it was really alive, very alive.
Story_ID: 613614
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first school at this point that you can recall, your first elementary school?
Speaker 2: The first kindergarten was at Franklin School [St. Louis, Missouri], which was a public school, which was, you know, all of again only maybe four or five blocks from my house [in Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri].  It was actually the same school where my aunt had gone to high school.  It was--went all the way through to high school.  It was called Washington Tech [Booker T. Washington Technical High School, St. Louis, Missouri] at one point.  But, I think it changed to Franklin School.  Anyway, that was my first memory, going there to kindergarten, and that's where I did my first performance.  I did a voice of a hand puppet.
Speaker 1: In kindergarten?
Speaker 2: In kindergarten 'cause I was the only one who could talk, I guess, they tell me, but--and they did sort of a Easter show, fashion show, and the little girls all wore their little Easter outfits and the puppet talked about them, you know.  (Adopts performance voice) "Look at--oh, those are pretty little girls--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --pink and green and--." And then I sang 'Easter Parade.'  Who knew, right?  You know, I mean--
Speaker 1: Do you recall how, how it went?  Can you sing a bar for it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it went well.  What?
Speaker 1: Can, can you sing--hum a bar for us real quick?
Speaker 2: Sure, let's see. (Singing) "In your Easter bonnet--." Should I sing it like I did then?  (Singing) "With all the frills upon it" (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Singing) "You'll be the grandest lady in the Easter parade." Step, touch, step, touch, you know.  And we had to wear our little Easter outfits as well, the boys.
Speaker 1: And how old were you now?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: Five?  Kindergarten, five, six.
Speaker 1: Now, did you volunteer for this or, or were you prompted to do it?  What caused you to--
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I don't remember if--I must've volunteered 'cause at that age, you know, anything you don't want to do, you are not doing.  You just--no, you know.  I wasn't afraid, so I guess there must've been something to that.  I probably volunteered or at least the teachers from what I can gather must've been aware of my verb- verbality [ph.], you know, and allowed me to do it.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of those teachers' names in kindergarten?
Speaker 2: One.  I think her name was Miss Griffin [ph.].  I remember she ate Snickers bars all the time.  She had Snickers bars in her desk and she'd always go and take a bite out of them and then she'd come back and work with us and you could always smell peanuts and chocolate on her breath, you know (laughter), I remember that one.  She's the only one--I mean, she may have been the only teacher.  I think--I remember her.
Speaker 1: Miss Griffin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Miss Griffin.
Story_ID: 613615
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Franklin [Franklin School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Just kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then where did you go?
Speaker 2: First, second, and third grade, I went to St. Bridget of Erin [St. Bridget of Erin School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: St. Bridget of Erin (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, E-R-I-N.  It's a town, city in Ireland [sic.].  And that--the church was there because it had been an Irish neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri], as I said before, and that was the church of the neighborhood, St. Bridget [St. Bridget of Erin Church, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: So that was first through third grade.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were you still performing and trying to be in plays and--
Speaker 2: First grade, yeah.  I did a--again, something for the pastor.  Was it the pastor?  Yeah.  Some sort of little program we put together.  And in first grade, I sang 'Why Do We Tip Our Hats to the Priest?' [sic. 'Why Do We Tip Our Hats to a Priest?'].  Yeah.  Why--it was (singing), "Why do we tip our hats to the priest and why do we call him father?  He's like Christ and how do I know?  Holy Orders made it," so--and you go on, the whole thing.
Speaker 1: Now, now was anybody aware at this point, anybody that you can recall saying, wow, he's, he's doing some (unclear), he might have something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Reed family that I mentioned, their dad, Bud Reed [ph.], he played some instruments and his kids, he always kind of--you know, they played guitar and they had drums and things.  He was always sort of pushing them with music and I remember recording something at that apart--at their house one day and I think it's the first time they heard me sing.  And I want to say--oh, gosh, was it 'Why Do Fools Fall in Love' or something like that, you know.  And, you know, as a kid, all of a sudden you open your mouth and you can sing and who knew that, you know.  And I think that's the first time I remember anybody kind of encouraging me as a singer, you know.  They'd go, "Sing something else."  And, of course, then I got shy and wouldn't do it, but that's the--and then also hearing my voice, hearing it back for the first time.
Story_ID: 613616
Speaker 1: So, what kind of child were you growing up?  Were you a studious or rambunctious?
Speaker 2: I would probably say I was more studious.  I played a lot.  I mean, you know, I wasn't in the house, one of those kids who just stayed in the house all the time, but I started reading early and was encouraged to do that.  So, I think I would categorize myself as being more studious.  And then my mother [Gloria Page Gilstrap] was very much about educating me and, and teaching me things and so forth.  And unfortunately, a lot of the other kids in the neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri] weren't being promoted and pushed that way, so I felt like I spent a good amount of my time reading books and things like that whereas they probably didn't.
Speaker 1: What kind--what kind of things were you reading back then?
Speaker 2: My cousin had a set of books, biographies, and now I'm talking like around eight, nine, somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: Third grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, somewhere in there.  And he had--well, of course, they were the Disney books, you know, what do they call them, Golden Books [Little Golden Books]?  They were my favorites, you know.  So, there were those (clears throat)--excuse me.  And then he had this set of biographies that his parents had bought for him and I would--I got to read them mostly when I went to his house.  I couldn't bring them home but I'd get to read them when I went there, and they were biographies of all of these famous people and that was kind of how I started really reading.
Story_ID: 613617
Speaker 1: So, you went to St. Bridget's of Erin [St. Bridget of Erin School, St. Louis, Missouri]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --from first to third grade.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, the rest of your schooling, what happened after that?
Speaker 2: Fourth grade, we moved from Carr Street, which was the other neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri] to the Carr Square Village housing project [St. Louis, Missouri], which in essence were sort of upscale housing projects.  I mean, you know, we look at--think of housing projects now and it has such a bad connotation, but these places were built like in the late '40s [1940s], so they really were some sort of hybrid between what we then became known as housing projects and something else, you know, very nice actually as much as you could be for a housing project and I transferred to St. Nicholas [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis. Missouri], which had been the church for the German area, which had been further away.  All of this was now black, but this is how these parishes had started, you know, and I went there from fourth through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So, fourth through eight at St. Nicholas.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you recall any of the teachers or maybe the students, anybody of note that we might know that may--that may have attended school with you or just anybody in general in your personal life that you deem--
Speaker 2: Yeah, lots of people.  I knew them all.  You know, I remember my teachers.  It's funny, sometimes I feel like it was only yesterday although it's been years, you know.  [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume went to my same grade school, actually, St. Nicholas, the old St. Nicholas and then the built the new one.  But at any rate, I think my--
Speaker 1: Was he there when you were there or was he before you?
Speaker 2: No, a few years before me, yeah, but we--once we met in New York [New York] and worked together, I knew he was from St. Louis [Missouri] 'cause I knew his name and it turned out we went to the same grade school and his kids ended up going to school with my cousins.  We had a lot of common things.  I think, let's see, fourth grade was sister--had nuns--Sister Latisha [ph.] and then fifth grade was Sister Celestia [ph.], and sixth grade was Sister Joan Adel [ph.], and seventh grade was--what was my seventh grade teacher?  Sister Mary Stevens [ph.], I guess, and eighth grade was Sister Mary Stevens.  I had her two years.
Story_ID: 613618
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now how was the parochial experience at this point?  Because nowadays for a child to go to parochial schools, it's a big privilege, a lot of money--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a lot of times.  Was it the same--was it the same sacrifice at that point opposed to the public school and the--and the parochial school then or was it just easier to deal with because of the way times were?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in, in balance with the times, I mean, it wasn't free.  Public school was free, so there was the difference.  And I think for some of us, it wasn't easy to come up with that extra little bit of money that it took to go there, but at the time, the education was very different, you know, and it wasn't--not to denigrate the public schools, but the Catholic school system was much more about not only academics, but most of them were also about arts, education, and you also got a certain behavioral education 'cause there were certain things that you were just not allowed to do and the nuns weren't having it, you know.  But, you know, when I hear a lot of people talk about their school time in Catholic school, it seems like it was a negative for a lot of people.  For me, it was very positive.  I mean, you know, I--some of the kids who were in the public schools, you know, they just were left to their own devices, really, you know pretty much, and the Catholic school kids were more monitored, if you will, so we--
Speaker 1: Better supervised.
Speaker 2: Better supervised, yeah.  And, you know, also we were--we had a whole thing about when we left the school, they instilled in us that you represent the school even when you're at home.  Even when you're in the street, you represent St. Nicholas [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri], you know.  So, we were very aware and it was--it was true that if we did something, it did get back to school and we did have to deal with it at school whereas I think for a lot of the public school kids, once they went outside the door, they were on their own.  So, it made a different kind of upbringing for you as far as school was concerned.
Story_ID: 613619
Speaker 1: So, during these formative years there, were you going--you said you went to St. Nicholas [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri] to the eighth grade, so that--so that would have encompassed your junior high years also (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any aspirations at that point?  Are you still--are you still doing little performances?  Are you still--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I started in the fifth grade, fifth or sixth grade.  This was at the time when people started, you know, busing and taking kids in and out of, you know--desegregation if you will and so forth, and we were taken to another Catholic school in a all-white area called Holy Innocents [Holy Innocents School, St. Louis, Missouri] and there was a nun there who was the same order of nuns [Sisters of the Most Precious Blood] that we had in our school, Sister Ruth Cecelia, and she had a, a choir called--I think it was just called the Holy Innocents choir at the time, the kids.  But they took about six of us every Friday to go there and rehearse with the choir and learning--of course, we participated in their concerts and so forth, so that was really where I started to, to train formally, if you will, being in the chorus of--there's another name for it and I almost said it.  It'll come to me.  And then in seventh grade, she came to our school.  They transferred her from this other, Holy Innocents, to St. Nicholas.  And when she came to our school, she initiated a music program, which we'd never had.  She went--actually went out and begged instruments from musicians and got them to volunteer time to teach us and she started an enrolled us in the--what was called the Bellarmine Speech League in St. Louis [Missouri].  My cousin [Derrick Ross (ph.)] had been in it for years out in the other neighborhood, and he went to Catholic school as well, but we didn't have anyone to teach us or bring us into it.  And she came to our school and started a speech program, which I became part of, which was basically the beginning of my dramatic training.  And proud to say, we ended up being number one in the city.  And at the time, it said a lot about--because we were the ghetto kids, you know, and people weren't that concerned about what we had or didn't have, and with her instituting a music program and a speech program, it allowed those of us who had maybe artistic leanings to have some way to vent ourselves.  We had basketball, we had all the other things, but we didn't have arts at all.
Story_ID: 613620
Speaker 1: So, elaborate a bit more about this, this group you were in that was doing the reading or the speaking, the league that you were a part--
Speaker 2: The Bellarmine Speech League?  Yeah, it was a, a citywide connected to a national speech league [National Catholic Forensic League], I guess you could call it.  It had been around for a long time.  I don't know the whole history of it, but I do know that up to a point, it had been an all-white establishment.  And within a few years before I got into it, it had started to open up because there were more--it was a Catholic speech league, I should say as well.  So as there were more black Catholics and more schools and so forth, there became more kids involved in it.  And it went from, I want to say like junior high through high school.
Speaker 1: Now, was it just oration?  Was it debating?  Was it a combination of extemporaneous speech?  What was it exactly?
Speaker 2: It had different categories.  There was serious interpretation, duets, there was oration, different categories, you know.  And my cousin [Derrick Ross (ph.)] had been in it and I used to go to his tournaments with him and, and watch, and he was in, I think it was called serious oratory or something, serious as opposed to, you know, not serious oratory.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, so when it came to my school [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri], I was familiar with it, but I'd never had the chance to do it.
Speaker 1: Now, was this--was this a rarity?  Did other kids who weren't in school, who didn't go to Catholic school, didn't know about this kind of direction, was this a weird thing for you to be in this?  Not playing ball, you're gonna go to the what?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it--was it a strange, an oddity?
Speaker 2: Well, it became because in my neighborhood, there hadn't been anything like that.  So, when the, the kids from our school who became involved in it started to do it, we were sort of this little microcosm.  We were going off to chorus practices and we were going to speech leagues and rehearsing speech after school and then going to compete.  So, of course, someone had to take us.  It was--you know, it was a whole thing, but it became more of an issue of the parish supporting us because, again, we were the first group of kids out of our neighborhood to start doing this sort of thing.
Speaker 1: You were the first African American children (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Story_ID: 613621
Speaker 1: Let's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --back up a little bit with the Catholic--with, with the Cath--with the Catholicism.  Most of urban blacks in those, those cities were either Baptist or some other kinds of thing except for in, in the South and Louisiana and places.  Catholicism isn't the primary--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the primary religion.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What are--what are St. Louis' ties to where there was so much Catholicism for African Americans in St. Louis [Missouri]?  Or why do you think that was?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that there was so much or so many African American Catholics, but I think what it was is a lot of the people migrated from Louisiana and places like that, so they came Catholic, they came to St. Louis.  St. Louis we're talking about, so there's a--the city itself was very Catholic outside of the African American community.  But I think at that time, oddly enough--I don't know.  I never thought about this.  There were a lot of black Catholics.  I think it had a lot to do with the Catholic church making an outreach.  First of all, it had to do with school.  Let's say it started there I would say because even if you went to Catholic school and you weren't Catholic, to go to Catholic school, you had to be Catholic.  So I remember studying, you know, in first, second, third grade to make your First Holy--you know, to make your First Holy Communion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Catechism.
Speaker 2: --Confirmation, and these things.  All of that came with going to Catholic school.  And, therefore, a lot of the parents converted to Catholicism because the kids were being taught Catholic and that kind of kept proliferating it, double over, double over, double over.
Speaker 1: When it--in, in its inception, were--was the clergy that was African American, were they bishops and priests and, and nuns?
Speaker 2: Not many.  There was one priest, two African American clergy that I remember.  One when I was at St. Bridget [St. Bridget of Erin School, St. Louis, Missouri] was a nun and they--the Blessed Sacrament nuns [Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament], they were called, and they had a particular outreach to Native Americans and African Americans.  So, in that way, my third grade teacher was Native American, and there was one nun who came to the school who was actually African American, which was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Explain that when you saw her and other students.
Speaker 2: Well, it was like strange.  I mean, you know, nuns we were used to, but we'd never seen a black nun.  And when she'd walk around the neighborhood [Kerry Patch, St. Louis, Missouri], I mean, people just really didn't know what to make of it at all.
Speaker 1: Because back in those days, they still wore the full--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the full--the full headdress.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the whole thing here and that's, that's all that was out, just the face.
Speaker 1: And you saw the--did you ever talk to her and ask her, like, Sister--what, what was her name?  Sister--
Speaker 2: I don't remember her name 'cause she wasn't my teacher.  I mean, I was very young, first, second, third grade, and she, I think, taught one of the older--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --classes.  But, again, I think it was a rare oddity.  First of all, there weren't many Catholic orders that had people of color, so there's that to begin with.  The Blessed Sacrament nuns, again as I say, had their ministry in the Native American community and the African American community, and I think they had been doing that for a long time.  If I'm not mistaken, I think their order might have actually come out of New Orleans [Louisiana] or somewhere like that, Louisiana, so they had a very varied group of people as their body of, of participants.  The other one was a, a, a man, our priest at St. Nicholas [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri] where, again, a separate order called Divine Word missionary priests [Society of the Divine Word].  And, again, because their outreach was to missionary outposts and things like that, some of their priests were people of color, which was again rare.  So, we had Father Rodney [ph.] and he was the first black priest I'd ever seen.  So, I was fortunate, you know what I'm saying, in the time to see a black nun and a black priest, which interestingly enough opened the door to the possibility of going into the priesthood.
Speaker 1: And did you consider that for a long time yourself?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.  Sometimes I think I should've (laughter).  I think I should've.  But, I did.  I considered it very--my, my cousin [Derrick Ross (ph.)], the one I speak of, actually went to the seminary.  He went to high school and college in two years, just--I think he was a year short of ordination.  So, it was not unthought of in our family and when I said that I wanted to do it, I don't think anybody really believed me.  They thought I was just emulating him, you know.
Story_ID: 613622
Speaker 1: With the eighth grade approaching then, now, before we go past the eighth grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and the speech league [Bellarmine Speech League], are there any people, mentors that stood out in your mind or people that you think really as you look back now had a very strong impact on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, the cousin I just spoke about because he did--
Speaker 1: And his name?  Say his name.
Speaker 2: Derrick Ross [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Derrick Ross.  Because he did everything I did later, he did first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He played piano, he did tap, he sang, he was in the cathedral boys choir, which is a big thing in the city.  He participated in the speech league, as I mentioned.  So, everything that he--I sort of emulated sort of everything that he did.  Also, there was the nun that I spoke about who taught the chorus and then came to our school [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri], Sister Ruth Cecelia.  When you have someone like that championing, championing, championing you, it makes a huge difference.  It was backed up by my family, my mom [Gloria Page Gilstrap] and my--you know, everybody else, and so did--my aunt and uncle were my godparents and they were the parents of my cousin who did all this other stuff, so I had a lot of support.  But she really--I think what she did for me is she recognized--'cause I was a pretty shy kid in school and she recognized that I had other talents and really started to push me in that direction, that I could sing, that I could speak, that I could do these other things, and fought for myself and my best friend that I had in school, Luther Clark [ph.].  She fought for us to get to go to a high school, Catholic high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri] out of our district 'cause at that time, you only went to the school within your own area, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Even if you were paying for it, you still had to go to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah 'cause you were only eligible to go to the school in your area.  There were a lot of them, so everybody had one but, of course, according to where you were, there was a difference in the quality of the education you would get at said school in whatever area.  And we went to a school because the, the school that we were to go to by our district had no music or speech program, so we were back--we would've been back where we started.  The school we ended up going to, which she really--I just found out recently that she like sat outside of the headquarters and wouldn't leave and all kinds of stuff to get us to go--get accepted, but they had a full music program and speech--further speech programs and arts and things like that, which we wouldn't have had otherwise.
Story_ID: 613623
Speaker 1: So, what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Bishop DuBourg [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Bishop DuBourg.
Speaker 2: DuBourg, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you, you enter there in the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're getting older, in ninth grade now, and, and you're still probably--you're doing little performances and things?  Are you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, continually--
Speaker 1: Of course, speech league [Bellarmine Speech League] is, is in big effect.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, are you doing any stage plays or anything of that nature?
Speaker 2: Starting--you know, you have your, your high school musical.  At this school, we didn't have dramatics as such.  We had a speech class that you took, but we had an annual musical every year.  And I came--when I came there, again, we had the same order of nuns [Sisters of the Most Precious Blood], so they knew that I had had training in music and so on and so forth.  And Sister Ruth [Ruth Cecelia], see, had let them know for sure, you know, that these two young men [Page and Luther Clark (ph.)] are coming and they have some talents in music and, and I want them to continue with this.  So, they were keen to, to see us continue.
Speaker 1: So, you entered, entered with expectation, so to speak.
Speaker 2: With expectations, to deliver and to be delivered.
Speaker 1: And what classes did you take in first when you first came to this school?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as you go first, freshman year through senior, you can take more electives as you go along.  The first year, I don't remember there being anything particularly arty about my curriculum except that I was in the Pius X chorus [St. Pius X High School Concert Choir], which rehearsed and met before school in the morning, and that was the big chorus of the school and you got solos and you did this sort of things.  And I think freshman year we had speech class, but it was sort of, you know, oratory and it wasn't really dramatics.  It was really speech, you know.
Story_ID: 613624
Speaker 1: Who are some of your celebrity icons, your figures now that as a young man you're watching and who did you start to say, I kind of like what they do and was, was any of that ringing in your--in your consciousness at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time when I was in high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Let's see, who did I watch?  Of course, Sidney Poitier, you know.  He was--there weren't a lot, so let's say that first, you know.
Speaker 1: Or, or of anybody, though.  It doesn't have to be African American, anybody--yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I'm going to say others too but Sidney Poitier because he was African American and right at that particular time was really hitting his stride in the film industry and so forth, and he was visible.  You could see him.  And it's interesting 'cause you didn't really think of Sidney Poitier as an actor.  You thought of him as somebody black who was in the movies.  You didn't think about him acting in the movies.  He was just in the movies, you know.
Speaker 1: That was a big deal in itself.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.
Speaker 1: Just being in the movies.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And I think that's why it registered that way to our community.  It wasn't--forget about what you're doing, just the fact that you're on the screen was a big deal, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, that--well, that--that's a big statement.  Do you think a lot of times we forget about the actual craft of the person by mere fact that they're just there?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  And I think, unfortunately, we get caught up in the there there and forget what it takes to be there.  And in that sense, I think a lot of people who are more about the craft and less about the be there get lost in the shuffle a little bit.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that possibly the people that are there in it or there aren't necessarily the ones that--the ones that have developed the craft to, to the level where we should pay attention?  Is it possible?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say that you shouldn't pay attention.  I mean, they're there and that's hard enough, you know.  But, I think there's a lot of training and craft that goes into the art, if you will, of acting, of singing or whatever that isn't always honored on the other end.
Speaker 1: So, so do you think more time and energy might be spent nowadays trying to be there or get there--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --versus--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what it takes to do once you're--
Speaker 2: I mean, the whole setup of society supports that at this point.  I mean, you know, God bless them, but you've got 'American Idol,' you've got all these sort of stir--add water stir career platforms where you can just go through a certain, a little bit of a process and then you're on TV for twelve weeks and you're a star, and you really are.  I mean, you've got a recording contract, you get movies and all this sort of thing.  You can eat some worms on 'Big Brother' or something (laughter) and end up with a spokesman deal, you know what I mean?  So, the people who go to school and train for it, it's a little harder than it ever has been because you've got all this other stuff to compete with.  It's not a matter of your expertise.  It's just a matter of luck.
Speaker 1: So, Sidney Poitier--Sidney Poitier, you're watching him.  Who else are you paying attention to during--
Speaker 2: I liked Jonathan Winters a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could relate to him.  There was something about his, his craziness, to be truthful, and his character creation that I could relate to 'cause I'd already started doing that, playing different characters and, and voices and things like that.  Jackie Gleason.  Obviously I'm a big man, so the, the bigger men, you know, I kind of clocked them out early.
Speaker 1: So, were you pretty large then, too, a larger child?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was always big.
Speaker 1: You were a larger child, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was big from the beginning, you know.  Trying to think who else I think about a lot in--all of the comedians I think I watched more.  There was something about what they did that I found access for myself to--the straight actor, the, the serious drama actors I admired them, but I didn't have as much access at a certain point.  As I studied more, I began to emulate and, and understand what they did more, but right off the bat, it was the people who did the comedy 'cause it seemed to come out of their natural ability.
Story_ID: 613625
Speaker 1: How about vocalists?  'Cause you're also a singer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I was fortunate in terms of vocal because my mom [Gloria Page Gilstrap], again, like I said being bohemian, we really listened to a lot of music in the house.  I mean, we listened to Jackie Wilson, Sarah Vaughan, Nina Simone, Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon], [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, you know, all the doo wop, all of that.  But, our, our musical tastes in the house were fairly eclectic, so I kind of grew up with a different--Nat King Cole, you know.
Speaker 1: Johnny Hartman, did you ever hear--
Speaker 2: Not Johnny Hartman.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Never listened to him.  I know him now and I--he's the best, you know, but I didn't grow up--
Speaker 1: I said that because of your voice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, people have told me that.  I've now gotten, you know, hip to him.  I'm really into him.  I didn't know that growing up.  I never really heard of him for a long time.  For me, vocally, I think I, I started really thinking more in terms of like Sam Cooke, Nat King Cole, Jackie Wilson.  I'm leaving out somebody that I always think of, but that kind of--
Speaker 1: Was your range at that time in that range, in, in that tenor at that range?  Were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I started out as a tenor tenor, heldentenor, I think they call it.  And then as I got older, my baritone range sort of--
Speaker 1: Increased.
Speaker 2: --enriched and then I ended up being--basically what I'm told I have and I guess I should believe is I have the top range of a bass and the bottom range of a tenor, so that gives me a pretty wide vocal.
Story_ID: 613626
Speaker 1: So, you're going through school and you're in high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri] now and are you still in the--in the speech, speech, speech league at that point?  Are you still doing--
Speaker 2: Yeah because the Bellarmine Speech League went into--I think I stayed with it through my second year of high school and then I dropped out.
Speaker 1: Your sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause then I started doing more theater things in school so then I didn't feel like I wanted to continue with the speech league.
Speaker 1: What were some of your, your highlight roles for you in, in high school, roles that you played?
Speaker 2: Well, there were only a few 'cause we did only one big show a year, you know.  The first year of high school, what did I do?  It's funny because, you know, there were all other kinds of shows.  But any rate, first year, we did 'Funny Girl' [Isobel Lennart] and I was the Ziegfeld Tenor.  It was a singing part, so it was really about my voice, you know.  And nobody else, interesting enough, could sing it.  I was the only--big deal, but I was the only one who could sing it, so I got it, you know what I mean?  Second year, we did 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] which interesting--what I think is most interesting about it is it was the first year--my high school was 5,558 students, big school, and there were fifty-eight black students.
Speaker 1: Out of the rest of the five thousand and whatever.
Speaker 2: Out of the 5,550, yeah.  And I say that to say that it was the first time there had been an interracial coupling in a show there.  I played Horace Vandergelder which is the male lead and this white girl played Dolly [Dolly Gallagher Levi] and it was a big deal.  I mean, it--you know, I think back on it and you think, oh god, but it really was a big deal because it had not--
Speaker 1: Did it cause controversy?  Did it--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: It hadn't happened.
Speaker 1: Describe that.  Were there--
Speaker 2: From what I know, you know--
Speaker 1: --opposition?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, again, of course, I'm the student so I'm sure I didn't hear as much of it as, as went on, but I caught the drift of a lot of it.  And, you know, her parents had issues whether they wanted her to be on stage with a black man on--you know, and it was that time that everything was--the doors were just creaking open just a little bit.
Speaker 1: This, this would've been early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: This was about '69 [1969], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in that kind of neighborhood, again, remember I went to school outside of my area, it was a big deal.  That we were even in the school was a big deal, you know, because all of us who were there had been brought in from elsewhere 'cause we didn't live in that area.
Speaker 1: How was the--how was the racial climate in school generally or in the neighborhood around there?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood around there probably wasn't as great, but then I didn't really participate in the neighborhood around there.  I came in and I went home, you know what I mean, so--
Speaker 1: How about in the school itself?
Speaker 2: The school itself wasn't--I don't remember there being a lot of racial tension.  It could be the fact that there were so few of us and, again, because it was a Catholic school, it wasn't tolerated.  It was just that simple, you know.  And I don't say that every nun or every priest was pro-black either, you know, but the exercise of prejudice was not allowed.
Speaker 1: The blatant open exercise, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're, you're in high school now, you're, you're becoming a--well, before we go further, so what was it--so, the play went on as--'Hello, Dolly!' occurred.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it happened.  And, and I'm told now even in retrospect that it changed everything for them because then--and, again, with so many issues like that, it isn't that people are as opposed to it as they think they are, they just have never seen it before.
Speaker 1: It's change.
Speaker 2: It's change, right.  So, once it happened, well, they were kind of like, "Oh well, I guess it wasn't so bad after all," you know.  They weren't gonna get married and run off into the woods, you know.  And then the next year, we did 'Oliver!' [Lionel Bart] and I played Fagin, which was, you know, not a role that required sort of the same thing but, again, they were seeing an African American on the stage.  And I should say, my friend, Luther [Luther Clark (ph.)], was in the shows also.  He didn't get to do the leads like I did, but he was also there and there was that, you know, so there were the two of us.  And then my senior year, we did 'Fiddler on the Roof' [Joseph Stein] which (laughter), you know, I still talk about it in my one man show because here we were in the early '70s [1970s], a Catholic school doing a show about Russian Jews with a black as the lead [Tevye].  And, you know, at the time, you know, there was controversy.  But it was interesting because I don't think anybody realized how many real barriers were coming down all at the same time 'cause at that time, even that the Catholic school was doing 'Fiddler on the Roof' was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Give us just a couple bars of 'If I Were a Rich Man' (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Adopts performance voice) "Dear God, you made a lot of poor people.  It's no great crime to be poor, but it's no great honor either.  So, what would've been so terrible if I had a small fortune?"
Speaker 1: Very good, yes, thank you.
Speaker 2: I'm still waiting to do it again (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I think you should.
Speaker 2: I will.  I'm determined.  Before they put me in a box, I'm going to do it somewhere.
Story_ID: 613627
Speaker 1: So, at this point, you're doing these plays and those, from what I can be told, what I've seen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they occupy a lot of the school year [at Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri], the time, the after school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you rehearse after school.
Speaker 1: Are there any other activities that, that you're involved besides the theater?  Are you doing anything else?
Speaker 2: No because there really wasn't any other time.  You know, you're in school all day and we rehearse the play forever.  I mean, you know, you did it in April and you started rehearsals in January or something like that and we, we rehearsed after school every day, so there really wasn't any other time.
Speaker 1: So, what were your summers like in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, let's see what did I do?  I would--should go back and say probably in eighth, seventh and eighth grade, I did a program--and, again, this--I bring it up because it was indicative of the times, a thing called Upward Bound, which is where they took kids from the inner city and they trained them for some of the higher education high schools and so forth.  In my case, we were in a program for St. Louis University High School [St. Louis, Missouri], which was a Jesuit school, very academic, very tough, and they basically took us two summers of summer school so that we could possibly be ready to be students there in high school because they were that stringent and most of the kids who went there had come from schools where they had been more prepared in terms of what their curriculum was for that sort of school.  We didn't have that.  So, I went there for two summers, a little stiff for me I thought, you know, and I think I might've been just that much under the academic requirement, but I also realized that it was an all-male school and they did plays.  They didn't do musicals, you know, so my singing thing was gonna be cut off completely.  And with the opportunity to go to this other school where they had music and drama and art and everything, I opted to go to the other.  The down side was if you went to St. Louis University High School, it was almost a given that you would go to Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] 'cause they were joined.  I sacrificed that but, you know, I did fine.
Speaker 1: It's a catch 22.
Speaker 2: Catch 22.
Story_ID: 613628
Speaker 1: So, now, as you go--you're going through the summers, you're going through your high school years [at Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri], are you thinking about, okay, pretty soon I'm gonna graduate and what am I gonna do next?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are you thinking about at this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm thinking I want to do--you know, as it goes from something that you--for me, it was always the theater, let's say, or the dramatics or whatever.
Speaker 1: From what age did you just know that?
Speaker 2: I think I knew that going into high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, again, I'd already started from fourth grade.  I was singing and then speech and then--so, it wasn't like all of a sudden it was a hobby I picked up when I went to high school.  I had already been doing it since I was pretty young.  And once getting to do the plays in high school and as I got to junior, senior year, I then had drama class because they instituted a drama program, so then I was able to actually study drama just as opposed to doing the musical.  And I began to really appreciate the art of dramatics and I started to really realize that I wanted to further educate myself and so forth, and that opened the door.  You know, of course, junior year almost they start talking to you about where do you want to go to school?  What do you want to do in college?  So, you had to kind of decide, you know.
Speaker 1: So, where were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I looked into a few places 'cause of--the natural thing, of course, was all of the, the adjunct Catholic, Loyolas and the--you know (laughter), all the--all the Catholic places.  And the school that I ended up going to was, indeed, a Catholic college, Fontbonne College [Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri], it was at the time.  It's university now.  My drama teacher in my junior, senior year or senior year I think, had graduated from there.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Mary Lee Hummert.  Mary Lee Hummert.  And so that was a open door because there was more education towards it because she knew about it and knew the people and so on and so forth.  Again, Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] was a thought but it was so kind of high mindedly academic, you know.  Webster University, which is a big school in St. Louis [Missouri], but they had a program where if you went there for college, you couldn't do anything until junior year.
Speaker 1: Wow, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you didn't get to--
Speaker 1: Two years of nothing.
Speaker 2: Two years of just--you, you were lowly, you know.  You didn't--you carried a spear or something and some Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  But--and I didn't want to do that.  I wanted to get into it 'cause I'd already been training since I was in the fourth grade [at St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri].  I didn't want to stand around propping up the scenery, you know.
Story_ID: 613629
Speaker 1: So, I auditioned and got a scholarship to Fontbonne College [Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri] and I was awarded scholarships in music and theater.  And I had studied--I had a--you know, you had to do a recital for the music department, which was much stiffer than the drama thing.  Drama, it seemed natural to me.  The music, you really had to, you know, do an art song and a song in another language, and all this sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Do you recall who was on the jury to hear you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There was this wonderful African American teacher at my college named Relford Patterson, Dr. Patterson, which again, was a rarity because there were not a lot of black music teachers around and he was the head of the music department at the school.
Speaker 2: And he was on the audition board?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he and I think there were a couple of nuns, Sister Mary Gaydos and somebody, you know.  But it was particularly interesting because this was a black man who was the head of the vocal--well, the head of the music department, and I was auditioning for a vocal scholarship.  Interestingly enough as a footnote, their number one student at the time was this wonderful young lady, Floyd, Karen Floyd [Karen Floyd Savage], who was his protege.  She was African American.  So, you know, you were beginning to have these role models and opportunities that were in front of you that you could see for yourself as an African American student and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was there anybody else of note in your high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri] with you or at the school that you were going to that you--that you--anybody else that went on to great success?
Speaker 1: No, not in my time.  There's a, a young man who's come through since named Norbert Leo Butz who won a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] a couple years ago.
Speaker 2: Now, you, you went to this school in what year, '73 [1973] or so?
Speaker 1: Seventy--oh, Fontbonne, '73 [1973], '4 [1974], yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Fontbonne, I think before that, didn't they have a--where the female students took over the--took over the library?
Speaker 1: Oh, you know about that.  Okay, good with the research.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 1: I, I, I think I was there when that happened (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, we're in the theater part.  We were like, we didn't know what was going on half the time.  But, I think they did that my sophomore year there.  It was a very active--again, it was the period and there was a very active Black Student Union.  'Cause it had been an all women's college, it was all women.  You know, it really wasn't--didn't include those of us in the drama department as much.  But, they were very solid and very feminist.
Speaker 2: And this is at the height of that movement, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  It was right in the heat of it all.
Story_ID: 613630
Speaker 1: So, Fontbonne [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri] is a very progressive school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the priests and the nuns that they have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had an order (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and the Jesuits.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, the, the priests were all different kinds of priests--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but the nuns who were--the mother, I think it was Marie Fontbonne [sic. Jeanne Fontbonne] who started the school was a French nun, so on and so forth.  But, she--their order was very I say progressive.  They had a ministry to unwed mothers and, you know, African American ministry and things that were sort of the outside that probably most of the other orders or the church would've said no.  They went to that.  That was their ministry and that's what they did.  So, the school had a very progressive attitude of a sort.
Speaker 1: So, what exactly happened with the--with the--with the young ladies in the library?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: You know, I have to confess, I don't really know the whole story 'cause, again, it was something that happened sort of away from me, so to speak, 'cause, you know, there were only a few men at the school when I went there and the--
Speaker 1: I think what happened, if we can just jog your memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think--I think there weren't enough African American books--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --or things in the library and they--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --demanded there be some more materials.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Because what probably--'cause I, again, was a freshman at this point I think, if, if a sophomore, and I think that had come about from a few years previous, the women who were there who were, you know, part of the school who wanted more of that.  I didn't even know what was happening yet enough to know there weren't any if you know what I mean.  And also, again, in the theater department, we were very separate from the rest of the school.  We were practically our own school within the school.
Story_ID: 613631
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends there at that time who you were close to in, in the school [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well, I met a lot of people.  Certainly, the people in my class, you know, were good friends, so forth.  There was one person in particular who actually had graduated before I got there.  She graduated the year before me and her name was Mary Lee Nigro who changed her name to Katherine Riley [ph.] and she was like their star, you know.  That's all you could hear when you went there, "Mary Lee, Mary Lee, Mary Lee."  And, anyway, we became best friends.  I lived with her in New York [New York] for a while and she passed away a couple of years ago, but we remained friends all the way through from there.
Story_ID: 613632
Speaker 1: So, are there any, any teachers at this point that are really--I think you may have mentioned a few.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There was a--the head of the department, of course, was a nun, Sister Mary Charity, who's still a good friend.  But my biggest influence was our drama teacher, Don Garner [Gordon Garner], who again like Sister Ruth Cecelia at the point in which I was in grade school [St. Nicholas Grade School, St. Louis, Missouri], in college [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri], he was the person who really gently steered me toward the profession because he had come to the school after having had a professional career.  He was the mail boy on 'I Love Lucy' and he was in 'My Darling Clementine' with Henry Fonda and part of the founding group of, I think they were--with Jose Quintero and, and Jason Robards, and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, and--Circle in the Square [Circle in the Square Theatre, New York, New York], so he was very much involved in the professional side of the business.  And the first show I did in high--in college was 'Royal Gambit' ['Royal Gambit: A Drama in Five Acts,' Hermann Gressieker] which was a play about Henry the VIII and his wives.  And, you know, he sort of kept--oh, he was just sort of gently leading me towards it, to just think more about it as something you do, not something you study.
Speaker 1: What role were you in 'Royal Gambit'?
Speaker 2: Henry.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were Henry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you played the lead?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I played Henry the VIII.
Speaker 1: Now, how was that then in this school?  You, you come in there in the--now, is this freshman year?
Speaker 2: Freshman year, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you come in and you get the lead role?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How was that taken by the rest of the--
Speaker 2: Well, because there weren't as many men, it wasn't as bad.  You know, if it had been a full group, you know, like a normal school that had been a balance between men and women, it probably would've been a little bit more of an issue.  But there were only a few of us and I think they had an eye to what they would do.  As they had the students come in, they kind of knew what they wanted to do with them.  'Cause they tried to get me to stay.  I left after sophomore year and they kept saying, "We're gonna do 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' [Tennessee Williams].  You're gonna play Big Daddy [Big Daddy Pollitt]," (laughter).  I said, "Well, one day somewhere, but not here right now."
Story_ID: 613633
Speaker 1: So, why did you leave?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had done simultaneously to my summer of my freshman year in college [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri] and sophomore year, I had done chorus at what was called the St. Louis Municipal Opera [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Muny.
Speaker 2: The Muny.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I got my equity card [Actors' Equity Association] and had started working professionally and, again, had another step up the line, so to speak, about knowing what the real business was 'cause I was working with professionals and so forth.  And I thought after the two years that while I could've certainly studied more, I had already, again, been studying more because I was always into it from the beginning, so I was a little ahead of myself even as a sophomore.  I probably had the equivalent of a junior as far as what I already knew.
Speaker 1: So, do you think there's a possibility that sometimes in the arts, be it arts, music, whatever, sometimes the students go in to codify what they know but they already know it and when they go into final--the theoretical codification--
Speaker 2: To a great degree, often.
Speaker 1: Because I'm sure you probably knew what to do--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but now--but now, were you being told what this was you were doing?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  There you go, right on the head I think.  'Cause there was a lot of things I thought I knew that I didn't know.  I might've known how to but I didn't know how to, if that makes sense.  I remember a funny story I always tell students when I work with them about doing 'Royal Gambit' ['Royal Gambit: A Drama in Five Acts,' Hermann Gressieker] playing Henry the VIII.  I had a scene where was crying.  You know, I was upset because I was going to have to put, I think it was Anne Boleyn to death or whoever.  And I have this teacher, Joan Hanson, who also taught at Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri].  Her husband was the head of the department there, enormous woman, big, huge woman with (adopts high pitched voice) a teeny tiny little voice (laughter) like this.  And I was on stage and the lights were out and we're rehearsing, and I'm crying and I'm heaving, my shoulders are shaking, I'm doing--I'm acting, you know, schmacting, as we call it.  And I hear a voice out in the dark go, "Ken [HistoryMaker Ken Page], what are you doing?"  And, you know, the minute somebody asks you that, you--the magic is over.  I said, "I'm crying," you know, question mark.  And she said, "Oh, is that what you're doing?" (Laughter) "Oh, is this--?" (Adopts high pitched voice) This little voice, "Oh, is that what you're doing?"  Well, let's turn on the lights and talk about crying.  Well, the girls, of course were like, oh, god, you know.  But that's how it worked.  You know, I thought I knew what I was doing but I didn't know how to really access or anything.  So, those are the things I did learn, you know.  And, indeed, we did stop and she talked about where crying comes from and you don't cry unless there's a real impetus to do it and if you're going to do it, you have to have the emotional trigger.  Otherwise, what are you doing?  Just (shrugs shoulders), you know?
Speaker 1: So, let's, let's talk about that.  We see people cry in scenes all the time and you wonder, you know, you wonder how do they do that?  How, how could they have done that in one take, two takes?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are they really sad?  Do you have to put yourself in the mindset--what's the--what's, what's the theoretical format behind crying, a crying scene?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, sense memory if you're-- Stanislavski [Konstantin Stanislavski] taught, if your method, you think about--well, in both cases, sense memory, what, something that's happened to you that would bring you to that place emotionally.  I think there are--there are some schools that say you have to actually draw it from the actual thing you're playing in the scene.  You have to make that happen within yourself.  The Stanislavski sensory memory method is just--well, I won't say method, that'll confuse you--is to say, what have I experienced that's similar to this moment?  And you go back in your memory and find that and access it and then you bring that into what you're doing.  I think some people do it naturally.  They just have the ability to go there quickly.  And, and let's not kid ourselves, there's the magic of glycerin.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And there's even in the films, they blow mentholated air into your face (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you will cry therefore.
Speaker 2: --and it makes you cry.  Then, you just supply the visual and they give you the tears, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's all of that, too.
Story_ID: 613634
Speaker 1: At The Municipal Opera Association [The Municipal Opera Association of St. Louis; The Municipal Theatre Association of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], what are you doing there now?  Are you--are you becoming more engrossed and entrenched?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'm in the chorus, which is singing.  At that time, they had a singing chorus and a dancing chorus, which meant the singers moved a little, the dancers sang a little, but you didn't have to--you know.  So, I'm in the singing chorus.  My first year there, I--we did 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II]. Interesting, I was just reading reviews on it today, 'South Pacific' and I played Stew Pot, which was one of the CBs [chorus boy], one of the soldiers, you know.  And I got it because of my college work [at Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri].  The head of the tech department was our--he worked--let's see, our tech--the head of our tech department at the school was one of the tech workers at the theater, so he knew me.  His wife was the assistant choreographer and she knew me and recommended to the producer and director that I was a chorus guy who could act.  So, when I went in to do the work, you know, just to join in for the chorus, they said, "Oh, by the way, you have a costume fitting.  You're playing this character, this part."  So, I started off even in the chorus with a role, which was unusual, again, because I was in school training as an actor.  And, you know, I'd get a line here and a line there in the shows and so forth for that same reason.  But, again, there were always people sort of positioned along the way as God would have it that always sort of moved me along or gave me--
Speaker 1: And who was that at, at the opera?  Who had been at the opera?
Speaker 2: Well, those two people that I named.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they were there constantly, Sharon Halley and Wayne Linder or Sharon Linder [ph.] was his wife.  And Sharon was--they were both--Sharon was from St. Louis [Missouri] so, you know, it was sort of family in that sense, and she had already been to New York [New York] and worked and come back home to raise kids and so forth.  She was very much like my teacher at school, a professional who had come back to the St. Louis scene, so to speak.  So they were very much about sort of egging me on to go to the professional level with it.
Speaker 1: So, there's been someone there to help you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to, to open the door.
Speaker 1: And not necessarily insist, but just to say hey.
Speaker 2: Just to tell you the possibilities, you know.  And, I mean, she and I would sit--and she, of course, loved to tell her stories about being in New York and, you know, and it educated me.  It educated me a great deal.  You know, when someone tells you about the beginning days of Circle in the Square [Circle in the Square Theatre, New York, New York] with Colleen Dewhurst and [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones and Jason Robards and Jose Quintero, well, this is firsthand information.  This is not in a book.  So, it not only engaged me as far as the profession, it brought the fantasy to life for me, of the life you could live in the theater, what it would be like and so forth.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay with the company, with the opera association?
Speaker 2: Two years.  I did two summers there before I went to New York.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Simultaneous with my college.
Story_ID: 613635
Speaker 1: And then you decided to go--
Speaker 2: To New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Now, what was the definitive decision to do that?
Speaker 2: There was a season--it had been mounting, you know, and of course there were people--
Speaker 1: Because everyone goes to New York.
Speaker 2: Everybody goes to New York.
Speaker 1: That's just what you do.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And there were people from the ensemble who had been leaving and going to New York.
Speaker 1: So, they had many stories and coming back and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah, you know, so it was like, come to New York (laughter), you know.  And also, the summer we did 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] wonderful African American actress named Theresa Merritt was our Bloody Mary.  And, of course, this was my first time working professionally with an African American actor.
Speaker 1: This would've been like seventy--
Speaker 2: Four [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I asked her a thousand million trillion questions and she was really gracious and, you know, I told her I was in school [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri].  And at first, she said stay in school.  But I said, "Well, you know, I really want to go to New York, blah blah blah."  Her advice was, "If you go, keep your mouth shut and your ears and eyes open 'cause you don't know anything," so just, you know--but, she really did say some reality based things to me that I hadn't heard.  'Cause most of the people I'd been talking to were not African American, so their, their take on it had nothing to do with any of the obstacles I would face.  They were just about, "You're good, you're this, you can do it, go, do--." Which was great 'cause it, it set me on the road without thinking of what I couldn't do.  I was more about what the things I--the things I could do.
Speaker 1: So, the colloquial expression, Miss Mary hipped you--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --to what was really going on.
Speaker 2: She hipped me.  She hipped me.  She hipped me big.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not in a--in a negative way.  She just said, "Look, see all these people around here?"  And I said, "Yeah."  She goes, "You are not them," (laughter).  "You've gotta know this, this, this, this, and that."  But she also encouraged me to stay in the mindset that I could do anything anyone else could do, and that coming from her meant more even than the others telling me you have talent, you can do it because I knew she was informed by the struggle of what it was.
Speaker 1: And she was doing it.
Speaker 2: She was doing it and she'd been doing it.  And just as a side story, later when I went into 'The Wiz,' she had just finished her run in it as Evillene [Wicked Witch of the West] and, you know, they'd have card parties and things, you know, and we'd go.  And it was so nice to go to New York and have this woman who had told me to come to New York be part of my world and she was telling everybody, "I told that boy," you know, and-"didn't I?"  You know, I said, "Yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am you did," you know.  So, it was a nice bridge, you know.
Story_ID: 613636
Speaker 1: So you decide to go to New York [New York].
Speaker 2: I go to New York, yeah.
Speaker 1: What does your family say about this?  'Cause now--is this your first time away from home really at this--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I hadn't been anywhere.  I hadn't even been out of St. Louis [Missouri], you know.  Had I known Chicago [Illinois] was there (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That close.
Speaker 2: --I probably wouldn't have gone as far right away, you know.  But, I didn't even know.  I'd never been to Chicago.  Varying reactions.  I don't think they were surprised, again, because I'd been doing it.  I think as was the case and is even, a lot of people at the time were very much about getting your education, finish your education [at Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri].  But, everything was pointing to me going at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you think there was a mis- a lack of understanding about the career that one could have in arts that's not necessarily--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the level of superstar?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you think that's still prevalent today?  People don't think that there's a career out there that you can do unless they see you on the big screen?  They don't understand the nuances of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --even the technical people that make great livings--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --behind the scenes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But do you think there's, there's a misconception?
Speaker 2: Oh, I do, yeah.  And I think, again, you know--
Speaker 1: In other words, our parents used to tell us, "Have something to fall back on."
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, look, I'll tell you, you know, I can't say that they may not have been right.  But, the truth of it is, if you go with that thought, often times it stops you from doing the things you would do 'cause the time you spend getting the fall back together is the time you miss doing the other.  And that's not to say it's, you know, always one way or the other 'cause I know people who have college degrees and master's [degree] and everything who still went on and did careers and they're fine.  I know other people, I say like myself, had I not gone when I did, everything else would've been different.  The timing would've been different.  Everything else would've been--
Speaker 1: So, you get to New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What--what's the first thing you do when you get there?
Speaker 2: First thing.  Well, we walked into an apartment.  This is a funny side story.  We walked into an apartment that was supposed to be empty and somebody was in it, so that was the first thing.
Speaker 1: So, it was you and someone else went?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a girl that was in the ensemble with me.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Carol Bosh [ph.].
Speaker 1: So, the two of you have headed out to New York together.
Speaker 2: We've headed to--yeah, on the train.  So, we get there and we go to this apartment 'cause somebody we'd done chorus with had said, "Yes, you can use our apartment, wouldn't get to the city for a few weeks, get yourself situated.  Here's the key."  We put the key in the door and their other roommate who was supposed to be on the road had decided to come home and was standing there in his underwear, so Carol and I open the door and he's like, "Who are you?"  We're like, "Well, who are you?"  So, that was my first thing.  But, you know, right away, the idea, of course, was about you've gotta find a way to keep yourself going.  And money goes quick.  I only had five hundred dollars.  You know, I thought that was big money, but you got to New York, it wasn't.  It goes quick.
Story_ID: 613637
Speaker 1: I was advised by my friend, Katherine, whom I mentioned, who was from my college [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri] who was in New York [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Katherine Merritt.
Speaker 1: Katherine Riley [Mary Lee Nigro].
Speaker 2: Riley, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And she, of course, had been there a year or two already.  And the whole thing about temp work, to go out and get temp work.  That's how everybody kept going at the time.
Speaker 2: And that would mean--that would mean what?
Speaker 1: Secretarial, filing, (makes noise).  It could be anything.  I mean, it depended on--
Speaker 2: Warehouse and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, anything.  You know, you went to the temp work agencies and they sent you wherever they needed somebody.
Speaker 2: And they knew you all were actors--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and musicians and--
Speaker 1: And that was part of the whole system of New York, you know, the, the New York actor did temp work and you could leave at any time because if you got a role, you were gone, but that was the idea.  It was temporary work, so it wasn't--and some people got more jobs that they actually could go back to.  They kind of established a relationship with the place they worked, so they could go in and out on their own.  You know, it was--it's interesting as you think now, there was such a, a, a, a unity, I guess you could call it, or a system or I don't exactly known what word to use that existed at that time for the artist in New York.
Speaker 2: So, it was an appreciation so to speak.
Speaker 1: There was an appreciation.
Speaker 2: A respect.
Speaker 1: There was a respect.  There was a support.  The actual city supported the artist with this sort of thing.  People understood that people came there to work in the arts.  They didn't expect you to assimilate into the nine to five [o'clock].  That wasn't why you were there.  There was a path you could stay on as an artist that allowed you to do that.  It's much harder, much different than that now, I think.
Speaker 2: So, what was your first temp assignment?
Speaker 1: I probably blocked it out (laughter) to tell you the truth.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It wasn't that easy.  But I do remember the one that I actually stayed with a little bit was the department of social services [New York City Department of Social Services] in downtown Manhattan [New York] where I'd never even been.  I didn't know it was down there, you know.  And I worked in the Xerox department (laughter) which was basically punching buttons and copying things, you know.
Speaker 2: Lots of papers.
Speaker 1: Lots--stacks.  They would bring them, boom, and put them on the desk.  We need all this copied by three, you know.
Speaker 2: And back then, machines were a lot slower.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  You practically cranked them on the sides (laughter), you know.  But, there was an old guy, God bless him, who was the Xerox department head who when I arrived started right off saying, "You actors."  That's how he started, "You actors."  And I was like, "I'm just here to work."  But, I was there for two or three weeks or more and he actually warmed up to me and started to show me different things with the machines and so on and so forth.  So, when I actually did get a job, I actually felt guilty.  I really did 'cause he was such a kind--eventually kind.  He was kind always, but he was just gruff.
Speaker 2: He'd seen quite a few actors.
Speaker 1: He'd seen a lot of actors come and go and he was sort of tired of the routine.  But, he was very kind to me.  And when I came the day to tell him that I'd gotten a job and I wasn't going to be coming back, his first reaction, of course, was "You actors, that's what you do.  See, this is why I didn't want to deal with it."  And in the end, he says, "But I, I have a feeling you have talent."  And it, it changed my whole approach to going into the professional job that I got because I was sort of set--again, somebody was there to just say kind of, you know, keep going even from the temp work place, you know.  So, it was a blessing, you know.
Story_ID: 613638
Speaker 1: So, what was your first job?
Speaker 2: With the Fanfare Children's Ensemble doing 'Huckleberry Finn' [Joseph George Caruso] playing, of course, Jim, the runaway slave (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, it's--what else, right?  And, again, you know, I was so fortunate.  These were some of the kindest people.  They lived the theater.  They weren't--you know, it was their own troop and they went out in their VW [Volkswagen] van and traveled all over the eastern seaboard and, and did this children's theater.  It was a pretty high level children's theater.  I mean, they had--
Speaker 1: Now who were the people?  Who were the heads of this?
Speaker 2: Joan Shepard and Evan Thompson.  Joan had been the replacement in 'Member of the Wedding' ['The Member of the Wedding,' Carson McCullers] for Julie Harris.  She had played the young girl role, young, you know--and, so they were professional people, but they lived the theater.  I mean, they had this apartment on the east, like east 12th Street, full of props and costumes and everything.  They had two little kids.  But they really lived it, so they were like a theater family to come into.  The people that were in the shows had done ten years of shows with them, so they had already been with them a long time.  So, when I came into the group, they weren't just hiring an actor, they took you in as part of their troop.  It was almost like the old commedia dell'arte days, you know, where you became part of the troop of actors that went out on the road with your little band, you know, and it literally--really was like that, and they were so supportive.  That's the first time I traveled at all.  We did it in Baltimore [Maryland] and Vermont and Detroit [Michigan].  That's the first time I was in Detroit.  We were--and I can almost remember the name of the theater, but I can't exactly.  It was like an institute.
Speaker 1: In Detroit?
Speaker 2: Something Detroit Institute of--
Speaker 1: Detroit Institute of Arts [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Woodward Avenue.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And 'The Wiz' was in its pre-Broadway there at the time I remember 'cause we went to see it, which I would do later, but it was just coming into Broadway at the time.  But, they were just great people, very heart people, you know.  Interesting story, later, I was doing I wanna say 'Misbehavin'' ['Ain't Misbehavin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] or 'Guys and Dolls' something anyway, and they came to the show and I came out afterwards and they were sort of huddled behind the crowd over kind of in the--and, you know, I saw them and I went over to them and they couldn't have been happier for me, you know, but they thought I wouldn't talk to them.  And I thought, "Why would you think that?"  They said, "Well, you know, now you're doing your star on Broadway and blah blah blah.  We didn't think you'd--." And I'm thinking to myself, my god, you know, you are the heart and soul of what this is all about, you know.  But, that was their feeling that you moved on beyond what they were about.  And I--like I say, I say to this day, to me, they were the great example of what the New York [New York] theater actor's heart really was about 'cause they didn't make a lot of money, it was just what they did, you know.
Speaker 1: So, you were able to keep--now as you're, you're advancing, you're doing things, you're, you're in a New York company, you're doing different things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay with their troop?
Speaker 2: I only did the one show with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We did it off and on over like a half a year or so forth, but not long.
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it was only that show.
Story_ID: 613639
Speaker 1: And then what happens for you?
Speaker 2: I was cast in the, a winter production, winter stock at the Coconut Grove Playhouse in Miami, Florida, a production of 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] which had already been on Broadway and blah blah blah, you know, [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore and Cleavon Little, and so forth.
Speaker 1: And, and which role did you play?
Speaker 2: I was in the ensemble.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were in the ensemble.
Speaker 2: But, I understudied Gitlow, the role Sherman Hemsley had done in the Broadway show and was in this little trio of a number called "Skinnin' a Cat," me and two other guys.  And we did it there for a few months and, of course, this is my first time in Florida.  I'd never been to anywhere like that, you know.  And the show was doing so well that they decided to tour it again.  So, we went from Florida to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Washington, D.C., again.  This is like the third national as they would call it 'cause it'd had already been out a couple of times.
Speaker 1: So, now, this wasn't the troop with Cleavon.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: This is a different--
Speaker 2: Robert, [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, Robert Guillaume was in this one--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you--
Speaker 2: I think he did all the national companies, actually.
Speaker 1: And you all had some St. Louis [Missouri] connections you were able to share at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I met him for the first time and, you know, realized it.  Of course, at this time, I'm in the chorus, you know, and this is Robert Guillaume you know.  He had replaced Cleavon on Broadway and, therefore, did the tour.
Speaker 1: And also, was, was Linda Hopkins in this particular--
Speaker 2: No, Linda wasn't in this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did the original.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lady who became my best friend, Helen Gelzer, played the church soloist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Norma Donaldson was Aunt Missy who later was Adelaide [Miss Adelaide] when we did 'Guys and Dolls.'  Patti Jo did the Melba role and she had replaced Melba on Broadway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her husband, Barry Smith, played Gitlow.  So, it was a, you know, sort of the next group off of Broadway.  They were the people that went out with the show.
Story_ID: 613640
Speaker 1: What brought me to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for the first time, that's what I was getting to 'cause we did it as the L.A. premiere of the show.  Our tour got to come out here and it was my first time coming to California.
Speaker 2: So you see it now, you're out here now.
Speaker 1: I'm here.  First time, 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] 1975.
Speaker 2: So, so let's follow the trend from--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --from I call it the Mideast, St. Louis [Missouri], you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's really not west.  It's, it's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It's more Mideast.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Mideast to, to the East Coast.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You go from the East Coast to Florida.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, you come all the way--
Speaker 1: California.
Speaker 2: --to what they call the land of it.
Speaker 1: The land of it.
Speaker 2: Hollywood.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you--so you come out here and, and what do you think when you get out here?
Speaker 1: Lots of things 'cause I mean, you know, again, everything's new to me.  You know, it was the first time, so I didn't have preconceived ideas.  Hollywood to most people until you live in it or experience it, it's such a complete fantasy that you have no connection.  And, again, I didn't come here in the film or TV industry.  I came in doing a show, which was different still, and I didn't drive so I couldn't really get around and see everything.
Speaker 2: Which theater was it where you all--
Speaker 1: We were at the Aquarius Theater [Earl Carroll Theatre, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I ended up having a whole history with the crew.  We did 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] there.  I did a musical version of 'Sir, with Love' ['To Sir, with Love,' James Clavell] years later and we actually did the workshop productions there, so it was like my theater home in L.A. for a long time.  But, yeah, we were there and it was this--I remember--and I say this to people now and they laugh 'cause I make it sound like it was the dawn of time, but L.A. was completely different.  This was '75 [1975].  It was slow.  There weren't that many people yet in that trafficky, bumper to bumper kind of way that it is now.  I remember when we got here walking around.  We had to find apartments, so it's a long story, but go into these places and everything was clean and quiet and manicured and a lot of those sort of '60s [1960s] buildings if you will or, or '70s [1970s] even, early seven--were relatively new still.  And I remember we went into two or three, you just buzzed, you walked in, you looked at an apartment, you went, well, here's the money and they went, great, here's the key.  I mean, there was nothing to it.  And the lady met you in a caftan with a cocktail and she went, "Oh, how long are you here?"  You know, we said, "Well, we're doing a show."  "Oh, great, so, here's the key," you know.  People actually were at the supermarket in bikinis.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean, it really was that, you know.  And people swear I'm lying but I'm not.  I just remember also West Hollywood [California] as a place was--there was nothing there.  I mean, I remember there were railroad tracks going up the middle and dust.  It really was that different at the time.
Speaker 2: And now it's a hub.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a hub.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's its own city, whatever, but it was nothing there, going on there.  I mean, it was just like, what is this?  You know, as we drove--people, those who could drive would drive around.  So, my impression of L.A. was not anything.  I remember walking around Hollywood Boulevard, which at the time was not quite as bad as it got to be, you know.  Going to the movies, you know, whatever we did, we did it in a walking distances.  I lived in an apartment, the Franklin Park Apartments up on Franklin [Avenue].  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so how, how long were you here?
Speaker 1: We did the show here for like six months, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: About six months, yeah.
Story_ID: 613641
Speaker 1: So you done--you're doing 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell]--
Speaker 2: Doing 'Purlie.'
Speaker 1: --and now because, because L.A. [Los Angeles, California] has a--what I call it a celebrity accessibility factor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were there many people that came to see you who you may have considered celebrities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  But, again, because we were in the chorus, we weren't as aware because Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Guillaume] and Patti Jo and Norma [Norma Donaldson], they'd all been to L.A., so they had friends and people that they knew, you know.
Speaker 1: So, afterwards they'd see their friends, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, people would come see them and so forth.  I'm trying to remember who came that I can remember.  I wanna say like--I don't know, some of the sort of '70s [1970s] movie people, you know, Pam Grier, you know, Bridget Rountree [ph.], you know (laughter), people like that, that's who I remember, you know.  There were a lot of dancers moreover who came who were people connected with the show previously.  And Lester Wilson was--you know, he came and supported us a lot.
Story_ID: 613642
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us more about, about your time here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and, and who else was in the--in the musical.
Speaker 2: Norma Donaldson, as I said that I, became a good friend from then, and met some of the friends I probably had most of my life, my professional life sort of thing, Freda T. Vanterpool and, you know, we all were close, very, very close, and have remained friends ever since.
Speaker 1: So, you do 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] for about six months here in L.A.--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you're enjoying the beautiful sunshine of L.A.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what happens for you?
Speaker 2: Well, the show closes, which is always a shock whenever it happens, you know, and you go back to New York [New York], and you--
Speaker 1: Aren't you kind of aware that it's on the way?  It's coming--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you always know.
Speaker 1: It's a matter of when, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, when you look out and there's more of you on stage (laughter) than there are in the audience, that's a cue, you know.  But, we knew, you know, that it was gonna close.  But--and, of course, in a certain way, we were all anxious to get back to New York 'cause you want to go onto your next show and whatever.  And we wanted to--you know, everybody wanted to get on Broadway, so it wasn't about staying out on the road as much as certainly for the--those of us who were new, young to it, you know.  But within I wanna say maybe two or three months getting back to New York, they started casting for an all-black production of 'Guys and Dolls.' And to make a long story short, six of us from 'Purlie' ended up being in 'Guys and Dolls.'  It was--
Speaker 1: Who, who were those six?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Robert Guillaume, Norma Donaldson as two of the leads, myself, my friend, Freda, another lady, Helen Gelzer who later went onto to London [England] and became a big star, Prudence Darby.  I mean, you know, there was--like I said, six of us, which was great because you had sort of a nucleus of family in the very next production, and this was a production that was for Broadway, you know, so, it was really great.  It was like 'Purlie' two, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet [HistoryMaker] Armelia McQueen?
Speaker 2: I met Armelia in seventy--late '77 [1977] I wanna say, maybe even early '78 [1978] when we did the first workshop of--production, off Broadway I should say, production of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come forward in a moment then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now you're, you're in--you're, you're, you're doing a, a workshop production of what musical now, 'Guys and Dolls'?
Speaker 2: No, we're going into the production, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not a workshop.
Speaker 1: Of an all-black cast.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we--of course, they used to have--well, they still do, pre-Broadway, and we did it in Washington, D.C., first and then Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So, we--almost the next year right around, we were back everywhere we'd been with 'Purlie' so that was great fun for--
Speaker 1: So, you had an audience, so to speak, or a following slightly for--'cause they knew who you were.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit, little bit.  Not for me so much, but for Robert and Norma.
Speaker 1: But they put it together.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they had been in the leads.
Speaker 1: Wasn't he the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, you got a little bit of--in this--in this, I had a great part, so I got to do more, you know.
Speaker 1: And what--and what was your role in 'Guys and Dolls'?
Speaker 2: Nicely-Nicely Johnson.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nicely-Nicely, thank you, yeah.  Great part, originated in the original production by Stubby Kaye.  And, it was great.
Story_ID: 613643
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, it was controversial because, again, in the evolution of everything else, we were coming with--you know, 'Guys and Dolls' is probably if not the, one of the most cherished musicals of the quote unquote, white musical theater, so here's this black company that's gonna take this on and there was a lot of controversy--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --just the fact that we were doing it.
Speaker 2: Give us some anecdotes from that time period that you might remember of things happening.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, blatantly, people just thought we had no business doing it.  I mean, you know, why were we doing 'Guys and Dolls'?  Don't we have our own shows, you know?  Do 'Porgy and Bess' again, you know?  And--
Speaker 2: Written by--written by Gershwin [George Gershwin], by the way.
Speaker 1: Hello, yeah.  And in the doing of it, I mean, the show fared I think better in some ways.  I mean, there are still people that argue about it, literally.  There was a review I got for something else where they mentioned that I had been in the ill-advised 'Guys and Dolls'--you know, people still think it should've never happened, but it happened, so there you go.  And the show had its own life and breath and so forth.  I mean, someone said to me recently that, "Well, it wasn't a success."  I said, "Well, I guess you gotta say success is relative."  The Broadway show ran for seven months.  There was a national tour that went out.  It was a Vegas company that went out to Las Vegas [Nevada].  I said, you know, not a lot of shows--only really hit shows get that sort of reproduction, so it had to have some validity or it never could've even happened like that, you know.  A lot of people got a lot of work out of it.  But, again, it was very contentious because when we were rehearsing, the Loesser--Frank Loesser foundation was very adamant about changes.  Nothing could be changed unless it was sanctioned, to some degree understandably, but then there was the argument, well, why let a black company do it if you're not gonna allow them to express it through their own cultural voice, you know?  So, all of that went on all the time.  And I ended up faring probably better than most in it because the role lent itself more to what we were trying to do with it.  "Sit Down, You're Rocking the Boat" had always been quote, unquote a gospel number.  It was in the Save A Soul Mission and it was all--you know, so when they decided to bring more of the gospel idiom to the song, it wasn't quite, quite the offense to some people that some of the other changes in the show had been.  And it certainly worked well for me.  I mean, it gave me a, a big showcase, first Broadway show and--
Speaker 2: And you won an award, too, for that, didn't you?
Speaker 1: Theatre World Award, which you--basically, they give you--it's one of those you don't compete for.  If you make an auspicious Broadway debut whenever, whatever.  You could be--Elizabeth Taylor got one for 'Little Foxes' ['The Little Foxes,' Lillian Hellman] and, you know, she'd been around forever, you know.  But, whenever you make your Broadway debut, if they think it's auspicious enough, they give you a Theatre World Award.
Speaker 2: So, it's a nice award--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to receive.
Speaker 1: It's, it's really one of the better ones, actually.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 613644
Speaker 1: Tell me about 'The Wiz.'  When did that come into play for you?
Speaker 2: 'Guys and Dolls' had closed after the six month run, whatever and then while doing 'Guys and Dolls,' I had started doing my nightclub act, as we called them at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did that entail?
Speaker 2: Whatever you put in it, basically.  But, you know, the tradition of it was that you did sort of a presentation of yourself as an artist outside of a character that you were doing on Broadway, whatever, so that's kind of how I shaped it.  And I did sort of a tribute to the black shows that were running on Broadway.  And this incidentally was at a time when there were more black shows running on Broadway--
Speaker 1: What were some of those shows?
Speaker 2: --than there had ever been.
Speaker 1: What were some of the names?
Speaker 2: Well, 'Guys and Dolls,' 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell], 'The Wiz,' 'Treemonisha' [Scott Joplin], 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin], 'Me and Bessie' [Will Holt and Linda Hopkins], 'Your Arms Too Short to Box with God' [Vinnette Carroll], 'The Mighty Gents' [Richard Wesley].  There were plays, you know, all these things.  I mean, it really was a great time for African Americans on Broadway.
Speaker 1: Mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And all these things were running at one point simultaneously, which is hard to even imagine (laughter) now.
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you mention it, I know some musician friends of mine that played in the pits.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Saying how they were running from show to show.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You could go from show--I think it's probably the only time in the history of Broadway that black actors and musicians and so forth could actually go from show to show to show to show if they really so had the talent, you know.  'Guys and Dolls,' a lot of people--a couple of people from 'The Wiz' came to 'Guys and Dolls' and then left.  After 'Guys and Dolls' closed, they then went to do 'Arms Too Short to Box with God.'  'Bubbling Brown Sugar' was around the corner and we had the same creative team, so there was a cross--you know, it was really a great time.  You went out in the street and you partied all the time, you know.  It was great.
Story_ID: 613645
Speaker 1: So, how does 'The Wiz' come about for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was saying, I'm sorry, that I had done my nightclub act and in it, I did the black shows that were running on Broadway.  And I did "Mean Ole Lion" and "Ease on Down the Road" from 'The Wiz.'  And I also did stuff from 'Raisin' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] which by the way was also running at the time.  And the cast from 'The Wiz' 'cause I was such a big hit of 'Guys and Dolls' came to see my nightclub act.  And a lady, Clarice Taylor, who was playing Addaperle in 'The Wiz' went back and told Ken Harper who was the producer that they should see me for 'The Wiz.'  Now mind you, I had auditioned in a big cattle call earlier.  They didn't pay me any attention, you know.  And 'Guys and Dolls' closed and for various reasons, they wanted to replace the actor who was playing the lion at the time.  And they had me come in and I knew the song so, you know, I auditioned and they offered me the role that day.
Speaker 1: Once again--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Serendipitous people.
Speaker 2: Serendipitousness because she saw the show and she told the right person and, you know, there you go.
Speaker 1: Now, without putting you too far on the spot, we have to have a little bit of the lion, for you to sing or you give us a little bit of the lion.
Speaker 2: Oh (singing), "Say what you wanna, but I'm here to stay 'cause I'm a mean ole lion.  You can go where you wanna but don't get in my way 'cause I'm a mean ole lion (growls)," (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, now how long did you stay in 'The Wiz'?  How long?
Speaker 2: I did 'The Wiz' for about a year and a half.
Speaker 1: And who else was in this--
Speaker 2: A little under a half.
Speaker 1: --company with you at this time of note?
Speaker 2: Stephanie Mills was there still.  Tiger Haynes was still there, the original, playing the tin man.  Gregg Burge who had taken over for the Scarecrow early on, he was still there.  [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields was still there doing 'The Wiz.'  He left shortly after I came into it, but he was there when I joined.  Carl Hall replaced him.  Ella Mitchell--like I said, Theresa Merritt had just finished playing Evillene [Wicked Witch of the West] when I came in and Ella Mitchell went and took over.  And most of the, the ensemble was still the original people, pretty much.
Story_ID: 613646
Speaker 1: Tell us about--give us any anecdotes you might have, have on [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore possibly, working with her.
Speaker 2: You know, I never worked with Melba Moore, so I don't really have any unfortunately.  I mean, I, I knew her from being around the scene together at the same time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm, I'm sorry, I mean Stephanie Mills.
Speaker 2: Stephanie Mills, oh yeah.  Well, Stephanie is my sweetheart.  I just love her, love her, love her, love her, love her, love her, love her.  She was amazing.  I mean, she was really a kid, you know.  We got to be friends, which was I think--'cause I really was pretty much the same age.  It was only like two or three years difference between us, she and Gregg Burge and myself.  Her--I think she's one of the most--how would I say?  She's one of the most original unique talents to come along in a long--in a--ever.  In the role of Dorothy [Dorothy Gale], like Judy Garland, it was a signature role for her.  I don't think--you know, lots of little girls did it after her, but there was something about her talent, her voice, her vulnerability in that time in that show ['The Wiz'] that really made that come alive.
Speaker 1: If I'm correct, one of our other HistoryMakers, I don't know if she was there at this time, but [HistoryMaker] Jackee Harry was there in, in the role--
Speaker 2: She was a dresser.
Speaker 1: --in, in the role of a dresser.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, she was a dresser and she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --told us this story.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Which is--story?
Speaker 1: Any anecdotes of seeing her and not in a role of acting or singing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I think actually by the time I got there, she was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew she had been Andre's [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields] dresser in the show, but I think if I'm not mistaken, she had probably just moved on when I came into it.
Speaker 1: I think it's correct.  I think she said that Andre gave her the name Jackee.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He said--he said, "You are Jackee," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he wouldn't say (pronunciation) Jackee, Jackee, yeah.
Story_ID: 613647
Speaker 1: So you're there [with 'The Wiz'] for a year and a half you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just about.
Speaker 1: A year and a half doing, doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I left actually and then came back for like three or four more weeks.
Speaker 1: Oh, so what did you--oh, after you left, you came back.
Speaker 2: Well, I left and they brought the guy back who had been there before me and (laughter) then fired him again and they brought me back until they got someone else, you know, to really stay.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the process?  Because at that time, there were a lot of people--who were some of the other actors on Broadway, African American actors, male or female?  I think Loretta Devine was around at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Loretta was around.  I don't know if she was on Broadway yet at that time, but I know she was around.  Delores Hall who was amazing.  She won a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for 'Arms Too Short to Box with God' ['Your Arms Too Short to Box with God,' Vinnette Carroll].
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Armelia McQueen was--
Speaker 2: Armelia--well, Armelia actually wasn't there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --during this period.  She wasn't, you know, on Broadway yet.  Nell Carter was around.  She had done 'Dude' ['Dude: The Highway Life,' Gerome Ragni] a big flop, but she had been--she was doing a club act around.  Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields], of course, was in 'The Wiz,' Stephanie Mills, Vivian Reed, Chip Garnett, Linda Hopkins, Clamma Dale who had played Bess in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] great acclaim.  She was the first sexy sort of glamorous Bess.
Speaker 1: Those are some real seasoned people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, great people, really, really talented people.  I could go on.  I mean, it was just all kinds of people, Josephine Premice, who had been sort of the generation before.  She and Joe Attles [Joseph Attles] and Avon Long were in 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] and Avon was the original Sportin' Life in 'Porgy and Bess.'
Speaker 1: If I'm correct, I think as a musician, I don't know if he was there, George Davis was a guitar player in 'Guys and Dolls' for a long time.  He was an African American guitar player, are you aware of him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And he wrote "Tell it Like it Is."
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: You know--you know from, from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think--and he told me about--and he's the one that told us about going from show--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --to show and because he read--he was an African American--'cause the pits a lot of times--
Speaker 2: He could read.
Speaker 1: --were not black musicians, were they in, in--
Speaker 2: Not as many.  There were probably more working then because of the, the needs of the shows.  But as you were gonna say, I think that a lot of people--you had to read and a lot of people who--a lot of the black musicians didn't necessarily read, they played with--from what they knew and--
Speaker 1: And it was still--it was still very union heavy, too, wasn't it at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very much so and all the prejudices that go along with all that at the time, you know.  But, Danny Holgate was very active at that time, musical director--he was the musical director of 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' and 'Guys and Dolls' and--
Story_ID: 613648
Speaker 1: So, you stayed a year and a half, you left and came back for a few months even after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --after you left.  And so 'The Wiz,' after you finished doing that, then what's next for you?
Speaker 2: Left 'The Wiz,' after 'cause my knees were giving out, running, crawling on them as a lion, so I stopped that.  And it was a little bit of a--not so long.  I mean, I look back and it seems like a long time, but it was really only a few months, and they announced that they were doing a workshop or an off Broadway thing of Fats Waller's music.  And I had, oddly enough not too long before that, had been--Twyla Tharp's dance company [Twyla Tharp Dance] used to do a, a piece--dance piece to "Your Feet's Too Big."  And they were on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and somebody had seen them and they had a big picture of Fats Waller and somebody said looks just like you and so on.  So, I thought I'm gonna do a one man show at Fats Waller.  I started to research it.  In the research, I found out that he was a piano virtuoso and I don't play the piano.  That was a little problem.  So, I sort of had basically put it on hold.  And my agents got a call that they were doing this revue at the Manhattan Theatre Club and in truth, they said they were looking for a guy like the guy from 'Guys and Dolls,' the big one, which would be me.  So (laughter), you know, when I went over, they kind of looking for me kind of or type like me, so to speak.  Anyway, I did it and at that time, it was myself, Nell Carter, [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields, [HistoryMaker] Armelia McQueen, and Irene Cara was our fifth other young lady of the two young ladies.  And the show opened and was like an instant hit.  I mean, it really took off.
Speaker 1: So, in about, we'll say a span of maybe seven to eight years from college or maybe like late high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri] to college, you have went from St. Louis [Missouri]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and Fontbonne [Fontbonne College; Fontbonne University, St. Louis, Missouri]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to major Broadway productions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that would be like '73 [1973] to at this point '77 [1977], eight, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, in a five year span, which is a short time to pay dues because of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, you know, some people would say, would you agree or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  I, I always say I did everything, I just did it quick.  You know, I did temp work, I starved, I did--I did a tour, I did a bus and truck, I did children's theater, I did everything, but it was very compacted.
Speaker 1: Now, 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] took off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it did, it actually did.
Speaker 1: And how long did that run?
Speaker 2: The off Broadway I think ran two months, roughly.  And in that two months, everybody came to see it and, and people--bidding wars started, started for it to move.  They signed the deal for the record before we went to Broadway.  RCA [RCA Records] wanted to record it.  Even if the show hadn't gone to Broadway, they wanted to record it because they had the Fats Waller catalogue and so forth.  And it only took--let's see, we closed like in January and we opened on Broadway in May.
Story_ID: 613649
Speaker 1: Talk about the creative process.  We've heard from our, from, from Ms. McQueen [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen] that you all basically developed those roles individually--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --out, out of the music.  There was no--she said there was structure, but can you elaborate?  That you had to take the music and become--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, it was sort of like--I think--the process that I recall was that we took stacks of music, we listened to songs, we sort of picked the ones we thought we'd like.  The creative people thought, well, this is a good one for what we need, blah blah blah, back and forth, but it really all was built in truth on the personalities of the people.  There wasn't anything else because it was ostensibly a revue, so there wasn't a book, per se.  The order in which they ended up using the songs, which still were being chosen became the, the invisible book of the show, if you will.  But it all had to do with who was doing them and how we were doing them and what songs we would do.  It's one of the cases sort of like 'Chorus Line' ['A Chorus Line'] in the sense that, you know, it really was based on the people, you know.  'Chorus Line,' a little bit different because it did become a book musical and the characters became--but in our case, we were the characters.  There wasn't anything else.
Speaker 1: So even, even later companies based their, their, their deliveries and things off of what you all established.  It wasn't just hearing--
Speaker 2: Well, they kind of--
Speaker 1: --somebody with a script.  They had to kind of--
Speaker 2: There is no script.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, there's the music and in the music, it says Ken [HistoryMaker Ken Page], Armelia, Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields], Nell [Nell Carter], Charlayne, as Charlayne Woodard replaced Irene Cara, but there is no script.  There is no script.  When you get the script, and I've directed the show now three times, when you get the script, what you get is the lyrics typed out.  There isn't anything else.
Speaker 1: There's no script.
Speaker 2: And there's nothing on the page that tells you what you are to do.  So, the characterizations that have lived on that are 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] are absolutely what we brought to it, you know.  And in some cases, you know, you credit this one.  Murray Horwitz was a, a great contributor because he was a jazz aficionado and very well versed in Waller's [Fats Waller] music and everything.  His son's name is Thomas [Alexander Thomas Horwitz], you know, he--Arthur Faria, the choreographer, lived the period with us.  I mean, he would take what we did naturally and turn it into choreography or he would come with something and say, "I think I have this idea, let's try this."  He was, to me--the physical part of the show as far as the actual movement and that thing, that was really his work, you know.
Story_ID: 613650
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So as an actor and one that directed later on, is that a hard show to--kind of show to direct, a scriptless show?  Is it kind of hard to direct it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's probably hard if you don't know what it is.  I mean in my case, I know what it is, so it's not so hard.  But the work becomes bringing the five people to the task of meeting the energy of what I know the show should be.  Someone said to me the first product- second production that I directed, this lady came up to me, a nice lady, and she said, "Did you really do all of that or was that just the way it was?"  It took me a minute to kind of filter what she was saying.  I said, "Are you asking me if I've recreated the show, if this is the--?" I said, "Well, the show is the show."  I mean, you know, that's it.  I didn't redo it.  I mean, I recreated it in the sense--I said but, you know, if you go see 'Fiddler on the Roof,' [Joseph Stein] it's the same show with the same lines and the same music and the same choreography.  It's--that's what it is.  The work for the director is bringing those people to match that material.  And in our case of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] it's even harder because there is no book.  It has to come from me as a director or whomever and from them as artists to bring out their own personalities and meet it.
Speaker 1: And wouldn't you say that would be absolutely congruent with who Fats Waller was and the music of the time period and what it was about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --jazz in general?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There's a freeness.  There's a, a personality, orientation, I would say that you gotta have.  The last production I just did, which was only a few months ago, the people, of course, are progressively younger and further away from Waller's time and now thirty years hence the show even, so you're getting a generation that wasn't even around when the show was on Broadway.  They don't know nothing about--so, really getting them to access the time period not only of Waller's time but even of the show itself is a real task.
Speaker 1: To even get them to understand the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the kind of--the level of performance that we did at that time was much, much higher than what sort of is accepted now, to be honest.  You know, we were five people who inhabited the stage like twenty-five because you had to be all these different characters and all these different things and each thing had to move.  And a lot of the younger people aren't used to working like that anymore.  They don't have to do that so much.
Story_ID: 613651
Speaker 1: So, the show ran, ran for--how long did that show ['Ain't Misbehavin',' Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] run?
Speaker 2: It ran on Broadway for five years.  The original cast was with it for a little over a year and then Andre [HistoryMaker Andre De Shields] and Charlayne [Charlayne Woodard] went to London [England] to do a production.  Armelia [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen], Nell [Nell Carter], and myself stayed on Broadway and we were joined by Debbie Allen and Alan Weeks.  And then we all got back together again to do it in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for the L.A. company including Nell who had gone off to do TV and that by this point, a little bit.
Speaker 1: And wasn't there a TV production also of it?
Speaker 2: We did the NBC, yeah, right after we had done it--shortly after we did it in L.A.
Speaker 1: And that was the original cast?
Speaker 2: Original cast, yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is rare for television--
Speaker 2: Very rare.  Very, very rare.
Speaker 1: How did that turn out?
Speaker 2: Great.  I mean, it was terrific.  I mean, it was sort of like we were still on the original ride from the beginning still, you know, and for us to get to do that show as an NBC primetime network special was almost unheard of.  There were shows, one I think Armstrong's [Louis Armstrong] music--the--something.  They had done a few things, you know, but they generally weren't the original production.  They were just another production of it done for TV with some other people, but this was the original cast brought to television, which was very rare (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had you done any film up to this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, this was your first film experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How was that?
Speaker 2: Well, because it was a show that we had been doing.  It wasn't the same as doing something brand new, you know.
Speaker 1: But, are the mechanics of television and the Broadway stage similar or different?
Speaker 2: They're different, but the idea behind this was to capture the Broadway show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't to bring it to another place for the medium.  I think there are roles in the show that work better for the medium of television.  I think my role, to be honest, wasn't one of them (laughter) because my role was a creation of the theater.  It really needed the broad--you know, that was what it was for and that's what it was about.  It wasn't bad, but it wasn't as right for camera as--I think Andre's role was better because it was more subtle.  I think Armelia fared better for television because the camera could go in rather than have to push it out.  Nell was great, but her performance to my feeling wasn't the performance that you saw on the stage.
Speaker 1: It's kind of like a--like a musician who says that club work, playing in a nightclub is, is different than playing a--
Speaker 2: Recording.
Speaker 1: --concert or recording.
Speaker 2: A concert, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the same--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --kind of feeling.
Speaker 2: And it depends, you know, and--
Speaker 1: There's no energy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --energy of it--
Speaker 2: It's a different--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --ballgame, you know.  And to have made mine or Nell's role less than we had done it would've been a mistake because then it would've died.  For them to--so, it's just, you know, the way it turns out.  And you look at it and it's fine.  I mean, there's--nobody would actually say that I think right off the bat, but I can look at it and know that--
Speaker 1: From your own perspective.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that ran from--the show totally ran for about five years.  You were in it for like five years or so, correct?
Speaker 2: No, I did it--like I said, the, the original cast was together--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say all and all, I did it for like three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we also then did it in Paris [France], myself, Armelia, and Andre with another Nell, Yvette Freeman who's been on 'ER' for years, and Gail Boggs.  We did it in Paris for a little under a year.
Story_ID: 613652
Speaker 1: So, when you left aunt mis- 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], pardon me, then what did you do?
Speaker 2: What did I do (laughter)?  What did I do after I left ain't mis- a lot of my club act and I'm trying to think what was the next real work?  There was other things, you know, different--
Speaker 1: Different parts.
Speaker 2: --New York [New York] things, yeah, that came in between.  I did a wonderful piece called 'Louis' [Don Evans] which was a play about Louis Armstrong at the New Federal Theatre and they had hopes of it coming to Broadway.  And it was myself, Debbie Allen, Ernestine Jackson, Northern J. Calloway played Louis, Tiger Haynes, so we were sort of this hybrid of all the Broadway, all the Broadway shows.  They got us all to come do this one show.  It didn't go anywhere, unfortunately, but we had a great time doing it.  Shortly after, I want to say--I forget, this was about '79 [1979], so somewhere around '81 [1981], there were rumblings of this show that was--I think it had opened in, in London [England], 'Cats' [Andrew Lloyd Webber] and that they were bringing it to New York and blah blah blah blah.  You know, everybody was talking about it.  I mean, I really didn't think anything of it 'cause I just didn't think anything about it.  And I went to the closing performance of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' on Broadway and Bernard Jacobs [Bernard B. Jacobs] who was the head of the Shubert Organization said to me that he thought there was a role in the show for me.  And I--to my experience, to my knowledge, I thought the show was really like a dance show, for dancers and so forth.  I didn't know it.  He said, "I think there's a role that you might really be right for," really--you know.  And interesting enough as it comes out now I'm thinking of it chronologically, when he told me about that, we were getting ready to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to film 'Ain't Misbehavin'' so I actually took the music to learn for 'Cats' to L.A. with me and rehearse it.  And Armelia [HistoryMaker Armelia McQueen] used to always laugh 'cause she said she could hear me in the shower.  Our rooms were back to back and I'd--(singing), "You've heard of several kinds of cats" ["The Ad-Dressing of Cats"]. She said, "I used to hear you in the shower, like, oh god, there's Page [HistoryMaker Ken Page] rehearsing again."
Speaker 1: So, once again, someone--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you happened to be where you were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --just watching the closing performance.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And there it was.
Speaker 2: Right.  And I really had no clue about it and they had already been seeing people by this point.
Speaker 1: So, what did you do, just, just go down to the--to the director?
Speaker 2: Well, he--well, he gave me--you know, told me to go get the music and blah blah blah blah and learn it.  And they called me in, and this was at the end of the process.  They had been seeing people for about seven months at this point.  It was a big deal.  Everybody was just--as they say in London, their knickers were in a twist about it, you know.  And they had me come in the beginning of the week to sing for Trevor Nunn, the director, Gillian Lynne, the choreographer, and Stan Lebowsky [Stanley Lebowsky] was the musical director.  And I sang, and they said, well, we want you to come back and do a dramatic reading.  I'm thinking, well, I thought this show was music and dance, they want a dramatic reading.  So, I did a monologue that I had in Louis ['Louis,' Don Evans] where I played King Oliver, Joe Oliver, and I didn't know that Trevor Nunn--I thought I'd do something, they wouldn't know it, they'd just--you know.  And Trevor Nunn was a big jazz (laughter)--and says (adopts British accent), "Oh, Joe Oliver and he was Louis' mentor from--." He had all of this information.  I was like (makes noise)--so I had to talk about it.  Luckily, I knew, you know.  And I realized later that more than the reading, my conversation with him was more my audition.
Story_ID: 613653
Speaker 1: So, you get the role in, in 'Cats' [Andrew Lloyd Webber].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you're, you're already out of 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] now.  You've left that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We've done the TV special that's aired, blah blah blah.
Speaker 1: So, now, how, how did you playing Old Deuteronomy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'd been playing old somebody my whole career, since I was in high school [Bishop DuBourg High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and so it was not unusual.  I was twenty-seven when I did Old Deuteronomy, so I was actually young, you know, but the whole cast was young, so I was in a proximity of age with everybody else.  The show was such a huge ordeal.  I mean, it was already a big hit in London [England] and I would say probably I can't think of anything even up until now that's come to Broadway with as much pre-expectation 'cause it was just huge, you know.
Speaker 1: Who else was in that with you of note, in 'Cats,' of that cast?
Speaker 2: Betty Buckley who went, went on to win the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and sang "Memory," Terrence Mann who went on to do 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil] and a couple of other things.  I'm trying to think who else would be of note that you would know?  Harry Groener who's done a lot of TV work now and--big group, big group of us.
Speaker 1: So, 'Cats' became--would you call 'Cats' your signature performance of, of your--of your--of your Broadway career at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't know.  It's hard for me to say because I don't know--there's so many people that know me from one thing or know me from another thing.  I think 'Cats' is the most well known property that I was in.  It's probably the most anonymous because of the makeup and all that sort of thing, but I worked very hard to make sure that people knew I had been there before 'Cats' and then worked at, you know--so there was, you know, that to overcome.  But, I think it's probably the role when I see things now written that they refer to the most.
Story_ID: 613654
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Andrew Lloyd Webber?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, of course, you know, working on the show ['Cats,' Andrew Lloyd Webber].  He was there every day.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I had a funny moment with him because the show, of course, like I said had been done before and there was a character in London [England] that--the, the man who played Deuteronomy [Old Deuteronomy] also played Bustopher Jones and--Bustopher Jones.  So, there were two roles, you know, two things.  Well, when they did it here, I only played Deuteronomy, which was great actually, I sort of liked that.  But the guy who was playing Bustopher still was in the voicing musically of Deuteronomy.  So, when we started rehearsing, the guy who was doing Bustopher was sounding like me, you know, 'cause it was just in the same voicing.  That's not good.  That's not good.  And then, well, how do you say to Andrew Lloyd Webber this, you know.  And I talked to the musical director and it was so funny 'cause he said, "Great, you tell him," (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: "You tell him."  I thought, okay.  So, we had a--you know, after rehearsal, I said well, "Andrew, I wanted to bring up--."
Speaker 1: So, so for verification--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Bustopher was using a tonality--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just written in the same voice then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, it was the same person who did it, so it was still the same, you know, even though it had been divided for--
Speaker 1: And, and it had a--
Speaker 2: --America.
Speaker 1: --similarity to--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--similarity, you know.  And the guy doing it, you know, had to go there, so we, we ended up sounding more alike.
Speaker 1: And he wasn't gonna change his role naturally.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And they had--his role was Bustopher and Gus, the Theatre Cat, so it was balanced in another direction.  At any rate, so we had a little meeting afterwards and Stan Lebowsky [Stanley Lebowsky] says to Andrew, he says, "Ken [HistoryMaker Ken Page] has something he wants to say, something he wants to talk to you about."  And I thought oh, god, am I gonna get fired? You know.  But I put it to him the way I felt and I said well, you know, "I think the two characters in the show previously were the same actor, so the voicing of the music is still the same."  I said, "But it's making me sound like I'm the other person and vice versa."  He just sort of looked at me and I thought, well, this is it.  The axe is either gonna swing now or not.  He says (adopts British accent), "Well, you know, you're absolutely right.  I hadn't given that a thought at all."  I thought, oh, god.  He says (adopts British accent), "You're absolutely, absolutely correct."  And he played a little bit of it.  He goes (adopts British accent), "Oh, of course, it's absolutely right.  That shouldn't be the same at all now, should it?"  I thought, no, it shouldn't.  So, he says, (adopts British accent), "Well, I think we're gonna lower your part," and I was already on the bottom of my range.  I thought, good, great.  He lowered it and thank god I was able to sing it, about half a step or so lower, which made a difference, you know.  And I remember him saying (adopts British accent), "Oh, that's much better, isn't it?  It's much more fruity.  It's much more Father Christmas now, isn't it?  Much more sort of warm and inviting."  I thought, yeah.  And it stayed that way.  So, therefore, after that, you know, all the Deuteronomies, it was in another key and so on so forth, and it did make a difference.  It absolutely made a difference.  But, that was my scary moment with Andrew Lloyd Webber 'cause I really didn't know.  I mean, he was Andrew Lloyd Webber and this was his show.  How do you say to this man, "There's a mistake in your thinking?" You know.  But he was appreciative and it stayed that way and later on when we did the video version, they cast me in it, so I guess I must not have offended him too much, you know.
Story_ID: 613655
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay in 'Cats' [Andrew Lloyd Webber]?
Speaker 2: I did 'Cats' for a year.
Speaker 1: And we know the reviews were, were great--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for you in that.
Speaker 2: Well, some--well, they were good for me.  I mean, overall, they were good for everybody.  Not everybody loved 'Cats.'  Some people just thought it was a pile of junk, yak, yak, you know.  But, I think, you know, maybe it wasn't everybody's cup of tea, I would say that.  But, when a show runs for twenty-one years, you gotta give it up that somebody--and it's, of course, been done all over the world and translated into twenty or thirty different lang- you know.
Speaker 1: So, after you left 'Cats,' did you--were you--had you had enough of Broadway at this point and started getting into other--
Speaker 2: Well, there were other offers.  They were doing--'Three Musketeers' ['The Three Musketeers,' William Anthony McGuire] came up and they offered me that and there were a couple other things.  But I thought to myself, 'Cats' is the biggest thing that Broadway has seen ever.  How do you top that?  If it's not gonna be better than that, then this is a good place to try something different for the moment 'cause at, at the time, the possibility of coming back to it was still there.  You know, I could've left and come back or whatever.  So I chose at that time to go to California 'cause I thought well, you know, you've done Broadway, you've had successes, you have not done television, you have not done film.  Broadway for all of its wonderfulness is ephemeral.  Thank god, in my case, we got to do 'Ain't Misbehavin'' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.] on film, so it exists beyond the stage show.  That doesn't usually happen.  The best we get from memory for prosperity--posterity is the cast album.  The rest is (makes sound) gone into the dust, you know.  So, I thought if you want to be not only remembered, you've gotta do something that's gonna be permanent and, you know, a wider reaching audience.  So, I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in '84 [1984].
Story_ID: 613656
Speaker 1: You come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Is it a different theater environment?  Is it a different environment?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, because I moved to L.A. in '84 [1984] purely for television and film work.  I didn't try to do theater at all.
Speaker 1: Is the system or as you say--or we say the program of how things work in New York [New York], as you mention the temping and the things of that nature--
Speaker 2: Night and day.
Speaker 1: --is it a different system?
Speaker 2: Completely.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: At that timing, and this is 1984, in L.A., you couldn't--you couldn't really do the same thing because the, the, the amount of--New York is a--is a nighttime thing.  You might audition for a show, but once you get it, you work at night, you know, so the, the idea of daytime employment, you could sort of work around.  L.A., everything happens in the day, so you couldn't be really that involved in something else because you wouldn't be able to participate in the industry.  So, it was a tricky, tricky, you know, situation.  Fortunately for me, you know, I came out with, you know, some padding so to speak from having been on Broadway for a while.  I had a few funds and I didn't have to worry about working elsewhere just to be able to stay and be on my feet.  So, I was able to kind of pursue the business solely and not have to do something else.
Speaker 1: So, you came out and you started doing--you have--your, your resume is very extensive, did a lot of different roles and different shows and you got into the directing and, and directing of plays and television (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you became the consummate professional in all avenues of the industry.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--it broadened my horizons for sure.
Story_ID: 613657
Speaker 1: What do you think about theater today, especially African American theater?  Do you have any thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have thoughts on that?  Well, you know, I think it's certainly a different time.  Again, without comparing and I am comparing, but when I came through, it was a time when there were a lot of African American performers and, and shows on Broadway to be in.  Now, we've practically gone back to the '60s [1960s] or the '50s [1950s].  You know, you got one person in this show and maybe one in there.  There's a black guy and a black girl in the chorus, that's it.  You had 'The Color Purple' recently, which was like the only black show we've had on Broadway in quite some time as a--as an all-black production, so to speak.  It's a very, very tricky time.  Now, let me say in--up to the moment right now, there's a little renaissance going on, which is very encouraging because 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof' [Tennessee Williams] is running with [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones, [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad, Anika Noni Rose, Terrence Howard and company, Laurence Fishburne is opening in Thurgood Marshall ['Thurgood,' George Stevens, Jr.], a one, one, one man show.  S. Epatha Merkerson just finished doing 'Come Back'--'Come Back, Little Sheba' [William Inge] and Morgan Freeman is opening in 'Country Girl' ['The Country Girl,' Clifford Odets] an integrated cast.  So, you've had this sort of resurgence of black performers on Broadway interestingly enough in plays not musicals, so it's a switch up from the last--but at the same time, there's another element to it, which is the whole idea that the theater now hosts Hollywood people.  I'll say that instead of saying movie TV.  You really almost to get the lead in a Broadway show, musical or straight play, you kind of have to be a movie star or a TV star or a recording star.
Speaker 1: So, you don't have to be necessarily a trained actor, you have to be--
Speaker 2: Well, many of them are because they've come from the theater, but at the same time, they only get to do it because they've attained a certain amount of recognition outside of the theater.  You know, you look at the case of P. Diddy [Sean Combs] doing 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] you know, he got to do it because he's P. Diddy.  And god bless him, it's not because he had the talent--
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: --for it, you know, and I give him great kudos for taking on that kind of challenge, but I would've preferred he'd gone and studied and then did it than just jumping into it because he could.
Speaker 1: So, is it--is it the corporate business you think now?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: The--it's, it's a corporate--they see the bottom line as dollars versus the--
Speaker 2: Artistic.
Speaker 1: --the proliferation of the artistic--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --factor.
Speaker 2: And, I mean, it's like the rest of the country.  It's finally made its way to the theater.  It happened elsewhere first, needless to say, but it made itself its way to the theater last, but it's certainly there now.  I mean, it's all about--when you have theaters being renamed for corporations, you know they've landed, you know.  It's there.
Story_ID: 613658
Speaker 1: What's your advice to a young actor, entertainer at this point now in today's day and age should they want to get into this business?
Speaker 2: You know, it's a hard question and I've, I've talked to a lot of young people.  I've taught master classes and I had two occasions to talk to the graduating classes of the American music dramatic academy [American Musical and Dramatic Academy] and they are being trained to go into the professional theater, and I found it--this is what I found that I could say to them that I thought was fair and honest.  I said, "You've gotta think of yourself as art soldiers, meaning there is a war, there is a battle for art now, and if you want to do it, you've gotta go into it with the idea that you've gotta fight for the art."  It's easy enough for many people to do it now who don't have the training, who don't necessarily--I'm talking about the theater in specifics, who, who don't really care that much about the art form, they just want it as a stair step to wherever they're trying to get to.  So, the, the, the young people that train for it, I say you've gotta go in and fight for the art for yourself.  Corporatization is present.  It's not coming, it's there.  Their bottom line is the dollar, that's the truth.  I encourage them and encourage anyone to be very, very clear about what you want out of the business.  I try not to judge why you're doing or what you want, but be clear about it.  Because if you're going into it as an artist, you're gonna have a different path to deal with than if you go into it as a business.  A lot of young people that I see now are very business about it.  They're scary to me as someone who came from a time when it was really about the art and the art became the business and, therefore, you had show business.  They're very I think right in terms of what they're fitting into because it is very much that way now, but they seem to have lost a lot of the--for lack of a better word, the magic, and that's what I talk about--or talked about to them as well.  If you don't maintain that, you've lost the ingredient.  I don't care what dollar signs and dollars go on it, when you sit in the seat and the lights go out and the curtain comes up, it's that other thing.  And if that other thing isn't happening, ain't nothing going on.  You can do it in the parking lot.  You can do it in your living room.  You can do it at the Winter Garden [Winter Garden Theatre, New York, New York].  You can do it at the Hollywood Bowl [Los Angeles, California].  If that's not happening, there's nothing going on and that's why I said as art soldiers.  I did this whole thing.  I said, "Just take one day and imagine removing everything that is art from our experience.  No TV, no movies, no recording, no, no, no, no, no down the line, no music, nothing that we do as artists.  Take it away from the society and see what you have left."  I said, "So don't let anybody convince you that we're disposable because it's a money issue.  If we don't do what we do, there isn't anything.  These things that people run out to go see and to buy and to partake, there wouldn't be anything there."  So, we are important as artists and we have to maintain that knowledge within ourselves even as we face the business of show telling us that we're not as important as the dollar.
Story_ID: 613659
Speaker 1: Also, what are your aspirations for the African American community in the future?
Speaker 2: In general?
Speaker 1: In general.
Speaker 2: I would like to see--you know, we're standing in this position now possibly having the first African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], which is amazing.  I would like to see us as a community re-find ourselves.  Having been a child born in '54 [1954], coming at the tail end of integration, being a recipient of--and I say coming at the tail end of segregation, being a recipient of integration, being that generation that went out there first in many cases, broke down the barriers that were prepared for us by the generation before, it seems that we as a community have fallen in a place where we aren't--well, we were leaderless for a long time, I'll put it that way.  We were leaderless for a long time.  We've got to, got to, got to find the center of who we are again.  We cannot let ourselves be defined by once again other people's interpretation of who we are and then believe in it ourselves.  It's dangerous.  We are not only rap and hip hop.  We are not only bling and so forth.  When people say the Cosby family couldn't--the Cosby--the Huxtables via 'Cosby' ['The Cosby Show'] could never have existed, you're like, "What are you talking about?"  There are doctors and lawyers and professional people in our community.  We've gotta stay guard about all of that.  We've gotta maintain who we are in the landscape because it's not just ours anymore.  We're not the only people fighting to get up.  There are other people out there who deserve to, to be at the table as well, so it's not the thing that it was where we were maybe the only disenfranchised group that was trying to get to the front of the line and be at the table.  There are other communities that are doing that now and they mean to get there.  So, we have to rethink how we join that endeavor.
Story_ID: 613660
Speaker 1: How does [HistoryMaker] Ken Page want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think I would--I know I would like to be remembered as someone who held--I don't wanna be too metaphoric and artistic, but, but held my banner high.  You know, I've really been through times where I really thought that my community did not see my efforts because I was in the theater and we tend to react more to recording artists, movie stars, TV stars.  Theater people like myself, Hinton Battle, Audra McDonald, I could name more, who are theater people for the most part.  I think we've all now done other things, but we don't get the support from our community--
Speaker 1: David Whitfield, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  And you can go down another list and name all the people that are TV movie stars who started in the theater, but they didn't get recognition until they moved into the other areas of the media.  And often times, we needed more then than we do later.  Later, everybody loves you.  You're on TV, you're a movie star, but when we need the support, we don't often get it and I think that's just maybe because we don't have the access to the theater that we could have, you know, blah blah blah blah.  But, it's an important thing.  I would like to be remembered as somebody who sort of went my own path, wasn't afraid to not be understood in that endeavor, and yet when I look behind me, I see a long line now of people who can walk a little easier and a little more steadfast because I went that path, you know.  And sometime the path was cleared in front of me from somebody ahead of me, a lot of the time there was a trunk of a tree in front of me that I had to chop down to get past the point.  But, I've always tried to do it with the knowledge that it was god given for me to do, that I was there to do that.  If I'm the only one in X, Y, Z plays or production, it's for me to be there so you can then be there, not just for my own edification, you know.  With 'Cats' [Andrew Lloyd Webber] I remember a lady came to interview me from a, a black newspaper in Baltimore [Maryland] and she said, "Can I ask you something off the record?"  She says, "Have you had a lot of coverage from the black community?"  I said, "No." I said, "I'm in here, Janet Hubert is here, Wendy Edmead, Ken Ard [Kenneth Ard].  There were like seven black performers in the original cast of 'Cats' and we were never dealt with by our community because it wasn't a black production."  And I think that's the sort of thing we have to not do.  We've gotta support us.  Wherever we are, we've gotta support each other.
Speaker 1: And it's safe to say that we need to expand our horizons.
Speaker 2: Expand our horizons.
Speaker 1: Broaden them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, broaden our horizons because we as a people have everything within our horizon, within our diaspora of artistic expression.  We have everything.  And if we don't claim it, somebody else claims it.  And if the time goes by that somebody seeps through and falls through the crack, we've lost that artist to claim as our own, and it's too--they are too valuable to do that.  Everybody matters and we need to be really mindful about that.  And I hope that one day when I'm mummy dust (laughter), you know, somebody will look at the body of my work and go, oh, he was always there.  He may not have been there like they thought he should've been there or they thought he should've been there, but he was right there.
Speaker 1: Mr. Page, we want to thank you for this interview, your time that you spent with us, and we really appreciate you and your insight in this interview.  It's been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My pleasure.
Speaker 1: --it's been very, very enlightening.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Speaker 1: Thank you, very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
