Story_ID: 55583
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ricardo Patton.  It's R-I-C-A-R-D-O, P-A-T-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's is June 18th, 2002.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we?
Speaker 2: We're in Boulder, Colorado, about 35 miles outside of Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the head men's basketball coach here at the University of Colorado.
Story_ID: 55584
Speaker 1: All right, I've got about five "People" magazine-ish-type questions I need to ask you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we really get into depth.  Sir, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, you know, I, I think the older I've gotten, the more I enjoy eating, and so I would say the type of food I enjoy most is seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would have to say probably black.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place that has great golf courses.  For the past seven years I've started golfing, and so now all vacations are based on the golf course and so any place that has nice golfing I would enjoy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I, I probably like the spring most.  I think the weather is starting to change, and it's not too hot like the summers can be.  So I, I would say the spring.  I'm not a cold weather person, even though I live in a place that's known for its weather, its cold weather, I'm really not a cold weather person.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It depends on the circumstance.  It depends on if I'm golfing and people normally will ask you your handicap, and my standard line is that we're all about the same.  And basketball wise, the players will probably say, you know, when they're struggling doing a drill or something or, or tired from running, I always say that you know this game's not for everybody.
Story_ID: 55585
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's, let--let's talk about your background.  Now, when were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in 1958, October 23rd, In Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Juanita Patton.  Although I was not raised by my mother, I'd--I was familiar with who she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your father?
Speaker 2: My father was Leroy Reed.  And because my father and mother were not married, I kept my mother's last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, what happened with your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother left both me and my sister when I was nine months old, and so she left my sister and I with my grandmother, my father's mother.  And I met my mother for the first time in 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did she explain what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, in--when I met her in '81 [1981], it was, as you can imagine, an awkward setting, to meet your mother for the first time.  I had finished college, had been out of college actually a couple of years.  And I was in California, in Los Angeles, playing in the California Summer League, trying to make it to the NBA [National Basketball Association], and I met my mother for the first time.  And she just basically said that she was young.  My father--I heard stories growing up that my father was abusive.  I heard that she left because my father wouldn't marry her, and so to really know, I'm, I'm not sure if I still really know all the circumstances, but I've accepted it and since have, have moved on.
Speaker 1: Have you all become close since or?
Speaker 2: No, actually, after meeting her in '81 [1981], I think she wrote one letter.  I wrote a letter back, and that's the last contact we've had.
Speaker 1: And now is her family from Nashville originally or--I mean--
Speaker 2: Her family is from Nashville originally and--but when she left to go to California--again, I was nine months old--it appeared that the entire Patton family--Patton side of the family--moved at the same time, because most of the Patton relatives that I am familiar with now all live in, in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your father's--what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Again, my father was Leroy Reed.  And I never lived with him.  Only relationship I had with my father was discipline.  If I had been bad in school, my grandmother would call him over, and he'd come and do his thing, and, and that was it.  That was basically the only relationship I had with him growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked for Metro Water Works and has recently retired from that after probably thirty-five years or so.
Story_ID: 55586
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your grandmother, your, your father's mother basically was your--
Speaker 2: She was my mother.  She raised, again, my sister and I, and so she is the one that I call ma--mom.  And she was the one that I, I still have a relationship with.
Speaker 1: Now what's her name?
Speaker 2: Augusta Reed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's--how do you spell the last name?
Speaker 2: R-E-E-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Augusta, just like Augusta National.
Speaker 1: Okay, golf references.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, so your--you and your sister were raised basically by your grandmother?
Speaker 2: We were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Small three-room house in East Nashville, very poor area, very drug-infested area, and--but there was, there was a lot of discipline in, in, in our home.  And my grandmother raised us in the church, and, and I'm thankful for that.
Speaker 1: So, but you'd, you'd see your father every now and then you said.
Speaker 2: I would, I would, I did.  He would come over occasionally and sit and tell tough guy stories, and, and--but other than that, we, we basically had no relationship as a father/son in my mind should have.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your, what was your grandmother like?
Speaker 2: Very devout Christian.  She's 90 or 91, and not an educated woman, worked extremely hard to take care of her, her children, and then having to raise her son's kids along the way.  She's just been a very strong figure in my life in terms of just the determination, and hard work, and the work ethic that she instilled in us years ago, and just an appreciation for, for the church.
Speaker 1: And what, what stories did she pass along, you know, from the Reed side of the family about how they got to Nashville or, or, or the history of the Reed family?
Speaker 2: You know, she just always talked about being from Veto, Alabama, and it was--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it's V-E-T-O.  And I've, I, I keep looking for it on the map, and I can't find it, but she always talked about being from Veto.  And we would go to--as she called it--the country every summer and see her brother and their kids.  And they lived in, in really a tough environment and--but we'd go there, and we'd get country ham quite often.  And that was a, that was a good experience, going to the country from time to time and, and seeing--
Speaker 1: In, in Alabama?
Speaker 2: In Alabama, yeah.  And--but they, they all moved to Tennessee.  And she cleaned house for a living.  And again, by the time I grew up and, and was in elementary school, she was already in, in, in probably her 60s, and so she's worked extremely hard her entire life.
Speaker 1: How was she able to keep track of, of you and--as an older woman.  I mean did she--it must have really taken a lot of effort I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, we had rules.  We had rules, and her rule was that when school was out, I came home.  And there were times when I wanted to go out and play or go to the community center with my friends and play basketball and--but I had to come home first and do my chores, and couldn't go until she said it was okay to go, unlike some of my friends who could go straight from, from, from school if they wanted to.  And so it was easy for her to keep track of me because she--you know, I knew that I needed to be home by the time she got there.
Story_ID: 55587
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you talked about church.  Can you, can you talk about your church experience and--
Speaker 2: You know, she--I have a tremendous faith in God.  I think he has guided my steps.  He has blessed me tremendously in terms of, of, of, of where I am now in my life.  I don't consider myself any smarter than the next guy.  I do believe that the good Lord has blessed me to, to have a mentality to try to outwork the next guy.  But years ago I put my faith in God because that was all we had.  That was all I had--I felt was a strong faith that the only way I could make it out of my circumstances was to, to, to trust in God and to put my faith in him.
Speaker 1: So what, what was the, what was the name of your church, and can you, can you tell me about maybe the role your grandmother played in church (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You know, we--the church we went to was--or attended--was Pilgrim Emmanuel Baptist Church.  And my grandmother I think to this day is, is probably the, the oldest member of Pilgrim Emmanuel and in Nashville.  And she was, was not very active in the church to, to speak of, but she was diligent in her attendance every Sunday.  And, and it was required of, of my sister and I to, to attend church every Sunday, and so it, it just laid the foundation I think for, for, for my life as it has unfolded.
Speaker 1: Was, was going to church an enjoyable experience for you as a youth?
Speaker 2: Early on I don't think it was because it wasn't popular with my friends.  You know my, my friends that lived next door, down the street, you know, they, they didn't have to go to church every Sunday.  And, and as a young kid then you didn't like to dress up and, and put on a suit and, and all of that, so it wasn't enjoyable early on.  But by the time I got to be thirteen or, or fourteen years old, and I had, had made a, a pact with God that if he would allow me to be successful in basketball that I would stay away from drugs, because I was, I was around a lot of drugs growing up.  And so at that point, after I had established what I call a personal relationship with God, church become--became--more enjoyable.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any special role to play in the church when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: You know, we tried to establish some, some little groups to sing, and so early on, I, I sang in, in--not in the choir--we had a kind of a little special youth group that we had formed and sung a couple of Sundays, and so I remember that with fond memories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I thought I could sing.
Story_ID: 55588
Speaker 1: Now, what about school and kind of just--maybe let me backtrack a little bit and just when you, when you think about your youth, what, what are some of the sights, and, and sounds, and smells in the neighborhood that you can remember?
Speaker 2: The sights, that--there were a lot of people in the neighborhood, I, I think probably too many for the size of the neighborhood.  Again, you had different flavors of, of, of everything taking place.  You had people who did a lot of drinking; you had people that did a lot of smoking; and again, it was drug infested.  Saturday nights were, were, were times when people had what they called nights of fun, and basically the older--the adults had a party basically, where they sold fish sandwiches and sold beer and, and that type of thing.  And the kids would all try to sneak around and, and get a fish sandwich and, and, and be around adults and watch them, and so that's a memory I have of, of the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 55589
Speaker 1: The school that I attended, the elementary school, Glen Elementary, was in walking distance, and so walking to school, playing on the playground.  My sister and I were along the same age.  She's only a, a year and a half older than me, and so for the most part, we were in some of the same classes in elementary school.  And so I have a lot of memories of, of tea--a couple of teachers that taught me at, at Glen Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Who, who are those teachers?
Speaker 1: You know, one of the teachers that just passed recently, Boo Lynch [ph.], was a special teacher to me; Dixie Hagey [ph.] in elementary, and Dixie Hagey challenged me to, to be more of a student.  One of the things I remember her saying to me was, "Ricardo, don't be afraid to show people how smart you are," and any time someone said that I was afraid, that challenged me to show them that I wasn't.  And so at that point, I started to excel in her class because she had challenged me not to be afraid to show people that, that I was a good student.  And so that was a fond memory.  And, and one of the things that I will always remember is when we went to the NCAA tournament here a few years ago, both of those teachers accompanied the team on that trip, and so that's a fond memory for me.
Speaker 2: Now, now the other, Boo--
Speaker 1: Boo Lynch.
Speaker 2: Boo Lynch, now what did he teach and when?
Speaker 1: Boo Lynch actually--these were two female teachers.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Boo Lynch, and, and again, she just recently passed with cancer, and she was the English teacher, the spelling teacher.  And Ms. Hagey I think was the, the math and history, because back then the, the elementary teachers taught an array of things.  They didn't just specifically teach one subject.
Speaker 2: Okay, they, they encouraged you--
Speaker 1: They encouraged me, and all along the way.  In elementary school, in junior high, and high school there was always one or two teachers who I looked up to and admired, that I think I learned a lot from.  One of the things I think that, that helped me as a, a young child was the fact that when adults said it, I believed it, unlike today's kids, who think oh, God, you know, you don't know, they don't know, they're too old to know and--but when adults spoke when I was growing up, I listened and I believed what they said.
Story_ID: 55590
Speaker 1: But were, were you looking for guidance when you were young?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think I was looking for guidance.  I think I was looking for love.  I think I was looking for just a different set of circumstances.  In high school, for example, I ended up running away at one point and living with a family on some half-brother's side.  And, and then my, my grandmother and father tried to get me back.  We had to go to juvenile court for that, and then the judge stated that no one actually had custody of me.  So I remember feeling at that point, God, I don't belong to anybody.  And so I think as a, as a young child, I was looking for a lot of different things but just something other than the circumstances that I was in.
Speaker 1: Were, were you angry?  Is that why you ran away, or, or what was the reason why you ran--
Speaker 2: Oh, at that point, I think I was in the tenth grade or eleventh grade, and I had gone to spend the night, which my grandmother would let me do occasionally, with some brothers, again, by my father, some, some half-brothers.  I'd gone to spend the night with them for the weekend, and when I got back, my grandmother said she didn't tell me I could go.  And so she called my father, and he came over and asked me what time I was coming home the next day because my grandmother had company, so he wasn't, wasn't gonna whip me in front of the company.  And so he wanted to know what time I was coming home from school the next day, and I told him.  And--but then that night I told my fa--my sister that I wasn't coming back; I wasn't coming home.  And so I called my step-grandmother and asked her could I come and live with her, and she said yes.  And at that point, I realized that my father wasn't a father, and I didn't think he had a right to, to continue to, to whip me.  And I felt like--and, and, and I remember thinking that my grandmother had told me, and maybe she had forgotten that I could go.  And so I just was--at that point I wasn't gonna take any more whippings from my father.
Speaker 1: So he was called in to be the disciplinarian--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --basically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, were these severe beatings or--
Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't call them beatings.  I wouldn't say it was--I certainly wouldn't term it child abuse, but you know, they were, they were tough whippings, I could tell you that.  And, and most of the time they were with belts or switches or you know.  But I don't think there's--that there's anything wrong with the whippings, if there's some love involved also.  But at that point in my life I just felt like there was no love countering the whippings, and so I just wasn't gonna take it anymore.
Speaker 1: So you, so you kind of felt that that kind of disqualified him from--
Speaker 2: I, I felt, I felt so.  I felt at that time that--and again, I think I was in the eleventh grade, and I had started to formulate some opinions about different things and different treatments at that point.
Speaker 1: So this, this experience in juvenile court, and I've read that you, that you, that you felt--and you just said that you felt that nobody really had custody of you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and when you found out nobody really--you, you wondered like where you really belonged, right?
Speaker 2: I did.  You know, and, and again, that it was a feeling of, God, I don't belong to anyone.  And so, because of that, my grandmother and father couldn't get me back, and so I was allowed to stay with the grandmother on the, on, on, on my brother's side and, and, and kind of bounced around from my grandmother's house to my brother's mother's house to an aunt's house.  And I was very quiet growing up, and, and they thought I was unhappy, and so they kept move--moving me around.  And I didn't know at the time, but they kept moving me around just to see if I would open up a little bit more.  And then one night I remember, in the twelfth grade, my grandmother and my father coming to get me.  And they were--there was a knock at the door late one night, and I was at the aunt's house at this point, and it was grandmother and my father coming to get me.  And I just remember crying and, and, and really being very fearful, fearful of what my father might do to me at that point and--but nothing happened.  And then right after that I went away to college, and so it was--you know, my relationship with my father, we, we didn't speak for a while.  But at least he didn't, he didn't show any type of anger for what I had done.  But my aunt had called them to come get me, again, because they thought I was unhappy.  And I wasn't unhappy.  I was just quiet, and I was just in thought a lot about my future because that's what all the, the teachers that I had admired had talked about, thinking about what are you gonna do in your life.  And so I, I thought about that a lot.
Story_ID: 55591
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of a young man were you really, you know, as a child?  Did you--I mean as a, as a child and as a youth?  Were you, you always quiet and sort of contained or?
Speaker 2: Around adults.  I was very respectful and very quiet around adults.  Certainly, when I got with my friends, you know, my own peers, I was as, as silly and as, as crazy as they were.  But I was always very cautious as to the type of activities that I engaged in, because, one, I, I had a fear of, of what my grandmother would do.  And she had instilled in me--she had said early on, "Son, if you go to jail, I'm not coming to get you.  I did that for your father.  I'm not doing it for you."  And so I believed her.  Again, it goes back to I believed the adults when-- when they said it, I believed it, and, and so consequently, I tried to stay out of trouble.
Story_ID: 55592
Speaker 1: Now, you all didn't have a lot of means coming up from what I understand.
Speaker 2: No, we had very little means.  My grandmother did the best she could.  My father, even though he bragged about the amount of money he made, he, he didn't do anything to, to assist his mother in, in raising his kids, and so that was always a sore spot with me.  But my grandmother didn't have very much to give us growing up.  And I remember most holidays, particularly Christmases, getting a pair of jeans, and jeans weren't the style back then, and they certainly weren't Jordache or any of the, the stylish jeans that the kids wear today.  But that's about all we got growing up.  And I remember going to my, my, my friend who lived next door's home and just seeing a bed full of clothes or a floor full of toys and, and just feeling like, boy, you know, we don't have anything.  And so it was a--those were always tough for me growing up, the holidays, because I couldn't look forward to, to anything.  And, and for a long time, even in my adult years, my early adult years, I found myself being sad or, or down a little bit during those times, and then I realized, you know, what it was about.  And I, I finally realized it once I had kids of my own and so.
Story_ID: 55593
Speaker 1: And did you have a lot of friends when you were--
Speaker 2: We had a--I had a lot of friends in terms of the, the--some of the kids in the neighborhood, some of the kids I went to school with, and certainly the guys that, that played basketball down at the community center.  I give Cleveland Community Center credit for helping keep me out of trouble.  I spent a lot of time there trying to work on my basketball game.
Speaker 1: Was there--were, were there any particular people down there that, that you could point, point to that--
Speaker 2: You know--Yeah, you know, there were some guys there, Mr. Mitchell, Hassel [ph.], Charles Watkins, those guys were who were, were older guys that I admired and looked up to that, that really tried to give the kids some guidance out of the neighborhood.  And, and I think that those guys did a terrific job just talking to us, getting on us, you know, if we were doing something that, that we shouldn't be doing, and so those guys were special.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you weren't--you're saying you weren't, you weren't depressed, but you, you, you were down sometimes because of this kind of uncertainty and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would--I, I wouldn't call it depressed.  Certainly, again, during holidays--during the holiday season, you know, I was a little down.  But for the most part, what occupied my every thought was, how am I going to escape this?  I wanted more than I saw around me, but I didn't wanna get it the wrong way; I wanted to get it the right way.  And so I was in search inside myself as to how all this was gonna take place.  And again, I don't believe that I could've attained this without the help of the Man of above, the good Lord.
Speaker 1: Now what did you aspire to become, you know, as a youth.  I mean what, what, what were your aspirations?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a professional basketball player.  That was my prayer to God.  God, if you'll allow me to be successful in basketball, I'll stay away from the drugs.  Now I meant I wanted to play in the NBA, but I guess I wasn't specific enough with God.  But if you think about it, He kept his promise; He's made me successful in basketball.  That was my prayer, to be successful in basketball, and that's what He's done.  And again, it, it--I didn't play in the NBA, but I had a great college career and had fun, and I'm having fun now.  This is, this is--basketball has, has always been a part of my life from, from early on, and I'm thankful that it still is.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what ballplayers did you idolize when you were--
Speaker 2: I was a Walt Frazier guy.  Walt Frazier was my guy and Earl the Pearl, and those were the two guys, my all-time favorites, and Jerry West.  I was always a Jerry West--and those guys that could shoot the basketball, I really, really liked.
Story_ID: 55594
Speaker 1: At age 16, now, now you had a job, right?  You, you had, you had several jobs in your youth, right?
Speaker 2: I've worked since I can remember.  My first job was at Pancake Pantry in South Nashville, and I caught the city bus to, to go to work.  There was no car in the family, so I caught the bus everywhere, even caught the city bus to go to high school and--but Pancake Pantry.  I worked at 7-Eleven.  7-Eleven actually was my first job out of college, with a degree.  I worked at the Hyatt Regency my senior year in high school.  I started out as a bus boy and did a terrific job in terms of getting the tables cleaned off quickly and was, was elevated to room service waiter, and that was a great experience.  You know, you get to go up, and I met a lot of what I call stars at that time, you know, carrying their trays up to the room, and so that was a great experience for me.  And I remember the, the, the guy that was over the, the Hyatt Regency, the general manager, staying on the top floor.  He had that whole top floor renovated, and that was his suite.  And that was something that I wanted in my life.  I thought, boy, that'd be pretty cool to live like that.  But it was a great experience working at the Hyatt Regency.  And so I've had a number of jobs all my life.
Story_ID: 55595
Speaker 1: Okay, now you also took up taekwondo too, right?
Speaker 2: I started practicing martial arts, Taekwondo, in the ninth grade.  And I'd come home every afternoon and watch the "Green Hornet" and fell in love with Bruce Lee at that point and had to start practicing martial arts.  And fortunately we had a Taekwondo school which was in walking distance, probably three or four miles, but that was, that was walking distance for me and was able to go to, to practice with Master Shin Young Kong.
Speaker 1: Now did--were you able to pay for this yourself or?
Speaker 2: You know, at the time, we had to sign a contract.  I had to sign a contract and I'm sure as a young kid.  I'm not familiar with all the legalities of contracts, and I just remember not paying and, and receiving a notice from a collection agency that I owed this money.  And my instructor never said anything to me.  I guess he had just kind of turned delinquent bills over to the collection agency, and they sent the letters.  But I finally ended up paying him later on, and he's still a very dear friend to me now, and he's still my instructor.
Speaker 1: What's his name again?
Speaker 2: Shin Young Kong, S-H-I-N, Y-O-U-N-G, K-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: And he's, he's a Korean, right?
Speaker 2: He is from Korea.  He is a ninth degree master, a grand master actually, and he's one of the few in the United States.  And he has really helped shape my attitude about a lot of different things and, and, and certainly I think my players now see some martial arts background in, in just kind of the way I, I do things and some of the philosophies I have about how we work.
Speaker 1: What, what, what's the most important part of that philosophy that you use in your basketball coaching?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--you know, the thing I remember most that my instructor said to me when I received my black belt was, to become a black belt means you should become a better person.  And that's one of the philosophies I've, I've tried to hold onto and pass along to, to my guys.  A few years ago here--a couple of years ago, the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] attacked me because we were having prayer on the court after practice, after games, and they thought that I was trying to force religion on the guys.  And, and I explained to them that by no means am I trying to force religion on any of my guys.  All I'm asking them to do is have a good heart and be a good person.  And I think that, that goes hand in hand with what my instructor said to me years ago: To become a black belt means you should become a better person.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--I like that, but do, do you think that there's a way that you could, you know, pass those values on outside of the context of prayer, you think or?
Speaker 2: I think certainly; I think just in the way that you conduct yourself.  I think that my players have to see the, the type of values that I'm preaching, they have to see them in me first, because I think they can, they can quickly identify someone that's being not true to, to what he's, what he's talking about or what he's preaching.  And so I think first they have to see those values being displayed by, by my actions, and if they do that, then, then I think they will believe that what I'm saying is something I truly believe in.
Story_ID: 55596
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I wanna take us--before we get you into college, we--I wanna go back, you know, to complete the high school experience.  You are working; you're taking Taekwondo; you're moving from home to home--this takes a lot of energy--plus you're a student in high school trying to--trying your best to get good grades and get out of school; and you're playing basketball too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I don't know what else you were doing.  You may have been doing some other athletic activities too, but, but playing basketball, you were a pretty good player too from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, so tell us about your basketball.  How did you manage to do all this.  I mean you had a lot of energy.
Speaker 2: I think, I, I think kids have a lot of energy, or at least particularly when you're hungry.  One of the things I believe is that I was very hungry growing up.  Again, I wanted more than I saw around me, and I was willing to do whatever it took.  And that's, that's, that's something I hold onto right now, is the fact that I don't think I'm any smarter than the next guy.  But I do believe I have a mentality of trying to outwork the next guy, and if I can pass that along to the people, the young people, I work with is, you know, there has to be something that separates you from the next guy.  I think we're all created equal, and if you believe that we're all created equal, then you're applying for that job or when you're trying to, to become successful, I don't think we can all do things in equal proportion.  I think in order to get ahead, you must be willing to do more than the next person.  And I think as a child, I established that a long time ago.
Story_ID: 55597
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us about your high school days.
Speaker 2: High school was, high school was fun.  Again, I had a good basketball experience.  I, I was doing the Taekwondo after school.  There was a shop teacher, and he has since passed, named J. T. Walker.  And I majored in printing in high school, and he was my shop teacher; he was my printing teacher.  And you know, I remember him telling me, you know, Ricardo, get the chip off your shoulder.  And, and, and at that point, I didn't realize that I was acting as though I had a chip on my shoulder.  I didn't believe I did.  But again, going back to the, the belief or, or, or the philosophy of, boy, if an adult said it, it must be true, I started to think about that: God, what did he mean by that?  Is that how I act?  Because that was something that in my mind was negative, for someone to walk around with a chip on their shoulder, and certainly I didn't wanna be perceived as having one.  And so I started to, to change after he said that.  And, and that was a good experience.  I have found memories of, of Mr. Walker in his shop class and, and guys hanging out.  And you know, he had a philosophy that if you didn't wanna learn printing that was fine, but don't disturb the ones that do.  And there were guys that didn't learn and, and those that did.  And then I didn't do--I wasn't one of the better students, but after I finished college and started working in television, I had to go back to Mr. Walker and get kind of a, a brush-up course on the things that I was supposed to learn when I was in high school on printing, because that was the job that got me into television, is running their, their printing operation there at the TV station.
Speaker 1: Now, now, Coach Patton, what did you, what did you do to change to get, get the chip off your shoulder?  I mean what, what did you--what were the things that you perceived that you had to do to actually change this perception that you had a chip on your shoulder?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I was pretty cocky and arrogant in high school, and I was, I was very confident.  I think that's one of the things that Taekwondo helped to promote, was confidence.  And, and so I think, in looking back now, I was probably pretty arrogant.  I don't know that I was a, a guy that everybody liked.  You know, my friends, of course, we all got along 'cause we were all probably acting the same way.  But I started to, to treat people a little bit differently, not to walk around like I was any better than anybody else or--I fought a lot in high school.  And you know, you go through about three phases when you start practicing martial arts.  The first phase is you just begin, begin practicing.  You're a little uncoordinated.  You're uncertain about what you're doing.  You don't have a lot of confidence in what you're trying to do.  The next phase, you've been practicing about a year, and you're feeling pretty good about yourself, so now you wanna see if it works.  And, and, and so you, you don't necessarily start a fight, but you don't do all you should do to avoid one.  Then the third phase that you go through is you realize you would hate to have to use what you've learned, because what you learned is, is, a different way of protecting yourself, and you just can't, can't just go around using it.  And so those are three phases that you go through.  And I think when I was in high school, because again, I had started in, in martial arts in, in, in junior high school, in the ninth grade, so by the time I got to high school, I'm feeling pretty good for the--pretty cocky about myself.  So I--you know, I was, I was a little arrogant, looking back.  But I, but I, but I tried to change by just making a conscious effort to treat people a little bit differently.  And again, I got my black belt my senior year in high school.  And so when--going back to what my, my instructor said: Become a good person; become a better person.  So I wanted to become a better person, because I looked up to my instructor, and he was a good person, and I wanted to emulate his actions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were the--I guess the--what things I guess happened that, that caused you to get into fights?  I mean what, what kind of pressure was on you?  I know, I know it was a pretty tough neighborhood.  You've already said that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, but it wasn't as many fights in the neighborhood, because everybody knew each other.  Most of the fights that I got into were, were in school.  In junior high school I got into a fight, or in the ninth grade I got into a fight, and this was self-defense.  My, my sister and I were in the same physical education class.  So the, the, the good basketball players were playing on the main court, and everybody else played on the stage - the non-basketball players, the girls, they all played on the stage.  And so I was playing and my sister had gotten in a fight with a guy on the stage in the gym class, and so I had to go up and protect her.  And then in high school just being cocky got me into some fights, you know.  It wasn't a whole lot, but, but they got me into some.  And then I remember fighting once - one of the football players had accused me of taking his girlfriend behind his back, and that kind of thing.  And so those were, were the extent of, of some of the fights and altercations I got into.
Story_ID: 55598
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you got to--you, you went to Fogg High School.
Speaker 2: Hume Fogg.
Speaker 1: Hume Fogg High School in Nashville when--Yeah, he's--
Speaker 2: H-U-M-E, F-O-G-G.  It's in downtown Nashville on Broadway.  And, and right now, you know, if I say Hume Fogg back home--I say I went to Hume Fogg, it's, it's one of the magnet schools now, so all of the bright kids go there now.  And so I say oh, yeah, I went to Hume Fogg, but it was a vo-tech school when I went.  But it was still a good school, a lot of quality people there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you went to Hume Fogg as a freshman, were you already known as a basketball player or someone with the potential?
Speaker 2: I was, I was.  And actually, one of the reasons I chose Hume Fogg was the fact that I had some uncles-- again, on my brother's side--that had played there and had set all kind of basketball records, and I really wanted to follow in their footsteps.  And Freddie Petway and Raymond Petway, and Gail Gillespie, those guys had really just destroyed the record books at Hume Fogg.  And that was the reason really that I chose Hume Fogg.
Speaker 1: So did the coach know you already?
Speaker 2: The coach knew me from, from my junior high school days and Coach Roger Baker, and he and I are still very, very close to this day.  As a matter of fact, he spent some time with me here in Colorado for, for about three weeks, he and his wife.  And he and I have really grown to be very special friends, and he's a guy that I always admired.  And what's ironic about my admiration for him in high school was the fact that he kept his fingernails so clean and that he seemed to be a, a man that could talk about any subject.  And I, I, I marveled at his, his intelligence back then.  And where some of the other players and friends of mine thought that he was kind of nerdy or, or, or uncool, I just kind of looked up and admired him, and I'm glad I did.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the highlights of some of your basketball days at Hume Fogg High School?
Speaker 2: I guess, you know, we had great rivalries with North, who had tremendous athletes there, North High School and East High School and, and some of those.  And, and so I guess leading my team in scoring, I was the only player on my high school team to get a college scholarship.  That was exciting for me because I had already made plans to go to the Air Force.  I had an uncle that I really admired who was a career guy in the Air Force.  And I had already made plans, didn't know if I was gonna get a scholarship or not, and--but you know, averaging about 19 points a game in high school, being seeing your name in the paper, you know, on a weekly basis, and being regarded as one of the better players in, in, in your city is, is, is rewarding, going to the community center to play, and, and other kids knowing your name and wanting you to be on their team, so those were experiences that I remember about high school.
Story_ID: 55599
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, you say you got a scholarship, right?
Speaker 2: I would--
Speaker 1: Did you have many offers or, or was it one offer?
Speaker 2: I had one offer and it was to--actually, the, the, the head basketball coach at Vanderbilt University wanted to send me to a junior college for a couple of years.  And he contacted a friend of his in Decatur, Alabama, John C. Calhoun Community College, and Bob Shuttleworth was the coach.  And so I went there for two years and played for him, and I had a great, great time.  He, too, was a guy that helped me grow up.  He told me after my freshman year going home for Christmas break, you know Ricardo, if you don't come back with a better attitude, just don't come back.  And so--
Speaker 1: What, what was the attitude problem that you--
Speaker 2: Just a, a cockiness, just an arrogance, just--but it was also a confidence.  It was a confidence that, in, in thinking back, I needed, I needed that.  And, and maybe it was a de--a disguise from my childhood.  I don't know, but I do believe that, that having a degree of confidence can be good if it's pointing in, in the right direction.  But he was a man that, again, I contribute with helping me grow up, because that was a shocker for me.  I was starting.  We were ranked 17th in the nation as a junior college.  We had a great team.  I was a freshman playing well.  And for this man to say to me, change my attitude, well, I thought my attitude was okay, but apparently it wasn't.  So I remember driving home to Nashville over the Christmas break thinking, boy, I'd better straighten up and change.  And that's what has changed today.  I never told my grandmother that story 'cause I knew what she would have said.  She would have just said, boy, you'd better straighten up and do what that man says.  And so I never told her, but I changed and I'm thankful that I did.
Story_ID: 55600
Speaker 1: Okay, so after your junior college career, what, what happened next?
Speaker 2: I went back to--I actually signed with Georgia College in Milledgeville, Georgia.  And I was working at--there was--God, I can't think of the name of the place I worked for the summer.  It was one of the--oh, Morris Rent-All; that's what it was, Morris Rent-All.  And so I was delivering things for, for Morris Rent-All that summer.  And after work, I'd go over to Belmont College in Nashville and play.  And they had just hired a new coach, Don Purdy.  And I'd met him and he would come up and see us play or look over the, the, the banister and watch us play every afternoon.  And so one day he introduced himself and told me who he was and asked that if, if I would come over and play when he had recruits in town, and I said sure.  So I started to, to come over and play every day, and he'd call from time to time.  And then he, he wanted to know if I would consider coming back home to go to college.  And he gave me that story about being a, a big fish in a little pond, being back home where you family can have a chance to see you play and, and all that.  And, and that was appealing to me at the time, and so I, I stayed and went to Belmont College.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what kind of a school is Belmont College?
Speaker 2: Excuse me, Bel--Belmont is basically one of the, the top music business schools in the country.  It's, it is a church-oriented college.  It, it's a Baptist school.  It's about 3,000 students.  And at that time, it was NAIA program.  They weren't division one, which they are now, but it was a great experience for me.  It was an awakening asper--experience for me, because even though they called themselves Christian, I questioned one of the professors in one of the classes about the lack of diversity that the university had.  And his answer to me was, well, I don't think that it's because the students don't want black professors.  I don't think that it's because the other professors don't wanna work with other black professors.  He says it's because of the donors.  I don't think that the donors want many black professors here.  And so my response to that was, but you call yourselves Christians.  And so that was an experience that I remember, and this was a professor that I really liked, and admired, and respected, and so I felt very comfortable in having that type of discussion with him.
Story_ID: 55601
Speaker 1: Were you, were you the only black player on the basketball team or?
Speaker 2: We actually had a team of probably five or six black players.  My question was why weren't there any black professors at the university, and that was his answer.  But there was probably five or six black players on the team, and the black players--and, and we had some, some runners from Africa back then.  But there was--it was a very, very small group of blacks that attended Belmont at that time, and, and this was in '78 [1978], '70--'79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was your experience like there?  Was it--did you have a pretty good experience at Belmont?
Speaker 2: I did, particularly the first year I was there.  I was really playing well.  I had made small college All-American and leading the team in scoring and all that.  But my senior year I ended up not getting along with the, the coach at one point and quitting the basketball team.  I actually walked off the floor in the middle of a basketball game.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?  You gotta tell this story.  What, what happened?
Speaker 2: What happened was I felt and--I felt that because we had recruited some other players, that I wasn't being utilized the way I had been my junior year, and just felt like the coach had changed his philosophy in terms of how I was trying to play.  And you have to keep in mind, my senior year I'm trying to make it to the NBA.  And so my numbers weren't the same, and I just really became very frustrated.  And now, after being a coach, I understand what kids go through when they think they're being mistreated or when they think they should be playing more than, than they're playing or--so I understand a little bit better now, after, after having been, been a coach now.  But back then, of course, I'm just a, a kid trying to make it.  And so I actually--it was a game that the coach had, had pulled me a few times for certain shots.  And at one point, I just said look, if--you know, the horn blew, and I said--I'm saying to myself as I'm walking across the floor to the bench, if I go over there, I know I'm gonna go off.  I know I'm gonna have some words with the coach.  And so rather than go to the bench, I made a u-turn and went straight to the locker room.  And--
Speaker 1: This is after the game?
Speaker 2: This is during the game, during the game.  And I was married at the time.  I got married my senior year in high school--I'm sorry--my senior year in college.  And so I went in, and it was right before half-time.  And so after I had gotten out of the shower, the team came in and the coach says to me, he says, Coach Purdy said: "So you're gonna call it quits?  You're gonna go out this way, huh?  Well, get on out."  And so we had some words and--but I left.  And right before I pulled out of the parking lot, the women's basketball coach, Betty Wiseman, for no apparent reason, other than she cared, came out to the car and said: "Ricardo, you cannot go out that way."  She said, "That's all people will remember about you."  She said, "You've worked too hard to get this far.  Whatever you have to do to get back on that team, you do."  And so I hung around, and again, going back to when adults said it, I believed it.  And so I hung around that night and begged for forgiveness to get back on the team, and the coach allowed me to get back on the team.  And so, you know, our relationship was never the same.  The first game back, though, he told me I had to miss Homecoming, which was that Saturday.  And it was against Carson-Newman up in Jefferson County, Tennessee, and we got beat by one point.  And then we had a quick turnaround.  The next week we were playing Carson-Newman at their place, and I played.  That was my first game back, and I scored 34 points and we beat them by one at their place.  And so that for me was, was rewarding, that I'd--I, I felt like, you know, I am as good as I, I think I am, and this team does need me.  But my relationship with the coach probably was never the same again, but since then, we've, we've, we've become pretty good buddies.
Story_ID: 55602
Speaker 1: So you, you, you played two guard, right--off guard or shooting guard?
Speaker 2: I played one and two.  I was what they call today a combo guard, and--but primarily I was a two guard because I did a lot of shooting.  If our point guard was having problems bringing it up, then I would swing to the points (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you're a good ball handler?
Speaker 2: I could handle the ball, and, and, and as I tell my players, I wasn't a great ball handler, but you couldn't take my ball, and because I had too much pride in, in la--in, in--to allow someone to just take my, my rock, as we called it.  But I was, I was a solid ball handler.  I wasn't a great ball handler by any means, but I was a good shooter.
Speaker 1: You get a lot of shots during (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I got a lot of shots.  As a matter of fact, my, my staff now tease me.  They, they, they sent off for a media guide, and in the records I had--I am the second leading field goal attempter in a season.  So they tease me about, God, you know, out of all the guys that, that played there, I have the second most attempts in any season.
Story_ID: 55603
Speaker 1: Now, now, you, you--when you finish out your senior year at Belmont, are you feeling pretty good?  I mean you and the coach kind of have this problem, but you--are you, are you feeling pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're okay by, by this, by this time.  And now, I just remember thinking to myself, it's over.  Are you kidding me?  I can't believe--I mean I'm just now learning how to play.  I'm just now feeling pretty good.  I couldn't believe that college was over.  So now you're stuck with this, this, this mindset of what do I do now?  And so going back to my high school days where I felt like I was gonna go to the Air Force because of an uncle that I had, now I think I'm gonna go to the Navy because they were looking officers; they were looking for, for, for graduates to go into OCS, Officer Candidate School.  And so a friend of mine, Charlie Johnson, who played baseball, we had talked about being pilots.  And so we were gonna go to the Navy, but I was married at the time.  And I went to a few NBA camps, had an op--opportunity to go to, to Europe to play, but again, I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna do that, not with a wife.  And so I got a job at 7-Eleven and worked there for about six months.  And then I landed a job at, at the TV station.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you meet your wife on campus or was she a student there at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I met my wife actually in high school, and I was a senior in high school.  And I have always probably ran more with older guys and girls than, than, than younger.  And when I was a senior in high school, my wife was a senior in college, and that's when we met.  And so we dated a little bit that summer, then I was go--I went away to junior college for two years.  We had no contact.  And then when I came back, a friend of--a mutual friend said that hey, Jennifer says, why don't you give her a call?  So I called her in Memphis.  She was back home in Memphis, Tennessee, teaching.  And I called her and went to see her.  And so we dated my junior year and got married my senior year.
Story_ID: 55604
Speaker 1: --you said you, you--after Belmont College, you had tried to decide what you were gonna do.  And you had aspirations of playing in the NBA.  And--but you played two, two guard, and you'd be a, like a small two guard--
Speaker 2: I'd be a small two guard.
Speaker 1: You're--what are you about six feet?
Speaker 2: Six one and half.
Speaker 1: Six one and a half.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, and some of the most successful two guards are big--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are.
Speaker 1: --guys.  So, so you, you had--you talked about becoming a pilot with your friend.
Speaker 2: Going to the Navy.  We--
Speaker 1: Navy.
Speaker 2: Again, there was a Navy recruiter that came and, and talked to a lot of the, the, the senior students, the graduates, about OCS, Officer Candidate School.  And I just thought that that was something--I wanted, I wanted--I've always been fascinated with the military, and you know, I think it stems from, from my relationship with my uncle and his, his military experience.  And, and so we, we went and took the test to get in, into the Navy.  And actually, Charlie Johnson ended up going to the, to the military and, and I didn't because I got the job at a television station.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went from 7-Eleven to the television station, right?
Speaker 2: 7-Eleven to the television station.  And I started out as a printer, did all the in-house printing for the CBS affiliate there in Nashville [Tennessee], and did that for five--and then I moved on to become a studio cameraman and did the, the news shows.  And I was basically an in-house photographer, did both newscasts, the talk shows, and, and did some commercial spots and--but very rarely did I go out in the field, except on, on, on a few occasions.  But that was a great experience for me, but I still had a, a burning desire to, to do something more, to--I, I saw people at the television station who were--had been there a long time that had reached their ceiling in terms of, of where they could go from, from, from where they were, and, and that's not what I wanted.  I, I, I--again, I wanted more than I saw around me, and so I went back to school.  I, I used to go out and stop at a restaurant every night after the 10:00 News with the sports guy, Bill Swanbeck, who actually lives in Chicago [Illinois] now, and, and would talk about my dream of, of coaching basketball.  And he convinced me to go back to school to get certified to teach, and that's what I did.  So I, I worked at the television station in the afternoon, did my student teaching during the mornings, and was able to get my certifi--certification to teach.  So I taught one year at a middle school, taught health and science, volunteered to help the basketball coach.  The next year I got to the high school level, Hillwood High School, as an assistant basketball coach.  And then the very next year I'm at Middle Tennessee State University in Murfreesboro, Tennessee.  And we had a great team there and went to the NCAA tournament, beat Florida State first round in NCAA tournament when they was ranked number four in the country.  And so stayed at Middle Tennessee State for a couple of years, and that's how I got to the collegiate level.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's something.  Now you got a Masters degree in 1980 [1989] from Trevecca Nazarene [University]?
Speaker 2: I've--that's in Nashville, Tennessee.  That was also in the same conference with Belmont [College] and David Lipscomb [Lipscomb University] and those schools.  But I did get my Masters in guidance and counseling.  I'm--was it guidance and counseling?  No, it's not guidance--I got my--that's what my wife has her masters in.  My Masters is in administration and supervision.  I thought that if I stayed at the high school level, someday I might wanna be a principal, and so I, I thought that that would be a good area for me to study in terms of getting my Masters.
Speaker 1: And, and what's the name of that school again?
Speaker 2: Trevecca Nazarene College.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: T-R-E-V-E-C-C-A.
Story_ID: 55605
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you, you eventually coach at [University of] Arkansas-Little Rock, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I stayed at Middle Tennessee State [University] for two years, and then I left and went to [University of] Arkansas-Little Rock for one year and worked for a guy who had been an assistant at DePaul [University] for six years, Jim Platt, and he worked for Joey Meyer.  He and [Jim] Molinari were assistants together.  And so I, I got on with Jim Platt at [University of] Arkansas for one year.  I only stayed one year and, and then went back to Tennessee and worked at Tennessee State [University] for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: That's in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: That's in Nashville [Tennessee]--and worked for Frankie Allen there, and we turned that program around, a program that had been dormant for forever, once they had become Division I now back in--before they were Division I, they had a lot of great teams, a lot of great players.  Dick Skull Barnett went to Tennessee State [University]; [Ed] Too Tall Jones went to Tennessee State; Leonard Truck Robinson--and, and so they had some tradition years ago.  But once they had become Division I, they had not done any winning.  And so I'm very proud of the fact that working with Frankie Allen we were able to turn that program around and go to the NCAA tournament back-to-back years.
Speaker 1: Well, that's impressive, you know, because I know Tennessee State's a small school.
Speaker 2: It's a small school.
Speaker 1: All-black school--
Speaker 2: Predominantly black school.  And again, it's in Ohio Valley conference and, and teams like Middle Tennessee State [University] and, and Murray State  [University] had dominated that league.  And so it, it, it was a tremendous feat for us to go there and, and, and beat the likes of those schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you come to Colorado?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was at that point, after being in Middle Tennessee State [University] two years, [University of] Arkansas-Little Rock one year, Tennessee State two years, every place that I had, had been we had one.  And, and I had developed somewhat of reputation of being a good recruiter, being able to get players at different places.  And so I met--I was involved with the [University of] Colorado job and also the Auburn [University] job, job.  There was a coach who, again, has recently passed, Tommy Joe Eagles, who was at Auburn [University], and he was talking to me about he had an assistant's position open.  And once I flew out here to Colorado and met with Joe Harrington, the basketball coach, and athletic director, Bill Morote, I just thought that this was a, a great challenge.  They had not won in basketball.  And I asked myself, what will people use against me in recruiting, because of--recruiting is the life blood of your program.  And I just thought, well, they can't say anything about the conference.  We were then in the Big Eight, but it was a terrific conference.  They couldn't say anything about the facilities.  Our facilities are as, as quality as, as, as any.  They couldn't say anything about the beauty or the aesthetics of the area.  I think it's a, a very beautiful area.  They couldn't say anything about us academically.  I think academically we're second to none.  The only thing people would be able to use against us in recruiting was that we hadn't won.  And I thought that I would be able to convince good players to come and take a chance on doing something that had not been done in a very long time.  And so I thought we could overcome that aspect of recruiting, and so I chose to come to Colorado.
Story_ID: 55606
Speaker 1: So what's your recruiting technique?  I mean how, how do you convince a player to come to play for you?
Speaker 2: I, I think one of the things that has, has helped me is I think my background has helped me.  I think my background has helped me to be able to go into a lot of different homes and, and make not only the player, but the player's parents feel comfortable about me, about who I am as a man.  I don't hide the fact of--I don't hide my background from anyone.  I think, I think sometimes kids see adults as, as, as people who have never had struggles, and so they don't see you really in a real light.  And I think that the players I recruit and, and the parents of those parents see me as a real person.  They know my struggles; they know what, what path I took to get to this point in my life.  And I think, quite frankly, some of the parents would like to see their kids emulate some of the, the decisions and steps that I've made in my life, and I think that's helped.03:10:00:14
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of a kid do you look for?
Speaker 2: I look for a quality person.  I've often said I don't think that you can be a loser off the floor and then all of a sudden hit the court and become a winner.  I think you've gotta be a winner off the floor.  You know, I have--I've been termed as, as being a disciplinarian, and basically I have three rules - one is be a good person; treat people like you wanna be treated; and be willing to work extremely hard.  Those are the only rules I have.  Other than that, I like to laugh, and have fun, and tell jokes.  I like to play spades, cards, you know.  I do a lot of fun things with my guys, but for whatever reason, I've been termed a disci--disciplinarian.  But those are the thing that I believe are very important in order to be successful, not just in basketball, but in life, because the game of life will be played a lot longer than this game of basketball will be played.  And so that helps me to, to, to stay grounded and teach the guys what I think they need to be taught.
Story_ID: 55607
Speaker 1: Now you have a favorite thing you do with the deflated basketball.  Could you show us this at this time?  I think it's a, this is (unclear).
Speaker 2: You know, one of the things I do is, is--when I'm speaking to, to high school groups or camp groups, or even my team--I did this at my team banquet--you know, your basketball transition goes through about three or four different stages.  You know, you start out, you've got that, that basketball you're playing with, and it may be a camp ball.  Then the next ball you play with may be a, a college NCAA basketball.  And if you're fortunate enough, you may have a chance to play in Europe or play in the NBA, and so you've, you've had three different balls to come along in your life.  But then that fourth ball that we all will have at some point will be this deflated basketball.  At some point all of our basketballs will look like this.  They'll be worn and tattered; they won't have any bounce left; and they won't shoot very well.  And so at that point you have to rely on your education.  And I think that's very important that, that, that young people understand that that will--they will live most of their life without the basketball than they do with the basketball.  And your education has got to be important to you. When I go into a home, I talk about that there will three things that will take place when you come to college - one, you're gonna entertain fans; you as a player, you're gonna entertain fans.  And by you entertaining fans, the second thing that's gonna happen is we're gonna win, and guess what?  Coaches will be compensated; coach is gonna get paid.  The third thing that must take place is you must leave there with a degree.  Because if you don't leave there with a degree, then those other two things happen and you didn't get a piece of what you actually should have gotten.  And I think that parents, parents can see that.  I think young kids can see that, and, and that's being real with them.  Coach is gonna get paid when they win; we know that.  Fans are gonna clap, and they're gonna enjoy watching you play.  So the fans are gonna get theirs; the coach is gonna get theirs; as a young student athlete, you must get yours, and that's your degree.
Speaker 1: So what's your record been in terms of graduation here at Colorado?  Did you have a pret--pretty good record?
Speaker 2: You know 85 percent, and this is since I've taken over in the past six years.  Eighty-five percent of all the players that have finished their eligibility or are in the process of finishing, finishing their eligibility are on track or have received their degree.  So I'm, I'm very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Well, that's astounding really in, in, Division I basketball.  It's, it's maybe sad to say that that's astounding, but it is; it's, it's a good record.
Speaker 2: You know, well, one of the things I think that, that has happened is the fact that, that one, my guys know that I won't tolerate them not going to class.  I won't tolerate them not doing anything that, that I think is gonna hinder their success.  And again, when they know, when, when, when athletes know that it's important to the coach, I think they're gonna do a little bit better.  And then the other piece of it is those guys that aren't interested in, in, in getting a degree, those guys that aren't interested in going to class, that just wanna come to school and play basketball and get by, they're not gonna come play for me.  Because when I go in their home and I'm talking about the things I'm talking about, they're not interested.  They're not interested in trying to outwork someone.  They're not interested in being a quality person.  They're not interested in their education.  They're just in--interested in basketball.  So if they're not interested in those things, they're not interested in playing for me.  And so, although I would have to give most of the credit to my guys graduating to those guys, they come here wanting to graduate, because I do believe that those who want it get it.
Story_ID: 55608
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's backtrack a little bit back to when you came here, you were an assistant coach.  And you said your strength was your--well, one of your strengths was your recruiting technique and your rapport with people.  A lot, lot of basketball players don't come from priv--privileged backgrounds.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you were able to relate to them.  So how did you become the, the head coach?  Could you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that happened, I worked here two and a half years as an assistant coach for Joe Harrington, and he resigned with six games remaining.  And I was actually in Memphis, Tennessee, recruiting, and--one of the top players in the country at that point, a kid by the name of Will Smith, who we ended up getting.  But the athletic director, Bill Morote called me off the road and said I needed to get back, and he, he gave me the job on an interim basis, the last six games.  And after the season, we went to the Big Eight Conference tournament, and right after the first game, he named me permanent head coach.  And so that's how it all kind of transpired.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it a pretty easy transition to head coach?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it was an easy transition from the standpoint I didn't have to change my personality.  You know, sometimes assistants, I've noticed, try to be the, the student athletes' buddy or friend or guy more so than his coach.  I always wanted to be the guys' coach.  If we became friends in the process, so be it, and if we didn't, so be it.  That was always my philosophy.  I was always talking about working hard.  I was always talking about doing the right thing.  The same things I was saying as an assistant were the same things that I wanted as a head coach.  So I didn't have to make this, this total transformation of my personality, so I think that made the transition a lot easier.
Speaker 1: Now was this a surprise to you that you were offered this position, and did you dream that you would be the head coach of this school like [University of] Colorado?
Speaker 2: I thought--you know, I haven't put any, or I hadn't at that time put any ceiling or I didn't have any preconceived ideas of where I would be or what I would be doing.  What I had said was I wanted to be successful, and certainly success is defined, you know, by different people in different ways.  But I wanted to be financially secure.  That was one of the measuring sticks for, for, for me being successful.  I wanted to be able to, to, to provide for my family a lot better than, than, than my grandmother could for me.  And I wanted to be respected, and I wanted to be regarded as, as someone that worked hard, and someone that was a good person.  And so those were, were some of the, the measuring sticks for my success.  So it didn't surprise me.  I wasn't surprised.  I wasn't in awe that this happened.  And in going back to my one belief, my one faith, I knew God had a plan.  I thought that He had directed my steps.  I thought that He had, had, had blessed my decisions.  And when I came here to Colorado, I thought that it was a step on faith.  I stepped out on faith to come here.  I knew nothing about Colorado, not the university; I knew nothing about the state of Colorado, so I had to step out on faith.  I had to move my family all the way out here, and they had to trust.  They had to trust me, and I had to trust someone, so I put my trust in God.  And so when, when it all happened, it wasn't a great surprise to me.  I knew or felt that He had a plan.
Story_ID: 55609
Speaker 1: Now has the community been receptive to you, and how have you found the community response to as, as head coach been--you know, are you comfortable?
Speaker 2: I think, I think, I think the majority of the community have, have, have been very receptive to me being here.  Certainly, after the interim tag was removed and, and us going to the NCAA tournament for the first time in twenty-nine years, and, and beating Indiana the first round of the NCAA tournament, and, and losing to North Carolina the second round, I think there was a lot of, of, of positive feelings about me and about the university.  We lost a great player, and we lost four seniors after that run.  And so getting back to the tournament has been a little tough.  But at this point, I'm still the third all-time winningest coach at the University of Colorado.  And so that's, that's an achievement that, that I think some people here have an appreciation for.  But, but they've been receptive.  But I've had some of the same calls that, that I'm sure a lot of black coaches have received.  I've, I've had some of the, the hate messages left on my voicemail and, and all that, but you deal with it.  And, and my wife recently gave me a tape about not focusing on, on just the black dot, and the black dot being the negative.  You know, there are a lot of other dots out there that we ought, that we ought to focus on that are positive and not just always focusing on that one black negative dot.
Story_ID: 55610
Speaker 1: It's interesting, yesterday we were in a cab, and the cabdriver--we mentioned that we were coming here.  And the cabdriver, you know, spoke about you in, in glowing terms.  He said you were a real disciplinarian, like a general. And that was his--
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: --you know, the cabdriver.  And I, I was like--you know, I was impressed by that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it's--I've, I've been referred to as a general from time to time and, and again, as a disciplinarian.  And I guess my critics would say that I'm not an easy person to meet sometimes.  I'm just a very focused person.  I am very focused.  I still have a, a great deal of work that I feel like I need to do.  We had a sports psychologist to, to come in and, and visit with the team.  That's become kind of popular around college campuses now, so we had one to come in last, last year to talk to our group and, and him talking to me, and, and me talking about how I grew up.  He asked me, he said, do you think it's time you let the little boy go, talking about, you know, the little boy that helped me get to this point in my life.  You know, his, his deal was, you know, you've made it, you know.  You think it's time to let the little boy go?  So, initially, I thought, you know, maybe he's got a point; maybe he's right.  But then a few hours later, I said to myself--I'm sitting down and I'm thinking about those words, and I'm--and I thought, you know, I'm not ready to let the little boy go.  The little boy helped me get to this point in my life, and I'm not done yet; I'm not finished, so I don't wanna let the little boy go.
Speaker 1: By the little boy, is he talking about the hunger and the drive and the--
Speaker 2: The hunger, the drive, the determination, the, the attitude of not depending on anyone else.  You know, I remember as a, as a, as a young child, probably twelve or thirteen years old, I always wanted a bicycle.  You know, it seemed like everybody in the neighborhood had one, and I always wanted one.  And my father had promised me one, one time, and of course he nev--he never got it.  And so I was on the back porch crying, and a cousin, an older guy, who I admired and looked up to who had actually married into the family, you know, talked to me.  And he said you know--they called me Ricky; I grew up on Ricky not Ricardo.  But he said, "Ricky, don't ever let anybody make you cry.  Don't ever depend on anybody to do anything for you.  You do it yourself."  Those words stuck.  So for a long time I never cried.  And I grew up with that mentality of not depending on anybody to do anything for me.  And so I've been criticized a little bit now, even in this position, about, you know, there are some people that wanna do some things for you, but they don't know how to get in.  And I don't, I don't condone that.  I'm not a very trusting person initially.  I think I have to get to know people.  I, I genuinely care, care about people though.  I think that's, that's something I'm, I'm, I'm very proud of is that I do care about people, all people, regardless of race, color, whatever, backgrounds.  I think if we all took the time to just, just care about one another, I think it'd be a, a much better world.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you think that people really see that quality in you?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think they see it until they get to know me.  And I'm not--I, I don't have to have center stage.  I don't go out in the community and, and ask for center stage.  I, I, I am just as content being in the background letting someone else do the talking.  Once I get to talking, I can talk I think.  But, so until you get to know me, I, I, I don't know that people really know what I'm about or who I am.
Story_ID: 55611
Speaker 1: Now I know you're, you're--have a reputation as an intense coach.  And when you--what, what are some of the techniques that you use to get your team ready for a game?  I know I was reading about--I think the first time you all played the University of Kansas you kind of locked them in or something, right?
Speaker 2: Well, well, you know, one of the things we did was I was looking--I was tossing and turning.  This was my first game as an interim coach and it's against Kansas, the number four team in the country.  They're coming here, and it's gonna be a packed house.  So I'm tossing and turning the night before, thinking of how can I motivate these guys to come out and lay it on the line, give all they have and because at that point they hadn't done that yet.  And so I finally came up with, you know, I think we ought to just sleep in the gym.  Until we learn to protect our home court, we ought to just sleep in it.  So then I'm tossing a little bit longer, and I'm thinking, well, we can't do that.  So I wake up the next morning and I still have this deal about, you know, we ought to just sleep in the gym until we learn to protect it.  So I, I, I, I talk to the athletic director about it.  And, and I said, you know, the one thing I don't want it to be--become is a gimmick.  I don't want the media to get a hold of it, because I don't want it to appear like it's a gimmick.  This is something I truly believe in, and a lot of that stems from a martial arts background, the discipline that it teaches.  So he said, "Ricardo, if you wanna do it, you can do it."  So I called the local hotel.  It was--it's a Ramada now.  It was a Holiday Inn.  I called them and got some rollaway beds, and so we, we camped out.  We came to, to, to the girls' game that night.  We went to the girls' game, watched them play for a half.  Then we went in our locker room and watched the movie "Glory," and, and then we camped out that night.  And we lost by one or two points to the number four team in the country.  And I think the fans realized that things were gonna change, and they did change.
Speaker 1: But did the players live up to your expectations?
Speaker 2: They did, and that was the same group--that year was a struggle.  Again, we only had six games, and I think we won probably--probably went five hundred in those games.  But that was better than they had, had been, 'cause we finished the year nine and eighteen.  And again, I, I coached the last six games, and we won three of those.  But the following year that same group took us to the NCAA tournament.
Speaker 1: And that's the year you, you had Chauncey Billups.
Speaker 2: Chauncey Billups; had another McDonald's All-American by the name of Martice Moore, who had transferred in from Georgia Tech, who had been a freshman a year in ACC [Atlantic Coast Conference] a few years before.  And so, and then we had four other seniors that were quality reserve players for us.  And so they did; they lived up to the expectations.  We worked extremely hard.  There was some discipline in the program, and it was a good group to coach.
Story_ID: 55612
Speaker 1: And what do you work on as--I mean what's your coaching philosophy in terms of strategy?  I mean what, what, what's your strategy as a basketball coach?  Now some, some people are more offensive oriented, some defensive oriented.  What, what, what's your strategy?
Speaker 2: You know, it, it's actually changed over the years.  It keeps going back and forth a little bit.  I think you have to be sound defensively, but you must be able to put a basketball in the hole.  I don't care how good you are defensively, at some point you gotta score.  You know, we went through a season after Chauncey Billups and that group--Fred Edmonds and, and, and Martice [Moore], right after that group left, the very next year we went through a group that I thought was really gonna be good, because we could defend; we were really good defensively.  But what I found out, we couldn't score, and so we finished I think thirteen and thirteen that year because we just couldn't--we could defend with anybody, but we couldn't put the ball in the basket.  And the very next year, we go out and we sign guys that could put the ball in the basket, we couldn't defend, okay.  And so we go I think 15--no, we'd win eighteen games that year at least; we would go eighteen and fourteen or something, go to NIT [National Invitation Tournament].  We went to the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] back to back years, winning 18 games for the first time in the history of the school, back to back years postseason play.  And, and so, my philosophy is I, I worry in terms of, of scouting an opponent.  I worry more about us, us doing the things that we're capable of doing, both defensively and offensively (unclear) do the opponent.  I think we have to be familiar with some, some of their pet plays and some of the individ--vid--individual characteristics of the players, what their strengths and weaknesses are.  But other than that, I worry more about how we're gonna come out and execute what we're supposed to do and also how hard we're gonna play.  I think we've got to play harder than the next guy.
Speaker 1: So you got to be aggressive.
Speaker 2: You've got to be aggressive.  I think I'm aggressive by nature, and I like pressing, running, and trapping, and doing all those types of things.  We haven't had the personnel to be able to do that past couple of years, but I think we're getting there.  That's the type of play that I really like.  I grew up on SEC [Southeastern Conference] brand of basketball, you know, watching the Kentuckys, the Georgias, the Alabamas when they were just very, very athletic.  And that's the brand of basketball I really admire, that, that game that's played above the rim.
Story_ID: 55613
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanted to ask you about some of the, some of the struggles, you know, in this job.  This is--you're a young man, you know, in a high profile position.  It's a big time college, though never really focused on basketball.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, the football pro--program here is the most important.  You know it's the most visible one anyway.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now there, there have been some, some difficulties.  Can you talk about some of the difficulties here?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the things that the community, and the administration, and, and, and all the powers to be have to realize is that if you were to give the top 100 players or the top 200 basketball players in the country a word association test, if you say Colorado, they wouldn't say basketball.  If you said basketball, they wouldn't say Colorado.  And so, this has, has been a very difficult place to recruit to because of the lack of tradition.  Players tend to want to go to places that they're familiar with.  One of the things that has helped us to be able to get re--some of the recruits that we have is the fact that I think we have a tremendous staff here and the fact that we're in a terrific league.  And once we can convince them to come out and take a visit, I think then they see that, you know, they can achieve whatever success or dream that they have for themselves here at Colorado in the Big 12.  But it takes a very special and unique player to step out and do that because one, it takes a player that is interested in trying to do something that has not been done.  When you talk to a player about having one of the top programs in the country nationally every year, that hadn't been done at Colorado.  So now you have to find that unique person that's willing to step out on faith and take that chance.  Most kids want it already ready when they get there.  You know, it's kind of like mom  cooking dinner.  When the kid gets done playing basketball, he wants to walk in the house and see his dinner ready.  He doesn't want his mom to say well, you know, I gotta cook it first.  And it's no different in, in building a program.  And any time you're building something from the ground floor up, it's gonna take some time.  It's gonna have its, its, its, its bumps in the road, and certainly we had those here, particularly in the past couple of years.  I think the media attacked me from a lot of different vantage points this past season, and I think for a lot of different reasons, but we won't go into that.  But--and, and some of the criticism I, I certainly think was, was, was unfair.  But again, that's, that's the nature of the business that we're in, and you just have to, have to continue to do what you know in your heart is the right thing to do and then take whatever, whatever happens.
Speaker 1: Now there, there was some controversy over your top recruiter last year, right?  Is it Harrison the--
Speaker 2: David Harrison.
Speaker 1: David Harrison.
Speaker 2: Well, there was some reports about David Harrison had, had told me that Roy Williams, who, who coaches at Kansas in our conference, had writ--had written him a letter telling him to go to either Vanderbilt [University] in Nashville or [University of] North Carolina.  And both of those schools happened to have former Roy Williams assistant coaches and Kansas coaches.  And so I, I asked him about that at the Big 12 ca--coaches meeting in, in Colorado Springs last summer and--because we, we often, as, as a group of coaches, talk about promoting the Big 12 and doing things that will help the Big 12 be seen in a, in a good light.  And, and certain trying to convince one of the top players in the country to go elsewhere, elsewhere is, is, is not promoting the Big 12.  And so, he denied it and, and said that it didn't happen, to his knowledge, and so we've, we've since moved on.  But I thought it was important for me to at least approach the subject with him because one of--because, again, David had said that he had received that letter.  And one of, one of the things that I believe is that if I don't speak up and fight for the University of Colorado Men's Basketball Program, nobody else will either.
Story_ID: 55614
Speaker 1: [David] Harrison was injured, right, his first--this year?
Speaker 2: You know, his freshman year and he started out--could not go through any of the preseason conditioning because of a lower back.  It's not an injury.  It's, it's a condition that he has, and I think David Robinson with the San Antonio Spurs has the same condition.  And it's just something that requires a lifelong regiment of rehab.  And we actually sent David Harrison to the same physician in Los Angeles [California] that David Robinson goes to.  And so he is constantly in rehab just trying to strengthen the stomach muscles and the back muscles as much--as best he can so that he can go through preseason conditioning.  And then a couple of games into the season he suffered a concussion and, and couldn't play a game or two.  And so he had a lot of injuries and just--and then getting in basketball shape was a struggle.  And I, I thought we finally saw him in basketball condition toward the end of the year because it takes awhile to, to get accustomed to running up and down and playing at this pace, and keeping in mind, him coming from high school to the Big 12 is a tremendous leap.
Speaker 1: So what other things happened this year?  I know there are some--there was a series of in--injuries, right?
Speaker 2: We had, you know, we had, along with David's [Harrison's] injuries and concussion, we had one of our other senior guards to miss a couple of games with a broken nose.  We had one of our better wing players to miss three games because he had played in France in a semipro league, and so the NCAA came in and, and suspended him for three games.  And this was all prior to, to, to us knowing or recruiting him.  Then we had David Harrison's senior brother, who had led us in scoring all last year, to miss the last six games with a broken hand.  And so we had a, a really injury plagued season last year.  But of course, some of the, the media, and, and even some of the fans I think, to a small degree, didn't understand those dynamics.  And we're not a program.  We're not at the point where we can sustain a lot of loss of players, particularly our better players, and still overcome and be successful in, in arguably the best conference in the country.  We had one young man who was a very gifted freshman to, to become academically ineligible after the first semester and decided to leave after, after that semester, and so he flunked out.  We had two kids and their parents unhappy with playing time that decided to, to quit the basketball team.  So we, we had one heck of a season last year.  And so, as I look back on us going fifteen and fourteen last season, I think we did a pretty good job based on the circumstances.  When you thought--when you talk about the Big 12, six teams were taken in the NCAA tournament.  Two of those teams went on to the final four.  We were the only team in the bottom six of our league to have a winning record.  Even Iowa State [University], who had, had won the league back to back years, finished dead last in the conference last year.  So it was a unique year.
Speaker 1: It's a tough conference.
Speaker 2: It is.
Story_ID: 55615
Speaker 1: So as a coach, there are a lot of factors can--than can affect the outcomes of these games, and they just don't all have to do with coaching, right?  They, they, they--
Speaker 2: They certainly don't all have to do with coaching.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: By the--probably by the last six or seven games we were down to seven players.  And one of the things you must have in this league is depth.  You must be able to go to your bench and give guys--your starters a blow and, and not have a, a great drop-off in the talent level that you're, you're replacing them with.  But when you get down to seven guys, seven scholarship guys, it's very difficult to compete.  You're taking [University of] Oklahoma, we played Oklahoma the last regular season game here last season, and we were down big, I think fifteen points or so early on, and we cut it to--we get it to five points with ten minutes to go.  And then with seven minutes to go, two starters foul out, so now you, you have to dip into your non-scholarship pool.   And that's very tough to beat a team like an Oklahoma, again, who, who advanced all the way to the final four, but we were right there.  And so when you think about the games that we played and how hard our kids played, they gave everything they had; they really did.  They gave everything they had, and so I'm proud of them for that fact, but we just didn't have enough.
Speaker 1: With the, with the recruiting of college players by the NBA, you know, while--before they complete their eligibility, you know, now it's so popular, even dipping into high school, is it hard to keep players or find enough players to stock your team and--
Speaker 2: You know, with, with, with, with ca--high school players going early into, into the NBA Draft or with them going to college for one, two years--in our case, with Chauncey Billups, he stayed two years.  Now had Chauncey stayed an additional year, I think we could have built on the success that we had going into the NCAA tournament.  But also he would have helped us attract another great player to the university, so that set us back with him coming out.  But I, I think that it's unrealistic to think that basketball players having an opportunity to go into the draft high--Chauncey Billups I think when he came out and signed a contract, his total agreement may have been for somewhere in the neighborhood of $22 million.  And being a realist, there is absolutely nothing he could major in that's gonna pay him $22 million over a three-year period.  And so I think that guys have to take it.  I encourage guys to, to come back and get their degree, because I think at some point they're gonna have to have their degree, maybe not financially, but if they wanna get into coaching, if they wanna do, you know, anything that requires a degree, I think it's good to get that out of the way.  And I think one of the, the two worse combinations you can put together is ignorance and a whole lot of money.  I think any time you put ignorance with a whole lot of money, something bad is gonna happen.  And so I, I, I do firmly believe in education and, and--but it has changed the landscape of recruiting in terms of guys leaving for the NBA or guys coming out early.  It's, it's definitely changed the landscape of college basketball.
Story_ID: 55616
Speaker 1: So, well, you've, you've--as you were saying earlier, you've, you've come under some pressure here, and, and despite all the in--injuries and other things that have happened, there's still this pressure.  Have you ever considered leaving?
Speaker 2: You know, I've had some, some job considerations and have interviewed or, or talked to a, a couple of people.  Actually, the year we went to the NCAA tournament University of Memphis offered me a job.  Again, my wife's from Memphis.  I'm from Nashville.  University of Tennessee flew me in.  One of the things that I think anyone who knows me realizes that I am a very loyal person.  I felt like I had an obligation to be the coach to the players that we had gone out and signed in September.  We had signed a, a young man by the name of Jamahl Mosley from San Diego.  He was the California Player of the Year, terrific player, terrific person, worked extremely hard.  And so in September I was in his home.  And we hadn't won that year; we hadn't won yet.  So in September I'm in his home, and I'm talking to he and his mom about coming out here to Colorado and doing something that hadn't been done.  Well, this kid visited NC State [North Carolina State], Providence [College], UCLA [University of California - Los Angeles], and [University of] Colorado, and turned down a number of other, other visits.  And he chose Colorado.  Now, and, and so he was, was even criticized on the local San Diego talk sports shows--sports talk shows.  He was criticized on those shows about boy, why would he go to Colorado?  And so--and then when we won, I mean it was a great feeling for him.  It was a great feeling for me.  And so for me to not be here for that kid when he came the following year, I think would have been just not the right thing to do.  So I wasn't gonna go to, to, to [University of] Memphis, or I wasn't gonna go to University of Tennessee.  In, in most recent months, I was involved with, with, with some jobs and had thought about it, but again, I'm not through with, with what my plans are for this university.  I still believe that we got a chance to be one of the top programs in the country.  That's my dream.  That's why I wanted the position.  And you know, I don't think you can run every time you, you come under fire a little bit.  I think there's, there's been a number of, of great coaches that have, have come under fire from time to time, but have withstood the, the, the test of time.  And that's what I'm trying to do here, is continue to do something that hadn't been done at the University of Colorado.
Story_ID: 55617
Speaker 1: Where do you get the most of, pressure from media, or, or fans, or, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's definitely media.  It's definitely media.  And--but I think that's also the--kind of the, the, the platform that the media has taken now, just--not just here in, in Boulder, Colorado, but across the country.  And sometimes I, I think that media believe that they're supposed to do the hiring and the firing, and, and it's unfair and unfortunate, but it is what it is.
Speaker 1: What, what--Coach Patton, what gives you the greatest joy out of being a basketball coach, 'cause I know you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: I do.  I, I guess the greatest joy for me is it's after the guys have, have graduated and receiving letters from guys like Howard Frier, who, when I was an assistant, had, had actually become ineligible one semester and ended up getting his degree.  Once I took over, he ended up getting his degree and is now playing in Austria, and him getting--emailing me and talking about some of the thoughts for the days that I would, would give the team.  Every day in practice I'll give guys thought for the days, and, and we'll talk about it.  You know, and I'll ask what does this mean to you?  And to hear back from guys and say, guy, you were right, and that's the most rewarding thing for me.
Story_ID: 55618
Speaker 1: What do you think that young players need to know the most?  I mean what's the most thing they, they need to know, and what do you think that you should--I mean--
Speaker 2: I think, I think the biggest thing that--when you say young players, are you talking about high school kids coming up or you talking about my college guys?
Speaker 1: --your, your, your college players.
Speaker 2: I, I think the, the, the, the, the hardest thing to convince young freshman athletes of is that very few of 'em have a chance to make it to the NBA.  They all have that dream, and as I explained to them, we all had the dream, me included.  But at some point, I remember the teacher saying to me you'd better have something else to fall back on and that needs to be your degree.  That's the toughest thing I think you have to get kids to buy into early on.  And, and you have to do it in such a way that it doesn't shatter their dream.  I think it's a healthy dream to have, to want to play in the NBA.  But I think you have to be--your actions must match your goals is what I talk to them about.  If, if, if your goal is to make an A on that test, but your actions is you're not studying, you're staying up late, you're not doing--well, your actions don't match your goal.  So if your goal is to make it to the NBA, then you need to be outworking people, because at your position, there are a number of players all over the country.  So what are you gonna do that separates you from the next guy?  When we start practicing October the 15th, guess what?  Everybody in the country is practicing.  What are you gonna do extra?  Are you get there a little earlier?  Are you gonna stay there a little late?  Are you gonna do a little more work in the weight room?  Are you gonna take a little better care of your body?  What are you gonna do that separates you from the next guy?  That's the thing that I think that I struggle with the most in trying to make my guys realize early.  They all will get it later, but the sooner you get it, the sooner you'll be headed in the right direction towards success.
Speaker 1: Cuts down on regrets.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  One of my thoughts for the day spoke directly to that: Eliminate mistakes now to prevent regrets later.  So if you eliminate the mis--the early mistakes, you, you, you, you prevent the, the late regrets.
Story_ID: 55619
Speaker 1: Now, Coach Patton, I know you're a young man, but what--
Speaker 2: I don't know that I feel that young, but anyway, thank you.
Speaker 1: But what, what do you see your legacy at [University of] Colorado or your legacy as a basketball coach as being?
Speaker 2: You know, I would hope that when it's all over, when it's all said and done, that people would, would, would have an appreciation for my determination, that people would have a de--an appreciation for my competitive spirit. I talk a lot to my players about just having a competitive spirit. I've recently taken up the game of golf.  I've been playing seven years.  My handicap's about a four, and it's a four because I've worked extremely hard; it's a four because I feel like I'm playing catch up to all the guys that were playing long before me.  And so, I think that speaks to my competitive spirit.  So I think I, I would hope that people would have an appreciation for the fight that I've put up for the University of Colorado, because every day I'm fighting to make this a program that people can be proud of.
Story_ID: 55620
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a good guy, as a, as a, as a fun guy, as a good father, as someone who just was a good person, you know, that, that cared about people.  It doesn't have to be about any number of games.  In the scheme of things, the games are really unimportant.  It's about the things that you do for people to, to enhance other people's lives.  I hope that people will remember that I, I tried to, to help the people that I knew and, and could help.  You know, I often give the example about [Roland] Rollie Massimino.  [Roland] Rollie Massimino, if you, if you polled a, a crowd, an audience, and asked where is Rollie now, most of them wouldn't know unless you were from Ohio.  He's at Cleveland State.  [Roland] Rollie Massimino won a national championship.  Nobody knows where he is, so in the scheme of things, truly unimportant.  It's about your relationship with your friends, your family, and your god.  That's what life is all about, not about the games.  This, this, this, this position I have, hopefully I can touch some young people's lives and, and help them to, to realize what's really important.  It's not about the car I drive; it's not about the house I live in; it's not about the, the clothes I can afford to buy; it's not about any of that.  It's about my relationship with my friends, my family, and my God.  That's all it's about.  Because a rich man can die of the same disease and ailments as a poor man, so it's not about any of that.
Story_ID: 55621
Speaker 1: Now you have children of your own now.
Speaker 2: I have two sons.
Speaker 1: Two sons--
Speaker 2: Twelve, my youngest--the twelve year-old will be thirteen next month, July 23rd, and then the oldest fourteen.  And my wife's done a terrific job in raising them.  You know, as, as a coach's wife, a lot of times a wife spends the majority of the time with, with the kids.  And you know, I've often talked to my boys about it.  It's not, you know, necessarily the, the, the quantity of time but the quality of time, and so when we're together we have some quality time together.
Speaker 1: What, what are the things that you tried to do with them or tried to impart to them, you know--
Speaker 2: You know, I want them to be good, good guys.  I want them to be good people.  You know, I, I, I talk to a, a, a friend of mine that is very wealthy, and I've just gotten to know him over the past two or three years.  So we were talking about how we were brought up.  And I asked him about--and he's a lot older than me, and I asked him about, you know, him raising his kids and, and, and, and the lessons he tried to teach them, because you know, I spent a lot of early years trying to, to, to make sure my kids understood how I grew up and what it meant to have nothing and, and all of that.  And he explained to me, he said your kids will never understand how you grew up.  Your kids will never understand what it was like for you.  He--and my kids--he was saying his kids would never understood how it was for him.  He said so what he has tried to do with his kids is teach them to be givers.  And I think that's a tremendous statement, is to teach his kids to be givers.  And so that's what I'm trying to do with my sons now, is to teach them to be givers not just takers, because the world is full of a lot of takers.  We need some givers.
Story_ID: 55622
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, just one last question.  Do you--what do you think about this project that we're engaged in here, this oral history project?  Do you, do you have any thoughts about that you wanna share with us?
Speaker 2: You know, first of all, I'm, I'm honored and flattered that, that you would take the time to be here to, to visit with me.  Again, I don't see myself as anybody special.  I see myself as just a guy who's had some tough times that, that didn't use it as an excuse and was blessed, or am blessed.  And, and so I, I, I, I do feel honored and, and, and privileged that you would take the time to, to wanna hear my story.  And I think it's a, it's a great, a great deal.  And I think most people in my position that would have an opportunity to be interviewed like this and to be a part of this would feel the same way.  I'm, I'm really humbled that--to have this experience.  That's what it does for me.  And as you can hear in my voice, it's kind almost cracking, but I, I do, I feel very humbled to share my story with, with you guys.
Speaker 1: And quite a story.  Thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 55623
Speaker 1: 1980, in the spring, after graduating from Belmont College [Nashville, Tennessee].  That's actually on the, the lawn, lawn in one of the gazebos on Belmont College campus.
Speaker 2: In Nashville.
Speaker 1: In Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: That's probably four or five years ago here in Colorado.  I had just gotten a job here as the head basketball coach and went up to Estes Park, which was a place that my sons and, and, and family went every summer to go horseback riding and fishing.  And I can see my sons are pretty young and small then.  They're much bigger than that now.
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Jennifer Patton.  We've been married twenty-two years.  And she is a guidance counselor at Boulder High School here in Colorado.  And, and here she's sitting at her desk.
Speaker 2: That's a fond picture from 1982 I believe in Nashville, Tennessee, at WTVF, the CBS affiliate in Nashville.  I was working camera for one of the early morning talk shows, and we had a country band or hillbilly band playing that day.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my grandmother, Augusta Reed, in Nashville, Tennessee, in her former home.  It's the house I grew up in.  And that's how you would see her most of the time now, with her Bible in her hand.  And she's 90 years old now.
Speaker 2: Do you know what year this might have been taken?
Speaker 1: That year probably was 1999.
Speaker 2: This is the outside of my grandmother's home.  This is the house I grew up in, in East Nashville, Tennessee.  My grandmother no longer lives there.  We--she's since moved, but this is the house that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: This is a shot of, of Chauncey Billups, who's now with the Minnesota Timberwolves, who played here at the University of Colorado.  And this is actually in our arena.  This was after he had gone to the NBA and was traded a few times and was, was with the Nuggets.
Speaker 2: This is in 1999, a photo here taken in a--in actually a, a studio, of me doing a front kick.
Speaker 1: This was two years ago.  Here, or actually that was in Nashville, Tennessee, doing a promotion test where I had gone back home, and I'm often asked to do demonstrations during the promotion tests by my instructor, Shin Young Kong.  That's a side kick.
Story_ID: 55624
Speaker 1: This is in 1999 here at the University of Colorado during one of the home games.  This is here at, at Colorado during one of the home games, just me on the sideline.
Speaker 2: Another sideline shot here in the Coors Event Center.  And that's probably a couple of years ago, in 2000.  It's based on that suit I got on.
Speaker 1: This is me in the ninth grade at Highland Heights, Highland Heights Junior High School in Nashville, Tennessee.  I had recently gotten into a fight in P.E. [Physical Education] class.  And as you can see, my right arm's behind me because I have a cast on my right arm, and you can see the, the tips of the cast right past my body.
Speaker 2: Here at the Coors Event Center, one of my favorite coaching positions, just kind of down in a crotch position watching the action on the sidelines here during one of the home games.  And this was a more recent picture.  I think this was 2001.
Speaker 1: Same thing, sidelines here at Coors Event Center, coaching.  And you can see my assistant coach, Terry Dunn there right in the offset.
Speaker 2: His, his brother's the assistant at Penn--
Speaker 1: His brother's the head basketball coach--identical twin at Penn State, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is in 1981.  I had just won a martial arts tournament, open Taekwondo tournament.  And it was probably in Nashville, Tennessee.  So in '81 [1981] I, I had just finished college.  I finished college in 1980, so this was a year after.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-six [1996], had the privilege of, of having my high school basketball coach to come out and, and help me with, with camp.  He and his wife stayed out three weeks.  His name's Roger Baker.  He lives in Nashville, Tennessee, and his wife, Bonnie Baker, both live in Nashville.  And this was '96 [1996], during one of my basketball camps.
Speaker 2: You know, that picture has a story too.  This team--this is the team that got it done, the team that went to the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament my first full season as head coach here.  And we held, or, or we put up a, a very large picture frame in our locker room, an empty picture frame, and with the words above it, "The team that got it done."  And we challenged the players, that if they wanted to have a team picture in this frame, then they would have to make postseason play.  And so this was the team that got it done, and this is still the, the, the only team that has a picture in our locker room or, or team picture.
Speaker 1: And this was--which year was this?  This was '90--
Speaker 2: It was--I've been head coach six years, so--
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997], 1997.
