Story_ID: 239142
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Miss Carolyn Pate.  Sir, could you please identify yourself, and spell your name for us please.
Speaker 2: Officially, John W. Pate, Sr.; that's proper.  I guess I'm mostly known as [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate, J-O-H-N-N-Y Pate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Born December 5th, 1923 in Chicago Heights, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation was (laughter) I guess musician--bass player, arranger, record producer, but as of now I've been retired a little over twenty years.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 30th, 2004--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I had to think about that for a minute.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address but--
Speaker 2: We're in my home in Las Vegas [Nevada] where I've lived for the last twenty-one years.
Story_ID: 239143
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask as a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I have to really think about it because I like most foods, but if I had to name one favorite, I--I think you'd have me stumped there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly--blues, greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Once again, this is something--not especially.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Once again, not really.  Usually, I can be very comfortable wherever my wife [Carolyn Pate] wants to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess--my wife and I have this little situation where we'll hold up three fingers, and that means we have three words that apply to quite a few things; the three words are it's never enough.
Story_ID: 239144
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Pate, Sr.] side of the family, and I'll ask you about your mother's side first though.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Nora Beatrice Radford Pate, and she was born in Louisiana in a little town called St. Francisville [Louisiana]; she was born in 1899--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she passed away--this is a date I always have to look up, so I'm really not--I'd have to really check on it to look it up to give you the exact year that she passed.
Speaker 1: Well, give us a rough idea--in the '80s [1980s] or '70s [1970s], or--
Speaker 2: It was in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s], okay.
Speaker 2: It was in the '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and she was here in Las Vegas [Nevada] when she passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she--she lived a fairly long time then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she lived until she was ninety-two.  Oh, that'll help you with the date.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: She was born in 1899 and she lived until ninety-two, so you guys do the math.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 1991, I guess--I think.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991], that sounds about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I can't really go too far back.  I met my grandfather and grandmother once when I was quite a small child, and I can't go any further back than that on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: What were your grandparents like?
Speaker 2: At the time--like I say, I was so small 'til I couldn't really, really give you any insight on it.  I remember meeting 'em one time--that was on a trip down to Louisiana.  Like I say, I must have been maybe five or six years old, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about, about your grandparents that, that are passed down through the family, or about life in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Well, it seems like my mother did say that her grandfather was an Indian [Native American] chief--that, that much--I can remember her saying it one time, so I guess somewhere down the line there is some, I guess, Native American Indian blood.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, do you know what your grandparents did for a living?
Speaker 2: If I'm not mistaken, I think my grandfather might have been a minister, might have been a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Grandmother--I just--all I know is that she was the housewife.
Speaker 1: Now, did they live in a rural area or did they live in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a very rural area.  We went to--I think St. Francisville was very small--a, a village or something.  I don't know how it is nowadays, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up?  About--there and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  She didn't mention too much about her childhood.  She mentioned there was one sister that she had who eventually passed away, who ended up in a mental hospital; she had mental--mental disorder, and this was an aunt that I never saw, was her sister named Carrie [Pate], but I understand that she did pass at a very young age in a mental, mental institution.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your mother get a chance to get an education in St. Francisville and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother went as far as eighth grade, she said--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she stay down there a long time, or did she--'cause she eventually moved to Chicago--Chicago Heights [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she eventually moved to Chicago Heights when she, when she married, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember what year that she married, and I know the next thing you're gonna ask me is about my father--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and I have very little information on him because I don't remember my father ever being--living with us.  My mother and father separated when I was, I was a baby really.
Story_ID: 239145
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know his full name?
Speaker 2: Charles Hills Pate, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was from the same region of Louisiana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was from Louisiana as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You don't know the date of his birth, or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So you don't--you don't--you really don't know much about his side of the family either, right?
Speaker 2: Very little about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories at all that come down as to--
Speaker 2: Well, of course it's--as, as we got older in life, we would see him from time-to-time, and 'course after I became an adult and had a family, then we saw quite a bit of him at that time, but I couldn't tell you anything about his parents; I have no idea 'cause this is something that never came up.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about growing up in Louisiana himself?
Speaker 2: No, he never mentioned anything about that at all.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was just a laborer, just a common laborer--factory worker.  I think he probably did construction work, you know, like--as a laborer--nothing.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Nora Radford Pate] and father met?
Speaker 2: No, I never, I never did hear a story of how they met, and I don't even know the reason that they separated; the only story I know is that one day in the heart of winter, my mother says that she took my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and I--I only had one brother; I had one brother, and she put us on a sled in Chicago Heights [Illinois] and she walked out (unclear).  Now, the reasons, I have no idea why.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it never came up and it was never discussed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you think that--I mean there's a lot--was it a lotta tension between 'em or did you--
Speaker 2: They--the few times that I guess I saw them together, they were pretty civil, they were--but I don't think either one was that anxious to, you know, to be with the, you know, with the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you know about what time they moved to Chicago Heights?
Speaker 2: No, I, I guess it would have had to be when--my brother was born in '21 [1921], 1921 and, and he was born in Chicago Heights, so I, I guess it would have been somewhere in the early teens [1910s], maybe--I really don't know exactly.
Story_ID: 239146
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  What can I remember?  My mother [Nora Radford Pate] tells me that I did make a telephone call at three years old.  She was working--she was doing domestic work, and my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and I were--we usually were left alone because--I can't ever recall babysitters being around at that time.  My mother was working; she said her babysitter was the telephone, so she'd keep tabs on us by the telephone, and she says that I made a phone call when I was three years old; 'course I forgot what, what I wanted.  I wanted something, and I called her up, and I remember that telephone number to this day; this was back in the days when you had four numbers.  I remember that number was 1-9-4-4, and--it's funny how these things stick with you, but--
Speaker 1: Now, that's something that I never really realized before.  Nobody's ever discussed the phone numbers before, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back in those days, you had four numbers, you know.  We, we lived in Chicago Heights [Illinois], my mother always kept a telephone, and her work number was 1-9-4-4.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you, you called her; you weren't calling an agent or anything (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, no I wasn't calling an agent at that time for a gig (laughter).  And I think--the other thing that I kinda remember, I think around that age I was going to, I guess, kindergarten or nursery school, and I walked to school at three years old--three or four years old.  'Course Chicago Heights was a small town, and--let me see if I can count the streets.  We lived on Lowe Avenue and--let's see, we had Lowe Avenue, Wallace [Avenue], Parnell [Avenue], Center Avenue, and that's where the--where the community center was where I went to kindergarten, and I remember walking at--this little boy at three and four years old.
Speaker 1: Gee, that really seems like, you know, it's hard to imagine a child today, in 2004, walking a block by themselves, you know, at that age.
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, Chicago Heights was a small town, not a lotta traffic, and I guess I had been taught, you know, you get to a street corner and you look both ways and you're sure you cross the street.  But I used to go back and forth to kindergarten by myself.
Story_ID: 239147
Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood like?  What were some of the sights--some of the sights, sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I lived in pretty much an Italian neighborhood.  Chicago Heights [Illinois] was like a, you know, real blue-collar type town--a lot of industrial factories.  They had a couple of chemical plants there; I remember one was Victor Chemical [Works, Chicago Heights, Illinois], and there was another plant called Inland Steel [Company, Chicago Heights, Illinois]; there were a couple of steel mills in Chicago Heights.
Speaker 1: So Inland Steel was there, huh?
Speaker 2: Inland Steel, yeah.  There was another plant called Fletcoat [ph.]; never will forget that one.  And I guess growing up, as you grow up in a little town like that, if you could grow up and get a job at Victor Chemical, oh, you done big deal--oh, that was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Could you smell the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, you could smell the fumes.  There was another place--now that you mentioned that--linseed oil company [Bisbee Linseed Company, Chicago Heights Illinois].  We could smell linseed oil and, and this stuff--this reek--had a lot of the other chemicals in the city because back in those days, I guess nobody really thought that much about pollution, and I guess later on, it seemed to me that I heard reports of men who had worked at Victor Chemical coming out with lung diseases and things like that because I'm talking about back in the early '30s [1930s] now, and late '20s [1920s]; 'course nobody even had an idea health-wise what was going on back in those days.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Chicago Heights was a very--very segregated.  There were two sets of railroad tracks that went through the city.  There was one track on the east; the track on the east was the B&O--Baltimore and Ohio [Railroad], and the set of railroad tracks on the west was the CE&I, I think was Central, Eastern, and Illinois [sic. Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad], I think it was.  And on the east side, east side is the B&O, was mostly the black neighborhood.  In the middle it was pretty, pretty, pretty mixed, but on the west side--this was totally where the upper-class lived, and no, no blacks at all lived on the west side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so blacks lived on the east side of the tracks.
Speaker 2: The east side of the tracks; that's where most of 'em lived, and my mother [Nora Radford Pate] always tried to keep us in-between in that central area, in-between the tracks.  And we moved quite often because most of the time my mother couldn't pay the rent.  I remember once they set our furniture out on the street and another family took us in.  See, my mother raised two boys without a father and she refused to have a man over us at all.  My mother never remarried.
Story_ID: 239148
Speaker 1: Did your household consist of just your mother [Nora Radford Pate] and your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother, my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So no grandparents were living with you?
Speaker 2: No grandparents, no relatives at all.  We didn't have any relatives at all in Chicago Heights [Illinois].
Speaker 1: She had it pretty rough then.  She had no relatives at all (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but she was a very strong woman--very strong woman.
Speaker 1: That's unusual.  A lotta people that migrate up have a sister, a somebody.
Speaker 2: We had no relatives at all in, in Chicago Heights.  I'm tryin' to think.  In Chicago [Illinois]--in Chicago proper, she did have some cousins and--in fact, as I remember now, there was one aunt, I think she was a great-aunt who, on several occasions, invited my mother to bring us to live with her because she had daughters and they had kids, and--but my mother, for some reason or other, didn't wanna be, I guess, under anybody's thumb, so she was very, very independent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did she do for a living?  Did she do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did domestic work--domestic work all, all of her life; that was--did domestic work and went to church--
Speaker 1: Okay, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)  very, very religious--
Story_ID: 239149
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church that your family belonged to?
Speaker 2: There, there were a couple of 'em; one was the [Union] Institutional Baptist Church [Chicago Heights, Illinois]--that was the first one, and then my mother [Nora Radford Pate] took a turn and she went Methodist, and was a church called Payne Chapel [Chicago Heights, Illinois], P-A-Y-N-E, Payne Chapel.  So between those two churches--
Speaker 1: So that's a A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, right?
Speaker 2: That's an A.M.E. church, correct--A.M.E.  And she was very active in the church, and I guess from that first church that's, that's where I guess some of my musical background really got started because an organist, a new organist came to town and at first they didn't have a place for her to stay, and so she moved in with us and she stayed with us quite a while, and she was a very excellent pianist and she started teaching piano to my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and I, and also my mother.  In fact, she would--I remember at a recital, there was--this particular choir director had us doing a piece where there were six hands on the piano.  In other words, the three of us played this, this six-hand piece; it wasn't, wasn't very difficult but, but I remember that very distinctly--little lady named Empress Lorenzo Krizer.
Speaker 1: That was the organist's name?
Speaker 2: That was the organist's name.
Speaker 1: Empress.
Speaker 2: Empress Lorenzo Krizer, K-R-I-Z-E-R.
Speaker 1: K-R-I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I-Z-E-R.
Speaker 1: Krizer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Krizer.
Speaker 1: Now that's an unusual name.  Now, she was a black woman?
Speaker 2: She was a black woman.  Yeah, it was--but she, she knew her music; I guess she had, you know, done a lotta studying, but she lived with us for a little while and I think one of the families that my mother had worked for gave us an old upright piano at some point, and my mother has always been a music lover--just loved music, you know, was never--she never really could play anything, but she loved music, and possibly maybe her love of music might have been something that probably rubbed out on me.
Story_ID: 239150
Speaker 1: How would her [Pate's mother, Nora Radford Pate] love of music manifest itself?  Did she play the radio a lot, or did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, at that time we didn't even have a radio, we didn't have a radio.  I remember our first radio--my father [Charles Pate, Sr.] came out one time; he, he would come out from time-to-time, and when he would come out, he'd usually bring a little money--not on a regular basis, and I remember he came out once and brought us a radio.  But my mother would sing church songs around the house, and I found myself, a very young boy, I found myself--I was harmonizing with her and didn't really know what I was doing, you know, but I was singing harmony to whatever church song she was singing, 'course, and you heard 'em in church all the time.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she have a favorite song?  Do you remember a favorite song?
Speaker 2: There were so many.  There was one called 'In The Garden.'
Speaker 1: I think I've heard of that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah (singing), "I come to the garden alone"--that's the way it goes, but that was one of them, and 'course the old spiritual, you know, "Take my hand, precious Lord, lead me on, let me stand."  Those are the couple that I can remember, but she always wanted to sing but she never really had a great voice.  'Course this choir director had her singing in the choir, had her singing, you know, but my mother was not a singer.
Speaker 1: She just had the enthusiasm for it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she just want--just loved music.  Her thing was, she says--and I guess in this order--she loved children, music and flowers; that's what, what my mother was always big on.
Speaker 1: So she didn't get into popular music much, or that type of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that was kind of--back in those days, some of the devil's music; you didn't really get involved in that because I remember when we first start kinda listening to it, she kinda frowned on it so we'd have to kinda sneak and listen to blues and jazz back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she wasn't a party person at all.
Speaker 2: Oh, not at all.  She, she wouldn't--you'd never put her foot inside of a tavern--never.  We used to tease her a lot; she, she'd make her hot toddies and maybe curl up in bed maybe with, with a hot toddy or something, but she was not, not a street person at all--not in the least.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said she worked quite a bit and she was a--you know, she would kinda use a phone to keep in touch with you all--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so did she have to like stay over when she worked, or--
Speaker 2: Every now and then she'd have to stay over and maybe serve dinner 'cause she call (unclear) and she says, "Well, I may have to stay a little later tonight and serve dinner."  Usually, in those cases--the one family that she worked for for many years who was a judge in Chicago Heights [Illinois]--Judge [Homer] Abbott--and she worked for his family for quite a few years, and 'course they knew her situation and they would always like, if you work late, they'd always send dinner home for us, you know, for my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and I.  We lived in an Italian neighborhood, and most of the old Italian mothers really would keep an eye on us also; they'd feed us and if we had did somethin' wrong, they'd say, "I'ma tell your mother, tell your mother when she comes," you know.  So, so we weren't, so we weren't really on our own.  Like I said, Chicago Heights was a small, very small town at that time; I think population might have been twenty thousand people maybe.  And there wasn't a lotta crime goin' on, you know.
Story_ID: 239151
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to go into Chicago [Illinois] a lot in those days?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  Every now and then we'd have a thing, we had a thing--people living in Chicago Heights [Illinois], when you went to Chicago, you were goin' to the city. There was a big bus--South Suburban [Safeway Lines] bus that ran from Chicago Heights into Chicago proper, you know; it's one that would go all the way down the Loop.  Every now and then, my mother [Nora Radford Pate] would get tickets like to concerts and things that would take place at--I remember goin' to the Civic Opera House [Chicago, Illinois] quite a bit; she'd get tickets, so she'd try to expose us to as much culture as possible; she'd take us to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Shed Aquarium [Chicago, Illinois] quite often, so she tried to expose us to, you know, some of the better things in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you impressed by the opera?
Speaker 2: Pretty--not a lot at first, you know.  Opera to a young kid can get kinda boring unless you--unless there's somethin' wrong with you or somethin', but--so I wasn't really impressed by, by opera, you know.  But a lotta times there would be symphonic concerts and the, the, the symphony concerts were more--I mean I was more impressed by these than like seeing operas or, you know, operatic singing, so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, were there very many musicians playing on the street or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Chicago Heights had--we had--I think there were six schools that were kindergarten to sixth grade; then we had one junior high school which was seventh and eighth grade, and then we had a high school which was a four-year high school.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to grade school?  What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I started--the first school I went to was Lincoln [Elementary] School [Chicago Heights, Illinois], which was a school which was first to sixth grade.  Then, the junior high school I went to was Washington Junior High School [Chicago Heights, Illinois], and the high school that I went to and completed was Bloom Township High School [sic. Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois].
Story_ID: 239152
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're gonna backtrack a little bit and talk about some of your mother's relatives that were close to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's--
Speaker 2: We didn't touch upon the fact that my mother [Nora Radford Pate] had two other sisters, other than the sister that I had mentioned earlier.  My Aunt Nan [ph.], who was Florence Alberta [ph.] [laughter], and then my Aunt Margaret [ph.], who was the oldest sister my mother had, and Aunt Margaret continued to live in Louisiana until she passed away, and my Aunt Nan ended up--she was living--I think she ended up living in New York, in the Queens [New York, New York] area, outside of New York City [New York, New York].  And there was one brother; I don't know a lot about him because my mother never talked too much about him.  And I think the other thing that we didn't touch upon, the fact that I had one brother with--who was Charles Hills Pate, Jr.; he's named after, after my dad [Charles Pate, Sr.].  And my mother raised the two of us, as we mentioned before, without our dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there was some--one of your mother's sisters you were very close with, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my Aunt Nan, my Aunt Nan and her husband eventually moved to Chicago Heights [Illinois].  My Uncle John [ph.], the husband of, of my Aunt Nan [ph.], worked around racetracks, and Chicago Heights was a city that set in-between two big racetracks back in the '30s [1930s].  On the north there was Washington Park [Race Track, Chicago, Illinois], and on the south there was a track called Lincoln Fields [Balmoral Park, Crete, Illinois] which eventually, I guess, went downhill.  Washington Park stayed around a long time, so by these two race tracks being there and my Uncle John working around racetracks, this was ideal for him, so they moved to Chicago Heights; 'course when they moved to Chicago Heights, we moved in with them and 'course we had a little better life going at that time because my aunt and uncle never had any children and 'course the two sisters being pretty close, our life got a little bit better then.  And I'm tryin' to remember; they--I don't remember exactly how many years they lived with us, but they eventually moved and they moved to California, so by that time, my brother and I, we were getting up some size, so--I think we had reached at least junior high and high school age.  But my Aunt Nan, I guess, was the closest aunt that I was that close to because we would stay close to her even after I got grown and moved to California, so--but she and my Uncle John both passed away in California while we were out there.
Story_ID: 239153
Speaker 1: Now tell us, how would you describe yourself as a little boy?  What kind of a little boy were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was typical; I was mischievous and 'course I was very athletically inclined.  We, we played sports with the seasons; every time season would change, we'd be playin' whatever sport came up then, so I was always interested in sports.  I don't think I really got interested in music until oh, my teenage years I found myself--I liked to listen to music, you know, liked to listen to big band jazz music, and having a piano in the house, I would begin to fiddle at the piano; I could play quite a few things by ear because--I guess I, I, I had an exceptional ear and didn't realize I had it 'til much later on in life, but--'course I always liked the girls.  I remember in junior high school [Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] and high school [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] I'd, I'd be hangin' around the economic classes and I'd take typing and shorthand 'cause that's classes all the girls were in, so--so I guess that's the kinda little boy I was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were fairly outgoing, you say, or, or--
Speaker 2: Fairly outgoing, yes; I was--I would like to believe that I had a pretty decent personality.  I was pretty well-liked by most people, you know.
Story_ID: 239154
Speaker 1: How'd you like Lincoln [Elementary School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Lincoln elem--that was an elementary school; of course, you know, when you first start goin' to school, I guess as a, as a child, you--it's a big deal, you know, you (unclear) up goin' to school now, first grade, but I was not a great student; I never was--just very fair student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any subject that were your favorites?
Speaker 2: Not really; I liked, I liked the choirs and glee clubs and things like that; I liked--and I'd always get into the choral work, but no particular one subject that I really liked better than other--I guess several teachers called me rather lazy 'cause I, I was not really--I was not really a, a scholar, not a real student.  I, I guess I did enough to get by.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother [Nora Radford Pate] have high expectations of you in school, or did she--
Speaker 2: Not really; she insisted that we go to school.  It was--the one thing that I do remember, we were--we always got certificates for never being late and never missing, missing any school; we never missed school.  My mother used to have stacks of these certificates they give you every year for not be--ever being late or, or being absent.
Story_ID: 239155
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you involved in any organized activities like, like Boy Scouts [of America] or, or sports teams and--
Speaker 2: When I got to junior high school [Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] I played basketball, and 'course in high school [Bloom High School, Chicago, Illinois] I continued on playing basketball, but in--when I was goin' to Lincoln School, I don't think we really, really got into too much organized--organized sports at grade school, not before seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in those days now--I'm asking this question 'cause it's--you know, people make assumptions, and if somebody's playing basketball they might be able to play in their neighborhood and there's a hoop in the neighborhood or something.  Did you have access to a basketball goal in your neighborhood or--
Speaker 2: No, we, we were so poor we used to put up (laughter)--we used to take old bushel baskets and put 'em up on a telephone pole or something, and my mother would always get us a basketball, and she also had a thing of where she, she insisted that we stay in the house a lot, especially after dark, if she wasn't there, and we would take old oatmeal boxes, the round ones, and my brother [Charles Pate, Jr.] and I would cut 'em in half and we would nail 'em up at the top over a door, and we would make, out of old socks, we would make a ball out of old socks and play basketball in the house.  And a lotta times we were living on the second floor and boy, the neighbors downstairs would be complainin' and we called ourselves--we'd take our shoes off and thought we were being very quiet, and we were comin' down on that floor, we'd be playin' basketball in the house; I remember this very well.
Speaker 1: I bet the neighbors do, too (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure they--yeah, this was part of the cause of my mother to have to move a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you're in--so, so you played basketball in junior high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there, were there positions then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we--there were positions; it's like everything else.  This was during the year--see, there used to be a time in organized basketball where after every basket, they would have jump ball; you come back and do a jump ball after every basket, and this was just about the time that they outlawed that and be--and take the ball outta bounds, and 'course we've been doin' this in playing, you know, street ball and, you know, for the longest, so when they started this, I was rather short, but I played center, and the reason I played center was because I could handle the ball pretty well, and 'course the positions were the same as they are now, you know, guards, forwards, and a center.  And 'course when I got to high school then I, I switched off to guard; I was playing more guard when I got to high school but, but I, but I loved my basketball--
Story_ID: 239156
Speaker 1: You said now you were listening to big band music and--when you, when you finally got the radio, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we got the radio, we used to listen to bands like--I listened to bands like Benny Goodman, Duke Ellington back in those days.  I remember Artie Shaw, Charlie Barnett; these were some of the bands that were really big back then, and I guess I just loved the sound, you know, the, the har--the harmonies that they were getting in the band; big bands playin' together, I guess, is why I eventually ended up being an arranger, you know.  But this was always really something that really I was very fascinated with.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite number or a favorite band?
Speaker 2: For a long time, Benny Goodman was, was the, the top band that I really listened to, and I remember--then I found out that Fletcher Henderson was one of the arrangers who was doing all of Benny's music, and then Fletcher came out with his own band, and he had a brother name Horace Henderson, and their bands were really quite good.  And I remember there was a small group, John Kirby.  John Kirby was a bass player who had just a small combo; I think it was-couldn't been more than six or seven pieces in his group, and they had a very unique sound.  'Course Ellington, Duke Ellington.  But those were the bands that really were--I was really fascinated with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did, did you get a chance to go the movies much?
Speaker 2: Not a lot because--once again, this was economics involved.  My mother [Nora Radford Pate] did not have the dimes to send us to the movie, you know.  So every now and then, we'd get a chance to go, but not that often.
Story_ID: 239157
Speaker 1: So when you were in high school [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], you were playing basketball.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now did you--were you like a, a basketball star, or were you just a good ballplayer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, I wasn't a star; I wasn't a star, I--you know.  I was, I was just an average player.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about the team?  Did the team do anything significant?
Speaker 2: Team--we, we had fair teams; we didn't, we didn't ever go to the state tournaments or anything like that; we, we were not quite that good.  Our biggest rival was Thornton Township High School in Harvey [Illinois]; that was our, our rival, so whenever we played them, they always be tryin' to beat Thornton, you know, 'cause they were, they were the ones that--I can't remember at some of the other place; played Lockport [Township High School, Lockport, Illinois], Joliet [Illinois]--teams from there.  But back in those days, it wasn't like now where you did a lot of traveling.  You might play a few games away from home, but they weren't that far--very close by.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when you were in high school now, now you were still like, would you call a fair student; you just, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I was just a fair student, yeah; nothing exceptional.
Story_ID: 239158
Speaker 1: In high school [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], had you really--did you start playing a instrument in high school? Other than a piano at home?  You know.
Speaker 2: In high school--well, actually it started around sixth grade.  There was one bandmaster around the Chicago Heights [Illinois] area, he had a lock on all the schools and he would, I guess, get his band together for high school from picking kids from some of the grade schools, and so by the time they got to high school, you know, he would kinda have--select the best ones.  Well, around sixth grade, he did stick a tuba in my hand, a bass tuba.  Well, I was a little scrawny kid back--kids used to laugh 'cause my mother [Nora Radford Pate] would carry this tuba to school for me.  I was, I was so little and 'course I was more interested in basketball than that tuba, and I think in high school I did play in the band for maybe a year, but a game or somethin' would come up and I wouldn't be up there in the band, I'd be out there on the basketball floor.  So that didn't really last too long, and it wasn't something that I was just enamored with anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--so, you went through high school basically without really not--without being that excited about music, huh?
Speaker 2: No, I did sing in choral groups; I did sing in choral groups.  They had, they had a select chorus, and this was a chorus of where you had to try out, you know; you try out or if, if you weren't good enough, you didn't make the chorus if you didn't have the voice for it.  So I did end up in most of the select choruses, you know.  So that was about the only music that I really did in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduate from high school in what, nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942]; I graduated from high school in '42 [1942], by September I was in--I was classified 1-A; World War II [WWII] had broken out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was classified 1-A by September, and in January I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we leave high school completely, were there any teachers or, or mentors in your community, even outside of high school, that--in a church or anyplace that you, that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really at that time, no.  Mrs.--Miss [Empress Lorenzo] Krizer was the only one that really--I was really kinda fascinated with.  There was a teacher in junior high school, a Miss Castle [ph.], who was the choral director, and she was a very nice lady and she sort of encouraged, you know, encouraged me.  She--I guess she knew enough about music to, to know that I did have an ear, an exceptional ear, but nothing, nothing really dramatic or anything that really--so there was nobody really pushing me into music at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so in the spring of 19--the spring or the summer of 1942 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-three [1943].
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943]?
Speaker 2: What's that?  After I was out?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Out of high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you graduated in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I graduated '42 [1942], June of '42 [1942]--
Speaker 1: June of '42 [1942]--
Story_ID: 239159
Speaker 1: And by January, '43 [1943], I was in [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I ended up in a infantry training center, Camp Wheeler, Georgia, just outside of Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's where, that's where the music thing really came out because I could play, I could play a few things by ear on piano, and one of the things was Avery Parrish's 'After Hours;' I could play it almost note-for-note.  I could also play Eddie Heywood's 'Begin the Beguine.'  Eddie Heywood had a real classic arrangement on 'Begin the Beguine;' well, these two things I could--I, I really could play very well.  And some of the guys that I went in service with, they, they had heard me play; they knew I could play, and so they asked me to play at the [Camp Wheeler] Service Club, you know.  They had a piano down there, we'd go down to that Service Club and I'd bang on the piano down there.  And the officer in charge of the Service Club heard me playing and he said to me one day, he said, "Look," he said, "we have a dance"--I think it was monthly; I've forgotten now whether it's monthly or weekly, where he said, "Where we bring young ladies in from town, from town of Macon, and we have a dance, and usually during the dance we put on a little floor show; if any of the guys can sing or play an instrument or something, we have 'em perform."  So he said, "Would you mind playin' on the floor show?"  So I said, "No, it's no problem."  So, I did play these two pieces that I play pretty well.  Well, some of the guys in the band they--you know, these are musicians see, and they heard me and said, "Oh," because they said, "this guy plays pretty well."  And I guess word got back to the battalion adjutant who, who--oh, I know; right after I, I guess I had played--the next morning when I fell off a drill, they callin' me out of a drill and he said, "You need to report to the orderly room."  I got to the orderly room and they, they said, "Well, go down to officers' mess and see Lieutenant"--I forgot what his name was--"So-and-so;" so I got outta there, so this guy said, "I understand that you play piano," and so I said, "Yeah."  So he said, "Well, play some-- play somethin' for me."  And I just played around a little bit, and he said, "You do all that by ear?"  I said, "Yeah."  So he asked, "Have you had any formal training?"  I told him I did piano, you know, when I was a kid, so I knew a little bit.  And then I told him about the bass tuba, he said, "Oh," he said, "well," he said, "you know there is a band that is stationed here at the academy; they stay here, and while the soldiers come in for infantry training, they entertain them and they play at the Service Club like you did last night."  And he said, "And right now, they need a tuba player; their, their TO [ph.] called for two tuba players and they only had one."  All of a sudden that tuba looked pretty good to me, and so that's how I ended up in that band and staying right there at that camp in Macon, Georgia.  And so I took the tuba and, you know, and I kinda, you know, cleaned up my act on it.  It wasn't too hard to really get back in the, you know, in the groove, and pretty soon I was playin' pretty well.  They also had two dance orchestras which were within this band, and once again they had one fellow who played bass fiddle, and of course, in the [U.S.] Army in those days, the Army furnished all the instruments and they happened to have two bass fiddles around, so I picked up the other bass fiddle and taught myself to play and wasn't too long before I was playing well enough to, you know, be playing with this other band because--
Story_ID: 239160
Speaker 1: --Wait a minute now; you just taught yourself by ear how to play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Taught myself by ear.  I taught myself--well, I knew enough about, you know, the notes and everything; I mean--I said, "Gimme a book, gimme a book and the instrument."  He gave me the book and the instrument and I took the book and the instrument and I went from there.  But, but it took a little, you know, a little doin', a little--took a lotta practice practicing, and I remember the, the band would be--when I first start messin' with the tuba, the band would be rehearsing upstairs and I'd be down in the latrine with some of the music that they were playing, and I'd be trying to play along with 'em.  'Course I wasn't really goofin' them up 'cause I'm down in the latrine and I could hear them, but they couldn't really hear me, and I just taught myself to play both instruments.  And a little later on, there were a couple of guys in the band who were arrangers; they were writing, and I'd stand and look over their shoulder and see what they're doin' and I said to myself, "Oh, I can do that."  I didn't realize everything that was involved because the first couple of arrangements that I wrote were just horrendous, just terrible--weren't even close, you know; but I kept, I, I kept at it by trial and error.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you learn how to read music in high school Bloom Township High School [sic. Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]?  Did they teach you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  I had learned, you know--well, I had actually began to learn to read when Mrs. [Empress Lorenzo] Krizer stayed with us and she was teaching us piano, so I had learned the basics, you know; I knew where the notes were on the page, so I could read at that point; and of course, with the bass tuba, the little short time that I messed with the course, I was reading music then.  So I knew how to read music, but to really get proficient on the instruments, that's where I really kinda took the bull by the horns and, you know, began to teach myself.
Speaker 1: So a lot of incentive there because it's better to play an instrument in the Army than it was to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Than to carry a rifle, be marchin', believe me.  That was the incentive, the real incentive; that's it--
Story_ID: 239161
Speaker 1: --So did you stay on, on the stateside for the balance of the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: No.  We left Camp Wheeler [Georgia]--the band left Camp Wheeler and we went to Fort, Fort Benning, Georgia, and we stayed at Fort Benning, and from Fort Benning we went to Europe.  We went to France; we ended up in France and we--the bulk of the time in, in France, we were in Marce, France because they were shipping troops out of Europe to the CBI, China Burman India [sic. China Burma India Theater], shipping 'em to the South, South Pacific, and a big part of our job was being down there on the docks playing these troops off to CBIs; we call it the China Burman India, and of course while we were in Marce, the war in Europe ended, VE [Victory in Europe] Day, and some of the pictures I was showing you was where the band we were marching in the VE Day Parade in Marce, France.  And after the war was finally over, we did occupation in Salzburg, Austria, and I was still over in Europe for that.  And from Salzburg, that's when I came back home and I was discharged.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you there altogether then?
Speaker 2: We were--I guess I was in Europe probably a couple of years because I was discharged in '46 [1946]--in March of '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well, what did you project that you would do when you, when you got outta the service?
Speaker 2: All right, well, by that time, I had decided that I was going after music; I was gonna go after a musical career because I had begun to really do a lot of arranging, lot of writing, and I said, "Well, when I get out then we'll definitely try to pursue a career in music."  I'd already made up my mind that I would try to go to conservatory on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and try to, you know, fine-tune some of the skills that I, you know, had achieved.
Story_ID: 239162
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, let me back up a little bit.  When I came out of [U.S. military] service, when I came out of service, I had a wife and a child, and it wasn't too much longer before I had another child.
Speaker 1: Now, now, let's go back to--now where did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: I met her in Fort Benning, Georgia--Fort Benning, Georgia when I was there, and that's where we married, and I went overseas, and while overseas, my first son was born; John [Pate] Jr. was born.  And, and I didn't see him until I was discharged in '46 [1946].  And soon after that, my second child was born, my daughter Yvonne [Leon Smith]; she was born in 1947.  John [Pate] Jr. was born in '45 [1945] because I was still in Europe, and I was discharged in '46 [1946] and Yvonne [Pate Smith] was born in '47 [1947].  And my third son, Donald [Pate]--Donald was born in '48 [1948].  When I came out of service, I was, I was hell set bound on ending up in New York [New York] because this is where the jazz scene was really happening and I was really gonna go into jazz music.  And my aunt and uncle, the Aunt Nan [ph.] that I had mentioned earlier, she and my Uncle John [ph.] were living in New York and I lived with them, lived with them for--well, little over a year because I got outta service in March of '46 [1946], and I went straight to New York and I ended up that summer, the summer of 1946, playing in a club in Atlantic City [New Jersey], Club Harlem; I ended up playing bass down there in the band.  And the band left Atlantic City and we went--they--fact, they took the entire show into the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] in New York, and from the Apollo Theater in New York, we ended up coming to Chicago [Illinois] to the Rhumboogie Theater [Rhumboogie Club, Chicago, Illinois], and 'course my family was still in Chicago, my wife and kids, and this was, I guess--I guess the end of '46 [1946] because my daughter Yvonne was born in February of '47 [1947], and when I came to--back to Chicago, I ended up going to a conservatory, Midwestern Conservatory [of] Music [Chicago, Illinois]; I think it's defunct now; I don't think--I'm pretty sure they're not in operation, but I went to Midwestern Conservatory Music.
Speaker 1: Now, about what year is this?  Is this '47 [1947] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is--we're talking about '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And every time I'd get enrolled in school, a job would come along that would wanna take me outta town because--I think it was in '48 [1948], I ended up I guess on my--I ended up working with the Rhett Allen [sic. Henry "Red" Allen], J.C. Higginbotham combo; they were sort of a swing, Dixieland-type group.  Rhett Allen was from New Orleans [Louisiana]; he came along in the Louis Armstrong days and he was very well-known, and J.C. Higginbotham was, I guess, one of the premier trombonists during that era, and I ended up working with them.  'Course, every time a job would come along, because of my family, I had to take that job; I couldn't just stay and go to school, so as a result of that, I never did finish conservatory and get a degree because every time I'd come back to Chicago and get in school, I'd get in school for a few weeks and somebody would offer me a job which would take me on the road.  This is a time I was--I, I guess I was still playing bass more than I was doing anything else.  'Course, I was still wanting to write, and every chance I got, I'd try to do a little writing.  I ended up working with a couple of violin trios; I guess during that time, the two real premier jazz violinists, Stuff Smith and Eddie South.
Story_ID: 239163
Speaker 1: You were on the road with [Henry] "Red" Allen, J.C. Higginbotham and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, I ended up with the two jazz violinists of that time, Stuff Smith is one, and the other was Eddie South, and we're speaking now--we're talking about the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you played--you toured the country with those two.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I toured the country with, with, with actually those two; we worked, you know, all over--quite a few places.
Speaker 1: Now they played together, huh?
Speaker 2: No, no, they did not play together; they were really very competitive and they--it was very interesting to hear the two of 'em talk about the other one because Stuff Smith was really the one who really could swing more; Eddie South was more trained violinist.  Stuff Smith was just a, a natural--he was just a natural player, but Eddie South did a lotta classics as well as play popular jazz swing things.
Speaker 1: Did he kinda look down his nose at Stuff?
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that was pretty much it; they--he kinda looked down his nose at Stuff and 'course Stuff, at the time, said, "Well, he can't swing; he can't play no jazz."  So, it, it was very interesting having worked with one and then goin' over to work with the other; that was--
Speaker 1: Now, which one did you start with?
Speaker 2: I started with Stuff Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the first that I worked with, and then went to Eddie South.
Speaker 1: Did Eddie consider it cool to have you with him now, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not so much; I guess.  See, the both of them now, you know, they have these egos and they're more--and musicians with egos they're so much into themselves until they don't really pay that much attention to other people, and especially a violinist like these two were.
Speaker 1: Okay, so violinists have a bigger ego than--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh--the violinist--well, that's another whole ballgame, especially serious symphonic violinists.
Speaker 1: Okay, now they did they--now here you are, now you're playing a bigger fiddle than either one of them--
Speaker 2: Right, playing [unclear].
Speaker 1: --and you weren't necessarily classically trained but you could play, so--
Speaker 2: No, no, I could play, but--I could play whatever, you know, whatever they needed, and of course with both of them, I was trying to slip in an original composition every chance I could, and they were both very nice about it.  Eddie South recorded a rather serious thing I wrote, and I called it 'Assurance;' fact, he recorded it on the Mercury [Records] label.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were little ditties that I wrote that Stuff Smith played.  I remember one was called 'Current Jelly,' [ph.] and--okay, and I'm drawing a blank now; senioritis is settin' in.  But anyway, the--they, they both, you know, had played things that I'd written that were original.
Story_ID: 239164
Speaker 1: Worked with them for a while, and during the time--they were both based in Chicago [Illinois]; they were based outta Chicago, and of course I was still trying to write arrangements every chance I could, and the old Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois], a nightclub in Chicago on 55th [Street] and State [Street]--Red Saunders was the house band there, and I was young at that time and very eager, and anytime there was a big band around, I was always running up wanting if I could write an arrangement for them, you know, and I wrote, I wrote a few arrangements for, for Red's band, and Red was glad, you know, glad to get them, you know; here's a band leader and here he can get some free arrangements.  And at the time, I was writing pretty much in the modern jazz, the be-bop era, because one of my idols was Dizzy [Gillespie].  Dizzy was really one of my idols, and of course I loved what Bird [Charlie Parker], you know, Charlie Parker, was doing.  I loved what they were doing musically, so a lot of my music was sort of in that vein.  And of course Red Saunders' band, they weren't getting any arrangements of this, you know, in this particular style, so he was glad to get anything I wrote.  So in the meantime, there was an arranger and organist named [Wild] Bill Davis; Bill Davis was around Chicago for quite a few years, and a lotta people don't know that he wrote the arrangement for [Count] Basie, the 'April In Paris' arrangement for Count Basie, and Bill Davis was the musical director for the shows at Club DeLisa, and he was arranging, you know, all of the shows there.  So, something happened and Bill left, and when Bill left, because I had been giving arrangements to Red Saunders, I walked right into that job, so I ended up as musical director for the, you know, for the production shows at Club DeLisa--
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: All of this is going through--say, like '49 [1949].  Actually, I was in and out because see, they changed the shows every four weeks at, at, at the club, and I wouldn't have to come up with more arrangements, you know, within this four-week period, so I might go out on the road and, and actually be playing out on the road with a group in-between, and then usually when I was on the road, I wouldn't be out there for, for that long at a time, you know, I'd be coming back home; when I'd come back home, I would go in and always be ready for the next show, writing the next show at Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 239165
Speaker 1: And I worked very closely with the producer name--his name was Sammy Dyer.  You probably--sometime or other, the old-timers will probably remember a dance group called The Dyerettes.
Speaker 2: Right.  Sammy Dyer is still well-known in Chicago [Illinois]; there's a school of dance, a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sammy Dyer was a--Sammy Dyer had a, I think, a school of dance, and he did so much, but Sammy produced the shows at Club DeLisa.  So I worked closely with him, working out whatever production numbers we did.  And during this time, this is when I met Lurlean Hunter and Joe Williams because they were the male and the female singers at the club because they kept a male and a female singer because whatever production things that Sammy Dyer came up with, he utilized the male and the female singers, and one of the things that he did with Joe Williams, and we talked about it for years; in fact, so many people talked about it.  Sammy Dyer came up with an idea, and he had Joe singing "Vesti La Giubba" from 'Pagliacci' [Ruggero Leoncavallo]; Joe did it in Italian in a big clown suit.  He wore this clown suit right on stage and he sang it in Italian--legit, and after he had finished this legitimate rendition that Sammy Dyer had choreographed a swing arrangement of it, and I had written this swing arrangement on 'Pagliacci' that the girls danced to at the--'course I wrote the shows at Club DeLisa for, I think, two or three years, and I can't remember because at that--that's when I really had a chance to really do some really arranging that really also helped me really start getting better and better at it.
Speaker 2: Now that's really some challenging stuff going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --opera to be-bop.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, goin' from opera to swing, swing and be-bop, and we did so many different type things.  Sammy, Sammy Dyer was, you know, always on top of everything.  He knew all the Broadway shows that were going.  I remember 'South Pacific' had come in around that time, and we did one whole production about--on 'South Pacific' at the time, and 'course we were taking, you know, the well-known tunes from a lotta these shows and, and giving the swing treatment with, with the girls dancing, you know.  So that was a lot of very good experience.
Story_ID: 239166
Speaker 1: And I guess from there I began to make recording dates, playing bass, and then I remember [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis approaching me when he went to work for OKeh Records.  I think he went--he was--made vice president, I guess, Columbia [Records]--the OKeh record label was turned over to Carl.
Speaker 2: Now, about what year is this, then?
Speaker 1: We're talking now, we're getting into the '50s [1950s].  I guess we're, I guess well into the '50s [1950s]; late '50s [1950s].  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--but late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Late '50s [1950s], yeah.  Because a lot, a lot of things went on in the early '50s [1950s].  I, I would guess I was makin' every gig I could because I now had a third child who had--who was born--my son Donald [Pate] was born  in '48 [1948], so I had to really get out there and hit it to support a family--three, and I was doing it all on music.
Speaker 2: Now, now, these are the days when there's a lot--that live music and dance would be in Chicago [Illinois]; you had the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was a lot of--yeah, the Regal Theater was going--
Speaker 2: [Club] DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois], the Rhumboogie [Club, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, because once I started recording, then I, I was very close to the place of where I was almost ready to stop playing bass, but--I think it was '56 [1956] or '57 [1957], King Records approached me and I did a jazz album for them called 'Jazz Goes Ivy League.'  And this was just a small combo gig because we used a flute, vibes, guitar, piano, bass and drums, and this was done for the King Record label; they were outta Cincinnati [Ohio].  This was the label that James Brown was on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Bill Doggett.  And the Chicago producer that was doing this was a guy name Ralph Bass, B-A-S-S.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Doggett was really a big (unclear) in the late '50s [1950s].  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Bill Doggett was very big, very big at that time.  During this time, I was working a day job as well as giggin' at night, and I was working in a record store on Wabash [Avenue], a place called Gamble Hinged Music [Company], G-A-M-B-L-E, Gamble Hinged.  And the reason it was--they were called Gamble Hinged, they had come up with, I think, the first plastic hinges for sheet music where you could, you know, hinge the music together, and they had a patent on this hinge, and they had a record department and, and I was working in their record department.  And I remember one day we got a record in, and it was on the Jubilee [Records] label, and the artist was Moe Koffman, M-O-E, K-A-U, I think it was F-F-M-A-N, Moe Kauffman [sic. Koffman].  And on this particular record, he had a tune called 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues.'
Speaker 2: 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues.'
Speaker 1: 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues' was the name of the tune that was on this particular album.
Speaker 2: On the Jubilee--
Speaker 1: On the Jubilee label.  Now, during those days, it was pretty common to do what we call cover a record.  In other words, someone would come out with a record, and then someone would cover the record and come out with another version of the same record and try to make it a little better than that one, but maybe make it very close, so during those days, everybody was covering records.  Well, when I heard this thing--heard this 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues,' I said, "Boy," I said, "that's a nice little catchy tune."  And we had just recorded this flute vibes album for King Records, and I called Ralph Bass, I said, "Ralph," I said, "there's a tune I just heard," and I said, "This thing can be a hit."  Now, Moe Koffman just had it on a, on an, on an LP at that time, and his version, I think, was four or five minutes long and at that time, no radio station would play a single record that was over three minutes.  So I said, "Ralph," I said, "we can do a cover on this thing," I said, "And this thing could be a hit."  So he said, "Let me call Cincinnati."  He called Syd Nathan, the president of the company in Cincinnati, and told him he had this idea, that this idea had come up.  Well, to shorten this story, he called me back, he said, "How soon can you do it?"  I said, "We can do it day after tomorrow."  So we went in the studio and we recorded 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues.'  We did what we call a cover on it, and 'course our version came out and--I've forgotten how high it went on the charts but it did go up pretty high on the charts, and the sad--the funny part about it, it's ironic; everybody thought I wrote it because I was a writer, and clear as day on the record, it says Moe Koffman, you know, but people had it out that I had written 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues' because we had, we had the, we had the hit version of it.  'Course after ours came out, then Moe Koffman's company they had to come out with it because it was his, his tune.  This was, I guess, the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But eventually, I had--I think I kinda skipped over the [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis thing; we touched upon it, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Carl Davis approached me one day--'cause I was playin' bass on one of his sessions, and he said, "You're an arranger, aren't you?"  I said, "Yeah."  So he said, "Well, look," he said, "I'm with OKeh [Records] now."  He said, "Okay--I'm runnin' OKeh."  And he said, "I don't wanna have everything of mine sounding the same."  He said, "I'd like to have you do some arrangements."  So, I think one of the first dates that I did for him was Major, Major Lance--Major Lance, 'Monkey Time.'  And 'course 'Monkey Time' turned out to be a, a huge hit.
Story_ID: 239167
Speaker 1: Now this is like in the '60s [1960s] now.  We're like talking about '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're, we're, we're probably getting up to the '60s [1960s] now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is nineteen--I remember it was the fall of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], okay.
Speaker 1: When 'Monkey Time' came out, I was in high school, a freshman, that year.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And Major Lance became this big star.  We'd never heard of him before.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well, 'Monkey Time' was written by Curtis Mayfield.  Curtis wrote 'Monkey Time,' and Curtis [Mayfield] was, was an associated producer with [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis, and so he was doing quite a bit of work with Carl, and of course after 'Monkey Time' got to be a hit, we did an LP on it, and some other things, with Major Lance.  And then Curtis approached me; he said, "Well, you"--he says, "We're on the ABC-Paramount [Records] label."  And he said, "I've got a group called The Impressions," and he said, "We, we've gotta, we've gotta record pretty soon," and he said, "I sure like the arrangements that you are writing," and he said, "Would you," you know, "arrange for us?"  Well, by that time, I'd began to--I was getting so much work arranging until I just put the bass fiddle aside and I stopped playing completely because I was getting all this work writing.  Because after I recorded The Impressions on a few things, ABC-Paramount Records approached me and they said, "We'd like for you to come work for us as a record producer--working for ABC-Paramount Records."
Speaker 1: Now, let me--before we go to the producing aspect of it, I mean--now The Impressions--a lot of the songs were written by Curtis Mayfield, but I don't think a lotta people who're gonna be watching this--and maybe they do understand and I'm--I assume that they don't understand what's--what an arranger does to a,  a song that's written.
Speaker 2: All right.  What an arranger does is--we'll go back to Curtis Mayfield; we'll take Curtis Mayfield as our guide.  Curtis was an excellent composer-songwriter.  Curtis would sit down with his guitar and actually create a song.  He couldn't put it down on paper, couldn't write a note of music, but he could do the basic song, and he would sit down and play the basic song into a tape recorder and bring it, bring it to me, and what I would do would be take this basic song and put instruments, musical instruments, around it and do what we call write an arrangement.  There's a fine line between a orchestration and arrangement, yeah.  When an arranger writes, he writes for these instruments which--and it turns out to be an orchestration, and that's what an arranger does; he takes instruments--'course, Curtis would sit down and he says, "Well, I think maybe I can hear some strings on this one."  He could hear the strings on it but I would have to write them, and this is what arrangers do.  So singers and songwriters basically have the basic melody of a song, but a lotta people say a lotta times the arrangement can really make the record.  So, with Curtis' basic idea and with, I guess, my arrangement, then it turns out to be something, something special, but the two really need each other.
Story_ID: 239168
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can hear these in my head as you're, as you're talking.  I remember these--this music well.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And some of the pieces like (singing) ba-da bump, bump, bum--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --all that sorta thing, you know?  That's you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --really, adding those, those bridges and stuff and, and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Yeah, the little instrumental things; these are the things that I would do.
Speaker 1: (Singing) Doom, doom doom, doom, do-do doom; doom doom, doom, doom, do-do--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Now, now, Curtis [Mayfield], Curtis also played guitar, and a lotta time, from what ba--a basic thing that Curtis might give me originally on guitar, I might take maybe a little something he, he has given me, and I would embellish upon it and, and take it a little further; take it on to the next step, more-or-less.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, I must say you did a fine job (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: I mean 'cause this music really is--I mean, [The] Impressions albums--the album with "Keep On Pushin[g]" and "We're a Winner," and all that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And by 1960, we're talking the late--mid-'60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s], now '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  Some of that, that music is just--it's wonderful music; I mean it just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: And like everybody, you know, most people in the black community have heard this music and have also, you know, it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think the first thing I did was, was 'It's All Right.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that was the very first thing we did, 'It's All Right,' and then I think we did 'Amen,' and from 'Amen,' we went on to 'Keep On Pushin,' 'People Get Ready,' and all of these things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are the--yeah, that music is really something, so--yeah, so, so you're, you're making a--well, Major Lance, Curtis Mayfield and The Impressions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gene Chandler was another one; I, I did quite a bit with Gene Chandler.
Speaker 1: Did you do 'Rainbow,' the first version?
Speaker 2: 'Rainbow'?  I did 'Rainbow.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did 'Rainbow' and I think with Gene Chandler, 'Just Be True.'  I didn't do 'Duke of Earl,' I didn't do 'Duke of Earl.'
Speaker 1: But 'Rainbow,' now, this is a song that has endured three lives; it's come back three times.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: People play it, I mean it's, it's a perennial song played on college campuses for homecoming and stuff.  Gene Chandler even shows up now, I think; he sings 'Rainbow' every now and then (laughter).  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I did the 'Rainbow' and 'Just Be True,' and I'm tryin' to think of the others.  There were some others I did with Gene too, but I don't remember all of these names.
Speaker 1: So--yeah, 'Rainbow'--now, now, who wrote 'Rainbow'?
Speaker 2: Curtis.
Speaker 1: Curtis did, okay.
Speaker 2: That's Curtis Mayfield--both of those, 'Just Be True,' and 'Rainbow' were Curtis.  In fact, we went through that period where every date that Curtis did where he was writing, no matter who he was writing for, I was always doing their writing because we had, we had gotten to a place where we had a--you know, we, we kinda--could really feel each other, and Curtis felt that I could really give his songs, his compositions, the real treatment that they needed because we had done so many things together, you know.  So, so I did just about everything, you know.
Speaker 1: Now that music--I mean it's, it's music that--wow!  I mean, you know, it's--I can't help but hear these things in my head as I'm talking to you; all the, all the music that Curtis Mayfield--what about [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler now, did he--
Speaker 2: Jerry--I didn't do a lot with Jerry.  Jerry Butler and Betty Everett, the one I remember, they did an album together and I did all the arrangements on that.  Jerry alone, I didn't do a lot; there was another arranger, Chicago [Illinois], Riley Hampton, who did most of Jerry's stuff but, but the album that he did with Betty Everett had 'Let it Be Me' on it, that was really a, a huge hit, and that one I did.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's--
Speaker 2: That I did with that particular album.
Speaker 1: And I can hear that now.  This is funny; we do need a soundtrack for this interview almost 'cause I, I can--maybe other people listenin' to this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I, I got all the records sittin' down there--
Speaker 1: --can do the same thing that I, bein' of the age when a lotta this music was comin' out; I mean I can just hear 'em playin'.
Speaker 2: I've got all--all that stuff is down there and, surprisingly, a lot of the things that I did with them, at the same time I was also doing other work for other artists, and there's apparently a group--I guess it's an international group; they're in England, I guess, in France and Germany and Poland and they have what they call--they do what they called underground dance clubs in Europe, and I met a young lady who is affiliated with these groups, and she knows everything I've ever done.  She, she surprised me with so many things, and they--there's a guy from England who called me to interview me, and he had a whole list of things--things that I forgot that I've even done, things that I've even forgotten 'em, that I've done.
Story_ID: 239169
Speaker 1: Now, we talked about that before we started rolling; we talked about that level of knowledge about music, and who is responsible for the music that exists in Europe that doesn't exist here.  And, and also, one of the factors that, that weighs heavily in this is the fact that a lotta times, the arrangers or certain musicians are not even listed on American albums--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --they're just--the Motown Sound, for instance; all those brothers that played, who're they're now called The Funk Brothers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and given some credit now, as they are beyond retirement age, now are, are--you know, were unknown when the music was coming out.  Do you think that--I mean do you think that this--I mean--no, musicians in the United States I know are frustrated these days and have been frustrated for a long time with the exploitation that record companies, you know, do in relationship to music, especially black music--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I heard a piece on public radio that said that lawyers now in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] are just trying to find a musician, you know, someplace, that did anything because they can find where he's been cheated 'cause all of 'em are cheated.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well that's, that's, that's, that's the thing.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) and you can't lose a case.
Speaker 2: That's the thing, and there's been so much, you know.  Well, the musicians back in those days didn't really know how to protect themselves; they had no idea, you know, just what to really do to really look out for themselves, so there's money out there that they should have been making that they never made, you know.  But these underground clubs, these underground dance clubs--this one guy from England, I guess through a musician that I met while I was here, he happened to--this guy happened to come here, this guy name John Smith [ph.], and the musician that I knew here had called me one day and he said, "There's a guy here from England and I happened to mention your name," and he said, "He went crazy."  He said, "He's here in [Las] Vegas [Nevada]," he said, "And he said, 'Well I gotta, I gotta meet him.'"  So this guy came up, he interviewed me, and a few months later, I got an email from a young lady, her name was Nancy Yahiro [ph.], and she said that she had gotten my number--my email address from this guy John Smith, and she said her mother was moving to Vegas and that she was gonna be here and she wanted come out and meet me and she did.  Well, Larry [Crowe], this young lady had everything that I ever recorded; she's a collector.  She had all this stuff and she told me about these underground clubs and she did an interview for, I think, a Swedish publication or something.  In fact, I've got the interview; I'll show it to you later.  She did it in a three-part interview, and there was a record that I did for the old Vee-Jay [Records] label; that's the label that [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler was on, and I'd only done one side on this particular record--one tune, because I remember getting the call.  I got the call from Vee-Jay Records; Calvin Carter was the producer, and he said, "We're about to record a singer name Sam Fletcher, he's out of California."  And he said, "And there's this one song that we just got this morning," he said, "and we wanna do the song on the, on the session tomorrow."  He said, "Can you have your arrangement written by tomorrow?"  I said, "Well, what time is the session?"  So he said, "The session's in the afternoon."  I said, "I shouldn't have a problem."  So, I wrote this arrangement, then I rested a session and, and I think in the short time that I had to write it, I really felt it was one of my better efforts at that time, and it only came out on a 45, and somehow, in the interim of my moving around, I lost the only copy I had of this thing.  And I went on the Internet, I tried everywhere I could to try to locate this; could not locate this.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: The name of the song was 'I'd Think It Over,' by Sam Fletcher.
Story_ID: 248094
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was this one record that I wanted to--that I really would love to have had a copy on; somehow, in moving around I had lost it--I'd actually lost the only copy I ever had of it, and I couldn't find it anywhere.  I went on the Internet, and one day this young lady called and she was coming over, and I asked her, I said, "Would you per chance know anything about a singer name Sam Fletcher?"  She said, "Yes," and I said, "Well," I said, "I did one side--one song with him," and she said, "The song is 'I'd Think It Over.'"  And I said, I said, "You don't happen to have this."  She said, "Oh, yes, I do."  But she, she's really a, a real collector.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You said another group, The [Mighty] Marvelows.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a group called The Marvelows who--the lead singer in the group was from Chicago Heights [Illinois]; his mother had gone to high school [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] with me, and he called me one day while I was working for ABC-Paramount [Records], and he came in with his group and I listened to them, and we did, we did oh, several things, and they had a big hit called 'I Do,' another one called 'In the Morning.'
Speaker 2: How did 'In the Morning' go?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 1: I would have to play it; you wouldn't dare--you wouldn't want me to sing it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --but 'In the Morning' you would probably recognize because it was a, it was a big hit.
Speaker 2: I think I do; I'd hate to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I think you would recognize it because it was a big hit, especially around Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was quite a hit.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And I guess--while I was with ABC-Paramount, one of the gentlemen that they assigned to me was [HistoryMaker] B.B. King, and with B.B., I think the very first recording we did together, B.B. has told me--in fact, every--I think every time I see him he reminds me, he said, "The critics acclaimed this particular album as one of the greatest blues--the live--greatest live blues recording," he said, "ever recorded," and he said, "That's the one you did called 'B.B. King Live at the Regal.'"
Speaker 2: So this is at the Regal Theater in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is at the Regal Theater in Chicago; this was one of the first recordings that I, that I did with B.B. We did several more through the years, but that's the one that he really acclaims as one of the biggest, but--
Speaker 2: What would be one of the, I mean the biggest hit on that--on the album, do you think (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh Lord jeez, I have to remember the, the tunes that are on it.  I'm drawing a blank; I'd have to get the album out and look it, look it, look 'em up.
Speaker 2: That's okay, that's okay.
Speaker 1: This was, this was before 'The Thrill is Gone.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I--actually, another producer came in and did that one, so--but leading up to that, I think all of B.B.'s things we did up to that.  We did quite a few things together.
Story_ID: 248095
Speaker 1: Okay.  We mentioned all these [The] Impressions songs but--now, you had a chance to--probably the biggest thing, probably the biggest seller, I guess, you worked on with Curtis Mayfield was 'Super Fly.'
Speaker 2: 'Super Fly,' yeah.  Yes, I did the--all of the arranging and conducting for the, for the movie 'Super Fly.'
Speaker 1: Now, at that point, was that the biggest project that you'd ever worked on in terms of money and, and fame and so forth?
Speaker 2: Well, we don't really talk about the money on that one.  At--this was at the point where Curtis and I parted company, and it was due to some of the discrepancies on 'Super Fly.'  But I guess you could say that was, I guess, probably one of the most successful things that I did with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't receive too much of the success behind it, which is another whole story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you wanna get into any of that?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think I'll just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just rather not?
Speaker 2: I'll, I'll, I'll just let that lay, but that was at the point where Curtis and I sorta parted company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Curtis Mayfield, he's been discussed on public radio and other places as kind of a real tight man with the money (laughter) with a dollar, so I mean would you, would say that that's a fair characterization with Curtis Mayfield (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would say that's a fair characterization.
Speaker 1: So everybody's band had some kind of a struggle around money.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a--it's, it's a very fair characterization.
Speaker 1: A frugal man, let's say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very frugal, yeah.  When it came to 'Super Fly,' he had taken on a new manager who was equally as frugal as he was, so we'll just let it lay there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But this album, the, the longevity and the endurance of this music is really amazing.  It's like my, my son found an old album cover of 'Super Fly'--has it nailed on his wall right now--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, and even young people--I mean he's twenty-two, in the hip-hop generation, but people--all the kids seem to know somethin' about that music, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, it was quite a feat, but as we had mentioned earlier before, we were talking about some of the people in Europe how they read the fine print, and I'd like for most people that have the album 'Super Fly,' please read the fine print.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the orchestrations are--and anybody that, that listens to it, I mean it's a true movie soundtrack, the orchestrations are, are, are wonderful, man; they sound, they sound good.  The percussion--was that, was that ["Master"] Henry Gibson that played (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Henry Gibson, right.
Speaker 1: And Master Henry Gibson--
Speaker 2: That was Henry, Master Henry, right.  He passed away not too long ago.  Yeah, it--but it's--it was very interesting (laughter).
Story_ID: 248096
Speaker 1: Now, up to that point, I don't think a lotta black people were arranging for movies, you know, up to that point.  I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  They were--there, there were, there were quite a few, and a lotta people are unaware of who they, who they really were.  Right now, right now I, I teach a course at UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], and the course is in film scoring.  And some of the things that I point out, there's a lot of trivia that goes along; a lotta people are unaware of the movies that [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones scored, and this was, I think before 'Super Fly;' I think they were just before 'Super Fly.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Booker T. and the M.G.'s did one for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Booker T. and the M.G.'s, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'UpTight;' I know he did that album--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes' 'Shaft.'
Speaker 2: And there--years and years ago, there was a arranger-pianist name Calvin Jackson; a lotta people have no idea who he was, but Calvin Jackson was doing some things--
Speaker 1: What did he do?  Did he do anything that we would recognize?
Speaker 2: You know, off-hand, I can't really quote anything, but he was one of the, one of the first, and this has been later on, but the only black composer to ever receive an Oscar for a musical score now, not a song.  Isaac Hayes received an Oscar for the song 'Shaft,' but that was for the song; but for a score, the only black to ever receive an Oscar, most people have no idea.
Speaker 1: Who was it?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock.  It was a movie called 'Round Midnight.'  Herbie did the score and received an Oscar for his score.
Speaker 1: That's one with Dexter [Gordon] --
Speaker 2: One with Dexter Gordon, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dexter Gordon, yeah.
Speaker 2: Dexter Gordon, correct--yeah.  But it's a field that blacks are getting into now.  There's a young man name [HistoryMaker] Terence Blanchard who has done some; J.J. Johnson, 'fore he passed away did scores.
Speaker 1: And I know he did a Bill Cosby movie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --back in--and some others, too.
Speaker 2: But there are, there are some floating around, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, I heard back in the old days, Will Marion Cook, and some other people, did some mu--some, some movie music, and maybe there's another man, too, that did some--composed music for television--for 'Gunsmoke' and other TV shows.
Speaker 2: Well, I know Quincy did a lot; Quincy did a lot of 'em and I think if you, if you, if you dig around pretty good, you're gonna find a few, but it's a very tough field to get into because it's a very lucrative field, you know.  Once you get a movie or something out there, a movie score, they go on for a long time, you know; like they could last for quite a while, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what's been your most--now, you, you went on to do scores in the early '70s [1970s] for 'Shaft,' 'Shaft in Africa,' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, 'Shaft,' 'Shaft in Africa'--after the 'Super Fly' situation, I did quite a few little small independent movie scores.  It's one called 'Bucktown USA' with Fred Williamson, Carl Weathers, and the other people, and 'course, 'Shaft in Africa,' as you mentioned.  It was the ABC Movie of the Week, 'Satan's Triangle' with Kim Novak and Doug McClure, which I did.  It's another small one called 'Brother on the Run,' and there was one that probably is totally obscure called 'Dr. Black, Mr. Hyde;' [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey was the star of that one.  And there was one I did with Robert Conrad and the black actor who was Clint Eastwood's side-kick in a coupla movies--oh, Felton Perry--a thing called 'Sudden Death.'  So there were quite a few that I did.  And then 'course, one year after 'Shaft in Africa,' we did a 'Shaft' TV series for one year.  This is when they started doin' the ninety minute TV shows.  'Columbo' was--I think he, he was one of the first to do the ninety minutes, and so we did 'Shaft' for one year on TV, and I did those.
Story_ID: 248097
Speaker 1: What would you point to as your most satisfying project in terms of artistic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Most satisfying project.  What can I really say?  I think what I did on the 'Shaft in Africa' was very satisfying, and the arrangements and orchestration that's on 'Super Fly,' I can't really, you know, kick those to the curb for whatever reason.  I was pretty pleased with those, and I don't know why I think musical--some of the stuff I did with Peabo Bryson.  See, I did--I produced Peabo Bryson in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]; in fact, just before I retired, I was doing quite a bit with Peabo on things like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you do 'Crosswinds,' and--
Speaker 2: 'Crosswinds' I did.  'Crosswinds;' that brought the only gold album I have on the wall.
Speaker 1: That's a, that's a fantastic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'I'm So Into You,' and then a lot of the later things.  He and Natalie [Cole] did a duet album ['We're the Best of Friends'] together and I did all those, and I think--yeah, another album called 'I Am Love' (unclear) book.  With Peabo, I did quite a few things that I was really quite pleased with because with Peabo--Peabo, he used to kid me all the time.  We'd lay down the tracks to everything; this was during the days we'd start laying down tracks and we get the basic tracks down and then we'd do what we call sweeten, sweeten after that to go and do strings, and the way we were working, I'd fly down to Atlanta [Georgia] and we'd lay down all the rhythm tracks there, then I'd bring them back to Hollywood, back to California, and do the sweetening.  Peabo used to say, "John [HistoryMaker Johnny Pate], don't you underwrite on me now; don't you underwrite," you see.  And so I was able to really pull out all the stops, you know, and some of the things turned out quite nice.
Speaker 1: They did, indeed.  Peabo Bryson, he was one of my personal favorites; he has a wonderful voice, but those orchestrations are superb; I mean it's, it's wonderful, wonderful music.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.  We--you know, it's--I really enjoyed those things.  I guess those could be some of the most satisfying things that I did, you know.  But then, later on, after I moved here and called myself retiring, Joe Williams was still alive at the time and he was living here.  And Joe and I go back--I always kid people, I say Joe and I were friends before Count Basie knew his name.  And so after I got back--got here, and Joe said, "Well," he said, "you ain't retirin' on me."  He'd keep me writing something, and whenever he'd do a symphonic date--and he did a lot of concerts with symphony orchestras.  His musical director was a young man name Norman Simmons who lives in [New] Jersey, and Norman was his musical director at the time he died, because most of Joe's jobs would be with small groups.  Henry Gibson outta Chicago [Illinois] was Joe's guitarist, and Lawrence Simmons was the pianist, but on the symphony dates, Norman would say, "Well, I don't wanna have to deal with them crazy symphony musicians, so have Johnny Pate co-conduct."  So I would conduct the symphonic dates and I would write a lot of symphonic arrangements, and some of these I was quite pleased with, you know.  I think they were some of my better work.
Story_ID: 248098
Speaker 1: Well your music, I mean, has a certain elegance to it that I think that people, you know, listening to this who have, who have heard any, any of this music, can attest to.  I mean it's really, you know--my job is not to be a critic here, I guess (laughter).  I'm pleased to be able to, to talk to somebody whose music I really like, you know, so--do you have a certain philosophy of how you arrange music?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  It has to do with what the project is for.  Sometimes, who the artist is has a lot to do with it, and when it comes to the singer, I usually try to write, you know, around a singer and what I think would really help the singer.  This is the way I started out even with the music--Curtis' [Curtis Mayfield] music, you know.  Curtis would gimme me the basic thing and then I'd try to write an arrangement around what he'd given me to try to enhance whatever he had--whatever his basic thing was, you know.  So it's--so I didn't have a particular style that I go in; it had to do with the material involved and the artist, and that's what really dictates what I'm gonna write, depending on the artist and the, you know, the--that's basically the way that I would do it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did I--okay.  Do you have a favorite artist that you work with?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  If I'm just listening to music, I have some favorites that I like to listen to, but as far as actually working with people, hey, it's been over twenty years since I've really actually done any work with anybody.  But I like pianists; I like Oscar Peterson, I like Monty Alexander, there's a new young man name Bill Charlap who is just excellent.  Far as singers are concerned, I like Dianne Reeves; Dianne Reeves is excellent.  I think she's one of the greatest out here and 'course now if you get down to, to gutty blues something, I have a living legend, Ruth Brown--I just love what Ruth can do with tunes and things.  Arrangers, that's another thing.  Now, one of my favorite arrangers right now, a young man name John Clayton.  A lotta people have no idea who John Clayton is, and if you don't know who John Clayton is, do yourself a favor and look him up.  This young man is brilliant.  I guess, like me, he was a bass player (unclear); he still is a bass player.  But his arrangements are just fantastic.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what does he--come on, give us a name of something now; we can go listen to it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Give us the name of something?  Well, I'll tell you what I can--some of Natalie Cole's music he's done the arrangements on, Diana Krall.  A few years back, Gene Harris, a very fine pianist--Philip Morris gave him a boatload of money and he came out with the Philip Morris Superband, and John Clayton did a lot of these arrangements, but the main thing is there's an orchestra called the Clayton-Hamilton Jazz Orchestra; John Clayton does all of the writing for Clayton Hamilton, and these are things that are just phenomenal.  He's written for so many great singers, but once again, this is where people don't read the fine print.  But he's actually--you know, when you say, "John Clayton," I'm ready to start listening immediately.  But once again, this, this is a, a guy that is so brilliant and nobody ever pays attention; nobody knows who he is, I'll put it that way.
Story_ID: 248099
Speaker 1: We always ask this question of people.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Now, we're kinda getting slightly political, huh?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Actually, Larry [Crowe], when you reach the age of eighty you, you take a whole different outlook on life period.  First of all, you know that the road is shorter ahead of you than it was behind you, and from what I've seen behind me and what I've gone through, I look at a lot of the situation and it's supposed to be getting better, and I ask every African American, do you think it's getting better?  And I let them answer that question because as far as movements are concerned, I don't think there is any such thing as a mass movement, but I think if everyone makes himself a committee of one, and you start moving in the right direction, I think it'll be like a bunch of and sand pebbles--everything will begins--begin to move.  But I would like to think it's a little better than it was; one thing that I haven't mentioned in this interview is the--is my current son, the son that Carolyn [Pate] and I have together; his name is Brett [Pate], and he was a wanted child, he was a planned child.  So at the age of fifty-two, I looked up and I had another child, and my other three children were all out of college, were adults, families of their own, and at the age of fifty-two, I had to start all over again and raise a child, and fortunately, he's now twenty-eight years old, he's his own man, he's been very successful, he, he does his own thing, and we can't be more proud of him, and I'm hoping that the world that he's coming up in is gonna be a pretty good world.  So, in answer--to try to answer your question again, it's a little hard to say what's gonna happen as far as Afro-Americans are concerned, but I think we can go back to the cliche, you know, keep the faith.
Story_ID: 248100
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the hip-hop movement in music, that, that being the hottest thing goin' around?
Speaker 2: Well, having, having raised a son [Brett Pate] who is now twenty-eight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, he's in that--
Speaker 2: --when rap, when rap and hip-hop first came into it, I sat down with him; I said, "What is this?"  You know, and he said, "Dad, you gotta listen to the message that they're giving."  The one thing that I can say about these young people, they are smart enough to control their destiny; they are controlling their money, which I think is a very, very wise thing.  And take the people like, you know, P. Diddy [Sean Combs], you know, Master P, and the one that--who's the godfather of 'em all, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons; he really layed the way--paved the way for these guys, so people like Nelly and these guys, they are gonna do all right.  It's true that the music that they're coming out with, some of us may not really understand it, but I think they're, they're very successful with it, and they seem to have intelligence enough to really be controlling the money end of it and let's face it, money is where it's at, you know.  Everything is about money.  So I have to tip my hat to them, really, although I may not agree with all of their music artistically, but they're makin' it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that justifies whatever they do?
Speaker 2: I would think so.  I, I, I can't agree with a lotta the profanity and the, the degrading of women and some of this; I can't agree with this, but over-all, but over-all, you know, I think people like Usher--R. Kelly's had his ups and downs but, but I especially admire R. Kelly; I think he's a very talented writer, I think he writes very well.  And we have to face reality; this is what music is all about today, so you either accept it or you get outta the way 'cause they're gonna run you over with it because it's here to stay, I think.  Possibly, maybe it may turn around again, but there's still a place for the music as we see it, but even at eighty, I can understand what they're tryin' to do, and most of 'em seem to be trying to do it from their heart; they're sincere about what they're doing.
Story_ID: 248101
Speaker 1: When you look back at, at your career, and all the things that you've done and the different people you've played with and things you've done in music, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd--I think (laughter) when a situation with a movie like 'Super Fly,' I, I can think of a lot I would have done different there; not a lot, but a few things.
Speaker 1: Like what?  I mean can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, on 'Super Fly,' I, I did not protect myself on 'Super Fly;' it boils down to simply that because, needless to say, it was quite a financial success, and this is where things were not done fairly, as far as that's concerned--as far as I was concerned on that.  And that's the one thing that I would have done differently.  And, of course, it sticks out, I guess, more than some of the other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's kind of a new pro--I mean doin' a musical score, I mean a movie score is probably new--was that new to you at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, it was new to me at that time, but it wasn't just in doin' the musical score, it was just a, a thing of where I did not take care of business, because in the past, everything had gone along pretty fairly, and it didn't go along fairly as far as that's concerned.
Speaker 1: And the stakes were higher and so you think that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually, it was--I think because the stakes were higher and I mentioned before, Curtis [Mayfield] had taken on a, a different manager, and that's, that's where, where a lot of that happened, you know, and 'course we--all that's hindsight and 'course I don't even look back; I can't look back on that.
Story_ID: 248102
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, on the other hand, when you look at, at your career, you know, now that you're retired, what do you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I, I guess I never really think in terms of me (laughter) leaving a legacy of any kind.  I think that's for somebody else to determine; I, I can't really speak to that.
Story_ID: 248103
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did your mother [Nora Radford Pate] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My mother had a chance to really get a chance to see me be quite successful; I was able to do some very nice things for her.  Growing up around Chicago [Illinois], my mother was very old-school, and she loved the Palmer House [Hilton, Chicago, Illinois], and so on her eightieth birthday, I pulled out all the stops; I rented a big ballroom at the Palmer House and told her to invite about--I said, "Invite about fifty of your friends."  I said, "We'll have a sit-down dinner."  She invited one hundred people, but I was able to give her a, you know, a--a just a lavish eightieth birthday party.  I was also able to--each year after I began to get successful I would ask her every year, "What would you like to do this year?  Where would you like to go?"  She had never been to Hawaii, so took her to Hawaii once, and I think the next year said, "Mother, where you wanna go?"  And she said, "Well, it's gon' be a church conference in Israel and Jerusalem."  I say, "You got it."  And then I think another year after that, I ask, I said, "Well, where you wanna go this year?  What do you wanna do?"  Said, "Well, you know I went to Hawaii but I didn't see where they grow them orchids."  I said, "Okay, we're goin' back to Hawaii."  So I was able to do quite a few things for her, you know, after I got successful.
Story_ID: 248104
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your career as a producer for Verve Records.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, that came about early in my career, I guess, just before I went to work for--just before I went to work for ABC-Paramount [Records], I was approached by Creed Taylor who was a, a very big jazz producer; I was approached by Creed Taylor.  [HistoryMaker] John Levy, a name--I don't know if you know that name or not.  John Levy is a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Creed Taylor, I know that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  John Levy is a personal manager who has been very responsible for the careers of Nancy Wilson, [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, Ahmad Jamal, Dakota Staton, Cannonball Adderley, George Shearing--these are just a few of the people that John Levy has been responsible for their careers--these--personal manager.  John Levy and Creed Taylor called me and they said, "We have an artist, Wes Montgomery, and Wes has heard some the R&B things that you've been doing, and he wants to know if you would arrange an album for him."  And I did an album for Wes Montgomery called 'Movin' Wes,' and 'course then right after that I went to work for ABC-Paramount; I was exclusive with them.  And, I guess, in the late '60s [1960s], I left Chicago [Illinois] and relocated in New York [New York], and at that time, Verve Records hired me to come to work for them as in-house producer, and some of the people that I produced while I was there was Stan Getz, Jimmy Smith the organist, Shirley Horn, Kenny Burrell, Monty Alexander, Phil Woods; these are a few of the people that I worked with with Verve, and this was strictly in a jazz field, you know.  And I stayed with Verve a couple of years until I really started doing--getting more involved in movies, and that's the time that I left New York and I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and from that time on, I just worked independent--independently, as an independent producer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you--do you have a preference in terms of jazz or R&B?
Speaker 2: Well, jazz--jazz is my roots; that's, that's my first love.  Jazz is really my love; that's where I really cut my eye teeth and that's--the rhythm and blues thing just happened accidently because--I never will forget the call from [HistoryMaker] Carl Davis, you know, and Carl Davis and another producer Calvin Carter, they just more-or-less let me do my thing because most of the R&B stuff that I've done, if you listen closely enough, you're gonna hear a little jazz flavor in there because I--this is what I feel.
Speaker 1: That's right and that's true; you're right.
Speaker 2: This is basically what I feel.
Story_ID: 248105
Speaker 1: Since I've been here in [Las] Vegas [Nevada]--I came here to retire, as I mentioned before, and Joe Williams refused to let me retire, and there was a, a gentleman named Alan Grant who used to do jazz nights at the Four Queens [Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] downtown here in Vegas; he'd do this on Mondays, and he knew of my background, and he approached me one day and he says, "Look," he said, "you know, the city sponsors, every summer, a series called Jazz in the Park," and he said, "With your name," he said, "we'd love to have you do something for me."  He said, "Why don't you put a big band together?"  And I said, "Oh, Alan," I said, "I have no desire to put a band together."  I said, "That's the last thing I'm looking for."  So then he said, "Well, suppose we put a band together for you, and you just bring your music?"  And he said, "We'd like to have a name like yours, you know, Jazz in the Park."  So, so I did a series on the Jazz in the Park thing, and some of the musicians that they put together--they put together a band, and one of the trumpet players at the time was the, the head of the jazz studies at UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] here, and he called me one day and he said, "Man," he said, "what you do with those arrangements out there, those arrangements and tune," he says, "were great."  He said, "We'd like to buy some of 'em over at UNLV--buy 'em for the band."  So, so I took, took, took 'em over and he bought some, and then he called me back and he said, "We're doing our fall concert.  The guys would really like your charts."  He said, "Would you be willing to come in?"  He said, "We'd like to close our fall concert with this--your music, and have you conduct."  And so I did.  And at the time, Ken Hanlon [Kenneth Hanlon], one of the professors at the university happened to be there and, and he and another professor had set up a little record label, and he approached me.  He said, "You know," he said, "we'd sure love to record the UNLV Jazz Ensemble doing your work, you know, like the concert that we heard."  And so I was very flattered, so I said--you know, and he said, "Would you be willin' to do it?"  I said, "Yeah."  So, some time went by and I thought they'd forgotten all about it.  Hanlon called me back one day and he says, "You know," he said, "we haven't forgotten," he says, "We're just gettin' around to doing it," he said.  And then he says, "I wonder if, if we were to contact some of the people that you had produced, I wonder if they might be willing to come in and do a cameo on this album."  And I said, "Well," I said, I said, "Well, good luck," I said, "'cause I haven't talked to these people in years and years."  Well, a, a few weeks went by and he began callin' me back.  He said, "I just talked to Phil Woods," he said.  "Phil Woods said, '[HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate?' he said, 'I'll be there.'"  He called back, he said, "I just talked to Shirley Horn," he said, "She just had one of her legs amputated, but she said, 'I'll crawl.'"  And--so, he ended up with, I guess there was, of course, Phil Woods, Shirley Horn, Harvey Mason, James Moody, Monty Alexander, Marlena Shaw, Ron Carter--they all showed up.  And then he said, "You know what?"  He says, "We're gonna try to do this thing in a concert, and if"--he said, "If we can get them all here at the same time, and do a concert and record the concert live"--well, that's what he did, and that's what that eightieth birthday celebration was all about.  And I, I was just--it was just overwhelming, you know--yeah.  But after that, then they approached me at UNLV and asked me if I would teach a course in film scoring, so that's what I do nowadays--
Story_ID: 248106
Speaker 1: The only jazz station that we have in town is the university station KUNV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], and about seven years ago, the station manager approached me, he says, "Would you be willing to come in and do a DJ show for us?"  So I says, "Well," I said, "I'll do a one-hour show for you."  So I started out doing a one-hour show, and then here he came to me one day and said, "We're gettin' a lotta calls," and said, "Well"--oh, the other thing is, I don't use my name on the radio, but they heard Carolyn [Pate] call me the Maestro one day, so the station calls me the Maestro; I don't say, "This is the Maestro," or any of that, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you don't use your name on the radio--
Speaker 1: I don't use my name on the radio.
Speaker 2: --but you're on and you're playing music--
Speaker 1: But I'm on, I'm on playing music, yeah.  But he came to me and he said, "Some people, people have been callin' in and they said isn't it possible to have the Maestro do more than one hour?"  So then I began doin' two hours, and then one of the guys who was doing a, a five-hour show left the station, so they came to me and said, "Would you want this spot?"  Well, the spot is during the middle of the day; it's from ten [o'clock] in the morning 'til three [o'clock] in the afternoon so, you know, and we--I don't run into any traffic or anything goin' there, so I said, "Sure, I'll do it."  So now I do a five-hour show on Fridays; Friday morning I do ten 'til three in the afternoon.  So, so, that's about my routine (laughter) nowadays, and I'm very happy about it.  From time-to-time, if a friend or somebody comes to me and they want an arrangement or something, I will do it, but for the most part, I'm really, really out of the business.  I don't want the hassle and the stress of it anymore, 'specially not at this age.  And at eighty years old, I'm not lookin' for a career.
Story_ID: 248107
Speaker 1: Okay.  Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different, and it's this.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a hard one.  How would I like to be remembered?  I guess it's--I'd like to be remembered, I guess as somebody who maybe made a little good music during my lifetime, and I guess I'd just like to remember--be remembered as a nice guy.
Story_ID: 248108
Speaker 1: All right, this is my mother Nora [Radford] Pate, and this must have been sometime durin' the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: And these are the two most important people in my life, my wife Carolyn [Pate], and my last son Brett [Pate].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready for the next one.
Speaker 1: And this happens to be my only grandson, and he's with his dad, my son Donald [Pate], and Marlon [Pate] is my grandson; he lives in Copenhagen [Denmark], he's of Danish descent.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is Carolyn, Don and Marlon again.  This was something--taken just this year; just a few months ago in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And here I am with the king himself, with [HistoryMaker] B.B. King.  This was back in the '80s [1980s]; this was right here in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: This is my only daughter, Yvonne [Pate Smith].  I think this was taken while Yvonne was in college--Western Michigan [University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was my first-born, John, [Pate] Jr.  He's now retired from the [Chicago] Board of Education in the Chicago [Illinois] area, and he lives in Linwood [Illinois].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: And this is what I used to do; this was taken in Chicago.  This was back, I'd say, in the '60s [1960s], late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s].  I guess I'm hard at work.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is a shot--it's a slight story behind this.  Can I do this story real quickly?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: One day, I was sitting here at home and I got a call from B.B. King, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Johnny [Pate], I'm gonna be in town for a couple of days, I wanna run by and see you."  I said, "Well, today is not good," I said, "I've got an appointment with Joe Williams."  So he says, "What time is he coming?"  I said, "Well," I said, "Sometime this afternoon."  And B.B. says, "Call me as soon as he gets there."  He said, "I wanna sneak up on him."  And this was the day that I had two real legends, B.B. King and Joe Williams, right here in my living room.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This is a shot--I'm not sure where this was taken; it might have been at one of Joe Williams' scholarship fundraisers, but--I'm not sure who the gentleman is on the--on my far right, next to B.B. King; I'm not sure who he is, but it's B.B. King, Ruth Brown, Joe Williams, and myself, so I've really got three legends there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Earlier, I spoke of a young man name John Clayton.  That's John Clayton on my left, and his brother Jeff Clayton on my right.  So it's John Clayton, Jeff Clayton and myself, and this must have been, I guess, during the '90s [1990s] sometime, I'm not exactly sure exactly where or when it was, but remember the name John Clayton.
Speaker 2: Here we go.
Speaker 1: Here are two real legends.  The gentleman in the middle is Gerald Wilson; Gerald is now eighty-six years old.  The gentleman on his right is James Moody, and myself.  This was at a jazz educators convention.  If I'm not mistaken, it might have been in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: The gentleman with me here is one of the finest drummers and one of the finest vocalists around; his name is Grady Tate, and we always have our little funny things goin' because my name is Pate, his name is Tate.  So we have this nice little funny thing goin', Pate and Tate.
Story_ID: 248109
Speaker 1: With me here is Monty Alexander, one of the finest jazz pianists I think you'll ever hear in life.  Monty and I go back quite a few years.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Little guys here.
Speaker 2: I hope I can see this one.  When he, when he blows it up I hope I can see it.  Oh, oh, this goes back--this is my only brother, my only brother Chuck [Charles Pate, Jr.] and myself.  This was on 16th Street in Chicago Heights [Illinois].  I would guess I must have been about seven or eight, and he must have been about nine; he was two years older than I am--my brother Chuck and myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This was my junior high school picture; I was in junior high [Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois].  This must have been around 1938.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next?
Speaker 2: The shot here is VE [Victory in Europe] Day parade in Marce, France.  The war was over in Europe, and this was the VE Day parade in Marce, France, and I was marching with the tuba.
Speaker 1: And this is a longer shot from the same parade; this is the band that I, I was in the whole time I was in service.  It was the 218th Army Ground Forces Band.
Speaker 2: I'm not mistaken this was in Salzburg, Austria.  I was playing the upright bass and still in service at that time.
Speaker 1: And I guess this is a little shot that was made maybe a year or so ago; I'm down in my office, I guess.  I now do everything; I do all the writing that I do at the computer and the computers are hooked up to a keyboard.  I guess this is me working on something.
Speaker 2: This is another [U.S.] Army photo shot while I was in service.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is my granddaughter, my granddaughter Lauren [Smith].  Lauren [Smith] lives in Portland, Oregon; she's quite a young lady now.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my good buddy Peabo Bryson.  Peabo, who I did quite a bit of work with.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: The Trolls.
Speaker 1: This is a group that I was signing to ABC-Paramount [Records], a group back in the rock and roll days, a group called The Trolls.  This was a signing in Chicago [Illinois]; I was in Chicago when I signed this group.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Here I am with Miss Rhythm herself, Miss Ruth Brown.  That was probably maybe a year or so ago, right here in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think this was a random shot that somebody took at Universal [Recording Corporation] studios in Chicago; I guess--I don't know who I was recording at that time, but this was right in the middle of a recording session.
Speaker 2: Here's another shot in Chicago; in fact, that's Betty Everett right in the middle, and I guess we're doin' a little clowning.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: I think that's the same shot you had before, that we had before.
Speaker 1: Oh, we had this before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we've had that one so let's dump that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These are two very prominent jazz musicians.  The gentleman in the middle has passed away, Milt Jackson; they called him "Bags," and the gentleman on his left, Richard Davis, very fine bass player.  He's now teaching at the University of Wisconsin[-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Is he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, teaching at the University of Wisconsin, yeah.  Richard Davis, very good friend.
Speaker 1: Two other very prominent jazz musicians; gentleman in the red jacket, Billy Higgins, a fine drummer, passed away a couple--and the gentleman with the coveralls, very--Donald Byrd.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I guess another shot of me with--playing the bass.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a shot in the studio of my very first trio.  Charles Walton was on the drums and Ronnell Bright on piano.  This is the very first group I ever had.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Story_ID: 248110
Speaker 1: This is the great [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and myself.  This goes back to the--I guess the '50s [1950s].  I remember Quincy was in Chicago [Illinois] recording the Count Basie band, and he had me in the booths reading scores for him, but Quincy and I were, were friends for many, many years and--well, we still are; just talked to him last night.
Speaker 2: This is when I worked with the Duke Ellington band.  This is at the old Blue Note [Jazz Club] in Chicago [Illinois].  I worked with them on several occasions, but this was one of the times that I was working with them, and 'course in that band, you see all of the giants--Johnny Hodges, Paul Gonsalves, Harry Carney.
Speaker 1: This is another great photo.  My arms around [James] Moody with the saxophone, and the gentleman just to my right is Red Rodney, great trumpet player, and the gentleman on the end is the great Max Roach.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Something that we didn't mention in the interview, I got a call one day, and I hear this English accent, and--says, "John--John Pate [HistoryMaker Johnny Pate]?"  I said, "Yes."  He says, "Well, I'm calling for the Bee Gees."  I said, I said, "Somebody's puttin' me on," you know.  He says, "No," he says--well, anyway, they wanted me to fly out to California to do an album with them, and these are two of the brothers, Maurice [Gibb] and--
Speaker 2: Andy [Gibb]?
Speaker 1: It's not Andy [sic. Robin Gibb].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, I done drawn a blank, but it's Maurice.  But, but these, these are the twins--the twin brothers, and one has passed away.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: One has passed away.  But anyway, this--that was during the time that I worked with the Bee Gees.
Speaker 2: And this goes back to my high school basketball days [at Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]; it was a photo--I think a yearbook photo with the basketball.
Speaker 1: Once again, some real giants.  I'm in-between two of the greatest bass players have ever played; they're both gone now--Ray Brown on my right, and Milt Hinton right next to me, and then the great Hank Jones, brother of Thad Jones, is on the end.
Speaker 2: This was my very first trio.  Ronnell Bright up on top, I'm in the middle, and Charles Walton the drummer, on the bottom.
Speaker 1: This was at a recording date with Kenny Burrell who's standing in the middle between his manager Warren Stevens, myself, and the two gentlemen that are just behind me are very flutists name Lenny Druss; in fact, on my recording of 'Swingin' Shepherd Blues,' Lenny Druss was playing flute, and the gentleman just behind him is Bobby Christian, very fine percussionist; that was in Chicago [Illinois] as well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Curtis Mayfield and I.  Curtis is in the middle.  The gentleman on the other side, I don't know who he is; I can't remember who he is--no idea.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: I had mentioned a little while ago, Joe Thornton [ph.] is the doctor who's standing on the, on the right of Kenny Burrell, and that's Kenny Burrell in the middle and Joe Thornton.  Joe Thornton is a real, real jazz lover.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is me in the days, I guess, when I wore a mustache (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  A very neat (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this is the late, great Carmen McRae; we were very good friends.
Speaker 1: I don't know what the--the year, the year is on there somewhere; it may be at the bottom.  Can you read the bottom, Larry [Crowe]?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to--
Speaker 1: What hear it was--'69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  This is when I was on the national board of trustees for the, for the folks that give out the Grammys [Grammy Awards], and this was in 1968; this was at one of the national trustee meetings.
Speaker 2: That's NARAS.
Speaker 1: Yeah, NARAS, National Academy Recording Arts and Sciences [The Recording Academy], right.
Speaker 2: This is my mother [Nora Radford Pate], my brother, and I when we were coming up back in the real olden days.  I thought there was a picture of Getz in here, but I guess maybe it might have fallen out.
Speaker 1: That's my brother (unclear).  My brother Chuck, Charles Pate [Jr.]--Pate [Jr.]; he passed away a few years back, but--my only brother.
Speaker 2: This is Joe Williams with the dark glasses on and the red shirt; Clark Terry next to Joe, and Max Roach again--three great musicians.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think that's it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is Ray Charles and Shirley Horn.  Shirley Horn called me one day, and she was here in [Las] Vegas [Nevada], and I said, "Well, are you appearing?"  She said, "No."  She said, "I came with my daughter."  Her daughter was here at a meeting, and she said, "You know," she said, "I've never met Ray Charles."  She said, she said, "You do know him, don't you?"  I said, "Yeah."  I said, "I know him," so she said, "would you take me and introduce me to him?"  So I took her to see him, and I took her backstage, and that's when she met him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And once again, this is my wonderful twosome, Carolyn [Pate], my son Brett [Pate], and myself.  And this--taken, I guess, not too long ago.  Yeah, that's fairly recent.
