Story_ID: 364873
Speaker 1: Mr. Paterson [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson], I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  I will be the interviewer today.  This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.
Speaker 2: How are you?
Speaker 1: And I will start by having you state your full name, including the middle name, if you have one, and spelling it out for us.
Speaker 2: It's Basil Alexander Paterson with one T.
Speaker 1: And, Basil, the origins of the name.
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think--but I think somebody said my father [Leonard Paterson] once said, he named me after some Greek munitions dealer of the First World War [World War I, WWI].  I said, "What is that guy (laughter)?"  I don't know.  It's Basil.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 27, 1926.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: 279 West 119th Street in Harlem [New York, New York] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that--was that--200--you were born then--
Speaker 2: I was born in a building, in a house.
Speaker 1: In a house (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) An apartment, in an apartment.
Speaker 1: In an apartment.  With a midwife, then or--
Speaker 2: --I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't know.
Speaker 2: No, I think it was a doctor, but they never got--I had two older sisters [Carol Paterson and Jacynth Paterson] went to the hospital, and I had a younger sister [Patricia Paterson] went to the hospital, but I never got to the hospital.  They told me--I used to go by--I remember when I was first running for an office I couldn't win, I used to go in front of the building and say, I was born in this building, you know, I'm from here.  It didn't help me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Okay.  So your--your place of birth is New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Today's date one, eighteen of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) is January 18th, 19--2007.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007].  And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is 1350 Broadway, the Manhattan offices of the law firm of Meyer, Suozzi, English and Klein [Meyer, Suozzi, English and Klein, P.C.], of which I'm a partner.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, then, of course?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Story_ID: 364874
Speaker 1: Well, we will start.  I'm gonna ask you five basic People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: I think it's red (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hot dogs (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: I guess it's always been the hottest part of the summer.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I go away a lot, but I like do a vacation right in the neighborhood I live in [in New York, New York].  Nice chance to meet people I know and get a chance--not be rushing by them, you stop and talk.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: According to my wife [Portia Hairston Paterson], it's, get outta here.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: She keeps telling me to stop staying it, so I guess that's what it is. Get outta here (laughter).
Story_ID: 364875
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start, and we're gonna talk about your childhood, we're gonna talk about your parents, we wanna talk about the people who did for you what you did for you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Shawn [Shawn Wilson], Shawn, you don't have to tell me in advance, I'm probably better off if you just don't--just launch into it.  It'll be fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we will start with your mother, your mother's full name and her place and--place and date of birth.
Speaker 2: Evangeline Rondon [Evangeline Rondon Paterson], R-O-N-D-O-N, and she was born in Spanish Town, Jamaica; Jamaica, West Indies.
Speaker 1: And her date of birth, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  June 2nd, 1900.  We always knew her date of birth 'cause if we knew what year it was, we knew how old she was.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did she do for a living in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: She came here very young, so I don't think she did very much in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of the town she was born in?
Speaker 2: Well, Spanish Town (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spanish Town.
Speaker 2: It's like a suburb of Kingston [Jamaica], a few miles away from Kingston.
Speaker 1: So did your mother ever talk about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Not too much.
Speaker 1: No?  Do you know anything about her mother, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.  I had older sisters [Carol Paterson and Jacynth Paterson] who actually went to Jamaica and met my grandmother, but I never met any of my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's talk about your mother from your perspective as a child here in Harlem [New York, New York].  What did she do for a living there?
Speaker 2: My mother was a homemaker until I was in--I guess in high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York].  And I think in that generation, no matter how poor you were, your mother was home, but when I got to high school, she went back--she went--and went to work.
Speaker 1: And what did she do for a living then?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, before I was born, had been a sec- one of the secretaries to a famous man, and at the moment it--the Jamaican who became famous in this country.  Oh, God.  What's the name?  The big Negro Improvement Association, United Negro Improvement Association.  You must know who he was.  Quick (laughter).
Speaker 1: I can't think--his name escapes me, but--
Speaker 2: Oh.  He was a great organizer of our time.  They charged him with violating federal law and he bought some ships and was gonna ship blacks back to Africa.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Marcus.
Speaker 2: Ah, Marcus Garvey.  Marcus Garvey.  My mother was one of his secretaries.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then you grew up in a household that was somewhat political, even as a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my father [Leonard Paterson] knew more about it than my mother.
Story_ID: 364876
Speaker 1: My father knew all about Marcus Garvey and his movement.
Speaker 2: Okay and yo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My father was very political.  He read everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your father's name?
Speaker 1: He wasn't active in anything, but he read everything, and he talked about it a lot.
Speaker 2: And your father's name?
Speaker 1: Leonard [Leonard Paterson], L-E-O-N-A-R-D.
Speaker 2: And is his middle initial J?
Speaker 1: J, yeah, J for James.
Speaker 2: Paterson?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Excuse me one moment?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I just want to -- I'm dripping.
Speaker 2: So we were talking about your father.  Your father, just to get his place of birth.
Speaker 1: He was born in Carriacou in British West Indies, which is Grenada.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And his date of birth, do you know?
Speaker 1: Sometime eight--February 1893.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were saying that your father was very political and since that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, political, point of view of his interest. Activity, no.  My father stayed in the house.  We always knew my father was home.  When he came--he worked long hours, and when he came home, he was home.
Speaker 2: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: He was electroplater.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So when he came home, you said he was home.  But he always read.  What did he read (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was home.  He didn't go out.  He read everything imaginable; books, papers, and he didn't go but to sixth grade, but he was probably one of the great readers I've ever known.  I can recall once when I was in college [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York], I made some remark about some tariff act in this country, two tariff acts, my father said to me, "You got them reversed," I said, "Wait a minute," I went and got my textbook, he said, "You got them reversed, the book is wrong," and I went to the library and checked it, and went to my professor and showed him, of course and he said, "I wanna meet your father."  Yeah, he was a great reader, a very good thinker.
Story_ID: 364877
Speaker 1: Now, do, did they--culturally, because you're at home, were--did you experience the Jamaican culture, the West Indian culture?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess we did.  The strangest thing is most of the neighborhoods I lived in growing up, there were very few West Indians there.  Most of the people were southern, and maybe that's why I married a southern girl [Portia Hairston Paterson], I don't know.  But, no, they used to kid me about that my taste in food did not tend to go towards rice and peas, it went more toward potatoes, you know.  But, no, the West Indian culture was there, there's no question about it.  I--there were always people who--relatives or friends, my mother [Evangeline Rondon Paterson] being from Jamaica, my father [Leonard Paterson] being from Grenada, you got people from every island imaginable--Trinidad, Barbados, St. Lucia, (background noise) you--St. Vincent, you name them--they were always in and out of my house, but in the neighborhood, the people I grew up with, most of the people there were southern heritage.
Speaker 1: Did your mother and father talk about why they had come to New York City [New York, New York] ever?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm trying to recall.  My mother came, obvio- like some of the other immigrants, looking for a better life.  My father, the story I always heard, was that he had five or six brothers, all of whom had been taken to the British Army at the time of the First World War [World War I, WWI], and they would not take the last one, so his family sent him here.  That was it.
Speaker 1: So he only escaped or he got out of it because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't escape, but he came here--
Speaker 1: Well, he was the youngest.  I mean that was his out, was that he was the youngest.
Speaker 2: Yes, so he came to this country.
Speaker 1: So he came--did he have relatives in this country when he came (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think he had any relatives.
Speaker 1: So he came alone.
Speaker 2: I think he--he may have--not at that time.  I'm thinking--I don't remember him talking about relatives here.
Story_ID: 364878
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Growing up on 111th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], and--but at age five, we moved to 119th Street, between Manhattan [Avenue] and Morningside [Avenue], so most of my recollections would be from age five to age sixteen when we moved somewhere else, to 117th Street, but we lived in the neighborhood always (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about (unclear) around age five--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --what would the--what was the--what did you consider important at the time?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, no recollection of it.
Speaker 1: No recol- oh.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Who were the other people in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I realized who they were years later.  But at that time I didn't know--I knew the--I knew the superintendent's son, you know, we ran around together as little kids.
Speaker 1: Could you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Norman [ph.] something.  Yeah.  Norman something.  I remember him locking me in a refrigerator, I remember that much about it.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you--what are your recollections of Harlem as far as being, you know, the black mecca, 125th Street?  Did the place feel special to you as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, because from the time I was very small, or very young, I used to every Saturday morning walk up to 125th Street--I lived 119th--to pay the insurance policies.  These are those, you know, ten cents a week policies that people got conned into buying in those days, and I'd go up there and I would cross 125th Street, and in those days it was a bustling community, and it is again, it is again, it's come back.  But my recollection, obviously, thinking about it years later, everything there was white, you know.  All the stores were white, they were owned by whites, all the clerks were white, you didn't see a black face in any store you went into, so that when a neighbor of mine started a buy black movement, a lot of us were very much attracted to it.
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up as a child, 125th Street was white-owned and operated.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you remember some of the names of the stores that were on 125th Street?
Speaker 2: Well, you had Wisebecker [ph.], which was a meat market, delicatessen, you had Blumstein [Blumstein's Department Store, New York, New York], which I think is still there but it's rented out different neighborhoods, the local department store, you had--different stores that were there, I don't know whether their parts are changed or not, but as I said before, they were all totally white.
Speaker 1: Did you ever aten--
Speaker 2: I mean, what struck me, as you think about it years later, that it was--it was apparently accepted.  You didn't see a black clerk, a black saleswoman--none of that.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Evangeline Rondon Paterson] ever talk about--did--were you old enough to understand what Marcus Garvey was intending to do?
Speaker 2: When I got older I was.  I didn't know anything about him when I was younger, but I realized it years later, exactly what he was trying to do.
Speaker 1: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when you were younger, were there any people in the neighborhood that you looked up to?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, the toughest thug probably (laughter).
Speaker 2: Who was the toughest thug (laughter)?
Speaker 1: I don't know, but there was like Sugar Ray Robinson living in the next block, he was a little older, you know.  There were a lot of--interesting people grew up in that neighborhood, and of course, for people haven't--didn't grow up in Harlem, it's different.  I know my wife [Portia Hairston Paterson] grew up in Brooklyn [New York], and the long area that she was, it was nowhere like where we were.  Our area was congested.  We lived in a five-story walk-up, we lived on the top-floor tenement, and you had tenements in that block, which meant a lot of kids.  You always had company.  I feel sorry for those people that didn't live in a tenement.  You don't know what company is unless you've lived in one, because every building had--it seemed like a hundred kids.  So there's never a loss for picking out who you wanted to be around, they were always there.  And there were always games in the street.  You had cars, but you didn't have the kind of traffic congestion you have now, and we played every game imaginable in the street, in the middle of the street.  You know, the cars would stop when they came along, and you'd get out the way.
Story_ID: 364879
Speaker 1: At that time do you remember--I mean, just thinking on the street, were, were there the same kind of tensions between the police and the black community in Harlem [New York, New York] that exists or has existed in the past?
Speaker 2: I've tried to think about that at different times, because growing up I had trouble with the cops.  I always had trouble with the cops, and one once told my mother [Evangeline Rondon Paterson] I had a bad attitude.  Well, you know, when you're eleven, twelve years old, how can you have a bad attitude?  I mean, there was a tension, but there was no confrontation with the cops.  Nobody would dare do that, but I can remember being chased by cops.  For what?  For putting a--building a fire in the street, you know.  Three of us would--I always remember this, we were chased around a corner.  It was dark--it didn't have to be that late, it was winter--and the cop threw his nightstick at us.  I always remember that, the nightstick clanging along as we're running on, and I said--you know, I thought about it years later, the eldest person with us couldn't have been more than thirteen years old, twelve maybe, and a cop throws a nightstick at us.  As I got older, it got more difficult.  There's been tension with people in Harlem with the police since I can remember.  It's always been there.  The strangest thing is we used to say that the very cops who--by the way, corruption was rife, you saw it, you saw the numbers men, who were the only ones who knew the cops, knew their first names. Numbers, if anybody doesn't understand that, it was a policy racket, you bet three numbers, if you came out, you got 550 to one, what happened to the other 450?  You figure it out.  Some people got rich, and some cops got rich.  All this came out with the Knapp Commission [Commission to Investigate Alleged Police Corruption] investigation many years ago, it all got--it was laid right out.  But everybody that lived in Harlem knew about it long before that.   You knew that when you saw a police car stop in front of the local deli on a Sunday morning, they're stopping to get their pay-off because the deli was probably selling beer before two o'clock or whatever time it was, we had blue laws in New York and churches required that they not sell beer before a certain time.  You saw it.  It was--obviously, and the cops break up crap games and somebody says, "Stop and give them the money," and the crap game resumed, yeah, you saw this.  It's not like that anymore.  I mean, there may be graft, there may be corruption, but it's not systemic.  I mean, even when Judge Mollen, Milton Mollen Commission [Commission To Investigate Allegations of Police Corruption and the Anti-Corruption Procedures of the Police Department] investigated the Dirty Thirty precinct, his report was you had certain precincts where you might have a gang of four or five cops who in many ways intimidated the other members and did things that were bad, but it's not like it once was.  I mean, it's systematized, but the precinct got a certain amount of money every month from the numbers men, the cop on the beat got, the traffic cop got, you name them, they all got paid a certain amount, it was known.  What was funny, I look back now, I remember all these big scandals and they're shaking up the police department [New York City Police Department], they're transferring people from one borough to the other, but when I got to law school [St. John's College School of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York], I found out what that was about.  The black book stayed in the precinct, so whoever came to the precinct knew who it was who paid X number of dollars into the precinct each week or each month.  That began--it was an interesting point in law, because that black book was entered into evidence--I think it was Tom (unclear) [ph.] and his special prosecutors way back on the grounds that these were entries made in the ordinary course of business, which is a fundamental law of evidence.  Entries made into any document in the ordinary course of business are admissible into evidence, so that black book was admissible into evidence, and that's how they got a lot of people.  But that black book was always there, they could shift cops around, but it didn't matter.  The system remained and existed until--probably the biggest impact on it was when they legalized the lottery.  When they had a legal lottery--when they legalized it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when did they legalize the lottery--
Speaker 2: Oh, that had to be--I was going to say I was in the State Senate [New York State Senate] when it happened, so it had to be around '68 [1968], 1968, '69 [1969], but there's still numbers men operating, the state and the government can't give credit, but private entrepreneurs can give credit.  But it's not like it once was, and the graft is not there, but the tension still remained.  You asked about the tension, the tension's still there, but they used to say the very same cops who were on the take would risk their lives to save you, there was a belief there, the very cops that might be abusing somebody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you agree with it?
Speaker 2: Did I agree with it?  Yeah, I think it was true.  I think it was just a system that existed.  They--some cops say, well, it was combat pay.  Combat pay for what?  For operating in a minority community, a black or Latino community?  I literally have seen a cop cry, and asked--I was eating in a restaurant, what's (unclear)--I said, "What's that about," and another cop said to me, "He's being transferred."  I said, "Where to?"  He said, "Staten Island [New York]."  I said, "Where does he live?"  He said Staten Island, I said, he ought to be happy.  He said, "He can't afford it."  He was in a precinct where he could make money, he couldn't afford to be sent to a precinct where he couldn't make money, but that's--hopefully it's gone.
Story_ID: 364880
Speaker 1: Did you ever see any black police officers during the time you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were a few.
Speaker 1: Were they considered to be corrupt as well in the eyes of the community?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I've never thought about it, but I think the community felt they were cops that were part of the system.  I've talked to black cops who were--back then, long since retired and even afterwards.  I used to talk to a lot of cops when I was in State Senate [New York State Senate], 'cause I wanted to know what the system was, what you could do to help them, or whatever else.  Black cops had a very tough time on the police force.  I did a report back in 1966, forty years ago, that got big play in The New York Times.  We talk about how many black cops percentage-wise were on the force, and it was then about 5 percent, and how many black cops were in patrol cars, how maybe were made plainclothes detective, it was all appointed situation, no exam, how many black cops were there in detective squad and all of these things, non-exam, appointment, the numbers were ridiculously low.  So there was racism, as in every other institution, there's racism in the police department [New York City Police Department], looking at the numbers in the fire department [New York City Fire Department] even today, even today.  It's outrageous.
Speaker 1: So you spoke about the fire department.  Did you have the same sort of combative attitude with the fire department?
Speaker 2: I don't think people had much contact with them unless you had a fire.
Speaker 1: Unless you had a fire.
Story_ID: 364881
Speaker 1: What about--you were raised Catholic?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you attend--was there a Catholic church in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Sure.  It's now closed.  St. Thomas the Apostle [St. Thomas the Apostle Church, New York, New York], I think it was--18th Street [sic. 118th Street] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he a black priest?
Speaker 2: No, no black priest, no black priest.  Now I go to a church where the pastor is black, you know, we have a black priest there.  That didn't bother us at the time.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that church?
Speaker 2: Where I go now?
Speaker 1: No, the one back then.
Speaker 2: St. Thomas the Apostle.  It was closed about three years ago, it had fallen in disrepair, it took a lot of money to repair, and the congregation had just shriveled up a great deal.
Speaker 1: Now, both your parents were Catholic also?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My mother [Evangeline Rondon Paterson] was Catholic, my father [Leonard Paterson] was anti-Catholic (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he attend church at all?
Speaker 2: No, he became a Catholic shortly before he died (laughter).  (Unclear) you know.
Speaker 1: Did they ever tell you the story of their meeting and marrying?
Speaker 2: No, I always heard that she was pushing somebody else's baby carriage, and he walked up and talked to her, yeah.  No, that's all I recall.  But, you know, when you asked was I raised Catholic, I never attended Catholic schools or anything of that sort.
Speaker 1: Except for St. John's [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Except for college, yeah.
Story_ID: 364882
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up as a child, at what point did you become interested in law or did that happen much later on?
Speaker 2: That happened--I didn't know what to do with myself after I graduated from college [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York].  I had finished college, I had no interest--I had started out as a pre-med student, but then worked in a hospital and decided that's not what I wanted to do.  When I finished college, along about August, I said--I always was working, but I said, I gotta do something, this is leading nowhere, I went back to my--to the college and asked them could they enroll me the following year in the law school [St. John's College School of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: What did you get your bachelor's degree in?  You--
Speaker 2: I had a B.S., a Bachelor of Science, and majored in biology.
Speaker 1: In biology.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  When I went back--what was interesting is they said, "Why you gonna wait another year, we'll get you in."  I said, "How?  They have a long waiting list."   "You're from our school," and they put me in right away, put me in the next month, I was in, in law school.
Story_ID: 364883
Speaker 1: So were there ever any teachers during the time you were in high school that may have inspired you or inspiration--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I really wanted to be.  I wanted to be a teacher.  I had a teacher when I was in the fifth grade who made me feel very good about myself, you know.
Speaker 1: Who was that teacher?
Speaker 2: I can't recall his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he a black teacher?
Speaker 2: No, he was a white teacher.
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers throughout the time you were in school?
Speaker 2: When I--I went to DeWitt Clinton High School up in the Bronx [New York].  When I went there, they had ten thousand students.  I went to their hundredth anniversary, and they said it was the largest high school in the history of this country, and they had different classes, you know.  You went different hours and all, and I heard there was a black French teacher there, and I recall to this day that for two weeks I walked around that school looking to see what a black teacher looked like.  I never saw her.  I--people still tell me who I knew then that there was a teacher there.  I never saw her.  I wanted to know what a black teacher looked like.  I had never seen one.  Elementary school, junior high school [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York], high school, never saw a black teacher.
Speaker 1: But you wanted to become a teacher.
Speaker 2: I wanted to become a teacher.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I like summers off (laughter).  I thought I was a ball player, and I wanted to try out, you know, in summers, but--
Speaker 1: So you were an athlete in high school, in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a street athlete, pretty much.  I'm in the Harlem Stickball Hall of Fame [New York, New York].  I know you don't know what a stickball is, but I played that.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course I do, yeah.  So tell me just a little about this teacher, although you can't remember his name, you said he inspired you.
Speaker 2: No, he encouraged me.  I once said something to him, my mother [Evangeline Rondon Paterson] went to open--school week once, and he said to her, "If I had a son, I'd like it to be like your--like your son," you know.  I said, hey, and he gave me the highest grades that I had ever gotten in high school, so, you know, that was--it was very encouraging.  It was funny, it's interesting, that when I got that high grade, after, I always got high grades.  If it was history, I studied history.  If I was sitting on a train and it was an hour's trip, so I had time to read, I always found--I wasn't reading any other book, I was reading my history book, he said, "Oh, you're good in history?  Yeah, because you read it.  You had an interest in it and you read it.  It's like any other subject, you got an interest in it, you're gonna be better in it than something else."
Speaker 1: Why did they send you from Harlem [New York, New York] to the Bronx to go to school?
Speaker 2: I was zoned into it.  It turned out that's how--Clinton School was a very good school, but we--I lived west of 8th Avenue, so west of 8th Ave, they sent you to Clinton.  We were zoned.  You didn't go where you wanted to go.
Story_ID: 364884
Speaker 1: When did you meet, like, Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] and Sutton [Percy Sutton]?  Were you a teenage or much later than that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was--No, no, no, no, no.  That was much later.
Speaker 1: Did you have any political aspirations then at the time when you were a child?
Speaker 2: None whatever.  None whatever.  Had no idea what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had a couple of run-ins with the police, but that didn't spark you to want to become a lawyer or protect the community in any way?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.  I didn't connect it at that time.
Speaker 1: So who you--who do you consider being responsible for you actually going to college and inspiring you to say, you know, you can do this?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, I think, a very interesting story.  I came out of high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York] a month after I turned sixteen, and I was working.  I was working for a Davega sporting goods company [Davega Stores, New York, New York].  Somebody got me that job, and I worked on 42nd Street and worked six days a week and they paid you nothing (laughter), you know, and one day I stopped by the old Port Authority Building on 18th Street and 9th Avenue [sic.], where a cousin of mine worked, and I went--I was making a delivery in the building.  I stopped by to see him, and he said, "What are you doing," and I told him, and he said, "What are they paying you?"  I told him and he said, "How many days?"  I told him.  He said, "No, you could do better than that working here, let me see if I can get you a job at my place."  He got me the job there.  We used to work from noon to nine o'clock at night, because those times you didn't get that hour off for lunch.  You got an hour off for lunch, but it didn't count toward your work day, and this football player used to come in every afternoon, it was about three o'clock, he would be walking in and had a nice sweater, say City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], and I said to somebody, "Who's Joe College?"  And they said, "Oh, that's George Fleary."  That was his name, George Fleary.  I said, "Where does he go to school?"  They said, "He goes to City College."  Well, one day George Fleary is working with me, we're packing, unloading trucks or doing something, and he said, "Kid, why aren't you in school?"  I said, "I finished school."  He said, "What school you talking about?"  I told him I went to Clinton [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York].  He said, "What was your grade average?"  I said, "I don't know, a C plus."  He said, "Why aren't you in college?"  "I can't afford it.  My family can't afford for me to go to college."  He said, "So why don't you can do what I do?  They let me come in from school every day, whatever hour I get here, I get paid for that time."  And he took me to the front of the building where you never went, that was where the whites were.  Matter of fact, they used to pay us three dollars at Christmastime not to come to a Christmas party they had in the local hotel.  People think all this stuff is a thing of the past, some of us lived it.  So he said--he took me to the manager, who I had never met.  I had seen him walk through, and he said, listen, this is a bright young guy, why don't you ask to let him do what I do, and the manager said, "Well, speak to the foreman."  Went to the foreman, he was a black man, and he said, "Absolutely, fine with me, if you wanna do that, fine."  So that's what I did.  I registered and went to college and I--George Fleary became a judge in Brooklyn [New York].  When he ran for office, I went out there and campaigned for him and told the story, 'cause I'm gonna tell ya, he couldn't have been more than--I'm sixteen, I'm thinking George Fleary was then eighteen, nineteen at the most.  And yet here was a fella who took a kid and got him into college, arranged his work schedule so he could go to college.  I never forgot that.  I always thought, that is--that was some man.  He's passed away, and I'll never forget him, because I think of, would I have done that?  How many people would have done what he did?  Went out of his way, he didn't know me, went out of his way to get me into a situation where I could go to school.
Speaker 1: What do you think it was he saw in you?
Speaker 2: I don't think it was what he saw in me, 'cause I knew him later on, it was that's who he was.  If he saw anybody like that, he would have helped them.  He was--he was quite a guy.  He was a very fine guy, became a judge later on and passed away some years ago.  But to think about it, you know, man, when I was eighteen, I wouldn't have thought about that, about helping some kid go to college.  He did.  Yeah, it was a great thing.
Story_ID: 364885
Speaker 1: Why did you select St. John's [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York] as opposed to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was the cheapest.  To go to City College, you had to have an average to get in there.  I came out of a Harlem [New York, New York] school that was described at the time as the worst school in the City of New York [New York], it was a tough school, it was--Cooper Junior High School [James Fenimore Cooper Junior High School, New York, New York] had a very bad reputation.  And when you came out of there, you went to high school, you thought you were on a different planet, you didn't know what they were talking about.  And I was a good school--good student in junior high school, but got to high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York], it took you at least a year to catch up.  You didn't know what they were talking about.  Even though you thought you were good in math, all of a sudden you didn't know what the math was they were talking about.  We used to have students take the exams at the Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and the old Townsend Harris High School [New York, New York].  If we got one pass in a year out of maybe fifteen or twenty students taking it, that was glory time.  So you think about it.  I look back at my class, and we turned out some very good people out of that junior high school class.  It was a rapid advance class.  You ever heard of that?  You did a year and six months, that kind of thing.  And it was a tremendous class.  We turned out--there were two fellas I always remember, Arnold "Duckie" Wallace [ph.] and another fella whose name I don't recall, who wanted to be aeronautical engineers.  We used to laugh.  Teacher say, "What do you want to do when you grow up?"  They would get up and, "Aeronautical engineers."  We would laugh.  Both of them became aeronautical engineers.  Duckie Wallace passed away about five years ago, living in Washington, worked for Boeing [The Boeing Company]. The other one, I don't know where he went, they both made it.  It's an amazing thing to see kids in a school, then you go to high school and you're lost because they didn't teach you the same way.  It's a lesson that I have never forgotten.  Good teachers, decent schools make decent pupils, decent students.  This idea that kids can't learn.  It's not that kids can't learn.  If we teach them, they'll learn.  There's nobody inherently unable to learn.  Yeah, some people are retarded.  But most people have the same ability in their areas.  Give them half a chance, they're gonna make it.
Story_ID: 448887
Speaker 1: So continuing, we were talking about the test, and you said that you had taken the test.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And were lectured afterwards.
Speaker 2: Lectured by the principal and by all of us that took the test, why did you have the nerve to take the test?  Do you know how old we were?  We were probably twelve years old.  Twelve years old.  We were lectured we should not have taken the test to get into one of the specialized schools.  Why?  'Cause we didn't pass it.  Well, I look back at the--those kids who took that test.  They did very well in life, so they survived in spite of difficult odds going to a school where you weren't taught to compete, and my argument was always very simple.  You give a kid a decent education, you allow that he or her--he or she--to go out and compete in society.  If you cripple them with a poor education, they're crippled for the rest of their lives.  It's not just in the marketplace of jobs.  It's how you live, how you have a better life, what you think about, what you read, what you enjoy.  It comes basically from an education.  And our kids are constantly victimized, it's constantly being implied that they have an inability to learn.  That's horseradish.  I mean, I've seen my life experience and the people I grew up with and seeing how well so many of them did, and how others did not do well 'cause they never got their shot.  I mean, you've heard the story, I'm sure, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], we used to say that the greatest mathematicians we ever met were numbers bankers.  They could do math in their heads and never write a slip.  Why?  They wrote the slip, the police had evidence against them.  They'd do it in their heads.  Where do these people come from?  Who are they?  What could they have been?  I heard my son [David Paterson] make a speech the other day in which he said, "The cure for cancer may have been many years ago in the brain of some little Latino girl growing up in the South Bronx [New York] who never got her shot to develop her brain to the best degree."  That's so true.  Our society, if you discriminate against portions of your society, you're handicapping the whole society, and that's a lesson this country's got to learn, sooner or later it's got to learn it.  You don't deprive yourself of the--of the benefits of people's intelligence and their ability to help others by saying, you can't go there 'cause you're a woman, you can't go there 'cause you're black, you can't go there 'cause you're Latino.  It's very poor government, it's poor society, it's a bad culture.
Speaker 1: So do you feel--you took the test, do you feel that the test was biased towards (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  The test was a test that was testing people.  The bias, in my opinion, was interesting now, of the school you're going to not giving you the same lessons the other schools were getting.  They were asking questions on algebra--I recall that distinctly--we had never had.  Never had it.  But I assume if they were asking it, it was being taught in other New York City [New York, New York] schools.
Story_ID: 448888
Speaker 1: So when you get St. John's [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York], how do you--how do you compete as far as your studies?
Speaker 2: Well, I came out of a decent high--DeWitt Clinton [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York] was a decent high school.  Yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) DeWitt Clinton, was what caught you up to the college level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It caught up a lot.  Although St. John's was a Catholic college where most of their students came out of the prep schools, private schools, and they were--they were mean competition.  It was tough to compete with them because they came and they were ready.
Speaker 1: Were you one of a few black students in the biology (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was one of five.
Speaker 1: One of five.
Speaker 2: All--the four others were all on the track team (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why did you choose biology if you thought you wanted to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: I--well, I had a biology teacher in the third term or--yeah, third term, where I did very well in biology, and--yeah, I liked it.  I thought I was good at it.  That's before we got to bacteriology and entomology.  That's when you find it's a little different (laughter).
Speaker 1: And--but at the time you're thinking, okay, I'm going to become a doctor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  That's what every young black kid in Harlem [New York, New York] wanted to be was a doctor.  And very few of them ever got there.  Some made it.
Speaker 1: Did you see any black doctors when you were growing up in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were they?
Speaker 2: My doctors were all black.  I never went to a white doctor except maybe in a clinic.
Story_ID: 448889
Speaker 1: You know, it's a fact that we were doing some work for North General Hospital [New York, New York] a few years ago when we were trying to get the money to get a new building that they didn't build, and we were trying to show why Harlem [New York, New York], as one of the most medically under-served communities in the nation, deserved to have a new voluntary hospital there.  And one of the statistics that struck me, we had--we're going back to, like, 19--I'd say 1990, we had fewer doctors in Harlem than we had in the depths of the Depression [Great Depression].  There were more doctors in Harlem during the Depression than there were in 1990.  I dare say it might be true today.  Might be true today, you know.  That's one of the things that happens in a segregated society, your professionals tend to practice--don't tend, they practice in their own communities.  As we got integrated, a lot of things, many of the black docs who used to practice in Harlem left Harlem and went to other places.
Speaker 2: Do you feel we lost more than we gained?
Speaker 1: That's a great question, and I don't know how to answer it.  We gained more in terms of what our aspirations can be and what reality could be.  We lost some things, there's no question, a lot of black businesses suffered.  I used to marvel whenever I'd go south to some civil rights struggle, I used to marvel at who the real leaders of the Civil Rights Movement were.  They were black teachers in the South who knew they were gonna lose their jobs, you know the system.  The system was they got a year-to-year contract and they didn't have to give cause for firing them or not--no, they didn't fire them, they just didn't renew their contracts.  So these teachers knew they were fighting for something which once the schools were integrated, they were probably going to be the most likely targets not to get contracts instated, and they were in their leading the struggle.  That's something to be proud of.  Something to be proud of.  Yeah.  So your question, did we gain more or lose more through integration?  We have to say we gained more, we have to keep struggling for it.  Well, you know, I look at our schools, they're more segregated now more than they've ever been all over the country.  That's a fact of life.  It's a very difficult--a difficult situation.  Every parent struggles to get their kids into a private school or into a better school.
Speaker 2: Why do you feel there's a difference between legal segregation and what we have today?
Speaker 1: Well, you ask that question knowing that the obvious answer is that legal mandates it.  What we have today is de facto, it just happens, it's a reflection of residential patterns, although that may be changing.  You take a look at Harlem now, you see that the whites are moving into Harlem; that may change the school system, although I'm not sure.  I think maybe those people who are moving in are--moving into new quarters, which means they are paying high rentals, and if they can afford the high rentals or high fees for co-ops and condos, they may well be saying they can supply the schools that may be there.  But when you're gonna take--when you've got actual segreg- separateness--forget about using the term segregation--just separateness, it means that those who--whose parents can afford to do better, take them out of those schools and, therefore, drop the standard, unintentionally, 'cause they're trying to do better for their own.
Speaker 2: What are your feelings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is worse?  They are both, they're the same.  They are both terrible.
Speaker 2: Both the same--
Story_ID: 448890
Speaker 1: What are your feelings on Harlem [New York, New York] turning white?
Speaker 2: Well, since I was ten years old, I remember standing on the corner grocery store listening to these older men--I don't know how old they were, but I thought they were older men--saying, you know, the whites are gonna take back Harlem.  This is the most--this is the center of metropolitan area.  So I got older, I realized that they kept saying that, it wasn't happening, and I used to say years ago they can gentrify Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York], but they're not going to gentrify Harlem, 'cause even I have friends who are afraid to visit me in Harlem.  That's no longer true.  Harlem is no longer the monster name that scares people away.  You walk down a street in Harlem any Sunday morning and see white--young white women pushing their strollers and their babies, you see white women pushing their strollers at night, and they feel secure.  I hope they feel secure.  It's changing.  I just worry and wonder about where are the people going who've been forced out, 'cause when they put up these condos and rental apartments that are--have rents and fees that are well beyond what the people who were there before could afford, where have they gone?  I've asked some real estate brokers I know, where have the people gone?  They say they don't know, some people say they went to the Bronx [New York].  The Bronx is being developed, too.  Went to Brooklyn [New York].  Brooklyn's being developed, too.  Where are these people going?  What's happening to them?  This fight for affordable housing is a real important fight.
Story_ID: 448891
Speaker 1: Okay, continuing. Back at St. John's University [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York], were there any professors there that struck a chord with you, that inspired you?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  There were some good professors.
Speaker 1: But--okay.  So but at this time you're in your late teens, early twenties.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What's happening--
Speaker 2: Well, not really.  Well, what happened was, I was in St. John's for about--less than a year, and I enlisted.  I was seventeen, and I enlisted.  I went in the service, I came back and went to work for a while, and then went back to school.
Speaker 1: Why did you enlist?
Speaker 2: I was tired.  I was working and going to school, and I just wanted to do something else.  It was just too much, it wore on me.  And the neighborhood I was living in, most of the fellas I knew were older than me.  I was a street athlete, so I played with older guys, and it was getting kind of rough out there with few friends, so I said, it's safer to be in the [U.S.] Army than be in this neighborhood.
Speaker 1: That's not something I found about you.  So what year did you enlist?
Speaker 2: Have you ever heard that one before?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I've heard that.  I have friends that told me the same things, different neighborhoods, said they went in 'cause they wanted to get out of there.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: What year did you go in?
Speaker 2: Eighteen o'four [1804] (laughter).  Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So the war [World War II, WWII] had ended?
Speaker 2: No, it ended in '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945]. Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in about--I was in for a little over a year, and then I was out.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did they teach you anything about life, about yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it did me a world of good.  I know that when I went back to school, that was the best grades I ever got.
Speaker 1: Did you travel--did you go to Europe or did you stay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  No.
Speaker 1: Where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: I went to Alabama, Fort McClellan, Alabama, outside Anniston, and I visited some places down there, and--
Speaker 1: The Army was legally segregated still at the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  The only black officers were non-commissioned officers, didn't go above sergeant, and I tell people that Fort McClellan was one of the places where they incarcerated German prisoners of war, and I always thought they got better treated than we did.  They'd be calling us names, and if we answered back, we caught hell.  I mean, it was a funny thing.  I remember going to hear Louis Armstrong in the field house down there, he was going to entertain, and it was segregated.  Black troops had to be one section, white troops were somewhere else, we were in the back, of course.  So every time somebody tries to tell me, you know, oh, that's ancient history.  Not ancient history, and it's not all over.
Story_ID: 448892
Speaker 1: Did you want to make a difference then?  Did you feel you could?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You just accepted it for what it was.
Speaker 2: I don't think I accepted it.  I think I just felt you gotta find a time to do something.  I've always had this attitude, I guess.  I survived where I grew up [Harlem, New York, New York] by picking who I wanted to fight and when I was gonna fight.  And I was pretty good, but I knew that some people you don't take on.  Sometimes you talk your way out of it, you stop.  But you gotta pick your spot.  That's still true today.  We can fight a lot of things, but the smart way is to get it done, it's not how much noise you make, it's what do you accomplish.  We have a lot of people who understand that very well now, and sometimes making noise is very important.  Protest movements are very important.  There's a lawyer named Tom Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd] who represented Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] way back--
Speaker 1: Way back meaning?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I heard Tom Todd at a meeting in Washington [D.C.] once say that he could give credit for all the major civil rights legislation to the protest movement rather than to politics, not put them together.  But he made the point that the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], the '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], the national housing act of '68 [Fair Housing Act of 1968], all were--he could name what had happened before we got that legislation, The March on Washington of '63 [1963] led to the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964], and he pinpointed it.  You know, some people thought, well, people in politics (unclear)--we all said we think you're right, we think you're right.  So protest is part of the political movement.  It has to be when you're a minority, because you don't have the votes to outvote the other people, so you gotta find your spots to make--what did Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] do?  He played on--on the feeling in America that things weren't right, and he proved to them they weren't right.  And after a while, you move.  Now, there's some people don't think showing things are not right in America is going to get us any movement, but you have to pick your spots, you have to decide how to do it, have to pick the locations where you can win.  You're gonna lose a lot of battles, and I don't say you don't go in because you can't win.  I don't buy that at all, but Percy Sutton used to say that he and I and his--the group we had, we ran eleven times before anybody got elected to anything.  So we were not unwilling to lose, and I try to tell young blacks now interested in politics, don't be afraid to lose.  If somebody's giving it to you, it's never yours.  If you go out there and you struggle and you take it for yourself, nobody can tell you what to do, and that's what we--so protest movement's important, but I thought I could make a difference?  I never thought that.  Whatever I've done, I done at the moment what I thought should be done.
Story_ID: 448893
Speaker 1: I envy the people who knew well in advance why they were going to do something, because I've never known that, didn't know why I went to college [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York], didn't know why I went to law school.  Law school, I didn't know why I did it but, you know, that may be that my options were limited.  Some people have open options.  Some of us don't.  I couldn't go to any school I wanted to go to.  I couldn't go to school and study all day and go to the library.  I had to go to work.  I went to law school--and I would never wish this on anybody.  I worked from midnight until eight in the morning, and then went to school, and I'm gonna tell you, I had--another interesting thing, a sister came up to me in law school one day and she said--and she was there--that's what the most interesting thing--she was from Georgia, and at that time Georgia wouldn't permit any blacks in their professional schools, but a black could pick a school anywhere, and they'd pay for it.  So she picks St. John's [St. John's College School of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York] and they pay for it.  And she stopped me one day and she said, "Basil [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson], can I speak to you a moment?" I said, "Sure, what is it?"  She said, "You're embarrassing other blacks in this class," about five of us.  I said, "How?"  She says, "You're sleeping all the time."  So I said, "Well, I try not to," and so she found out, I said to her, "I work before I come to--."  "Oh, I didn't know."  And then she wanted to know how I got good grades.  Well, there were some white students there who had been in college with me who looked out for me, they'd help me--I could look at their notes when they studied.  They'd invite me to study on Sundays or something at their homes, so I'd drive all the way out to--not drive, take the subway out to Brooklyn [New York].  That was very helpful.  There's no question about it.  A lot of people helped me.  But that's not what we want.  We want our--our offspring to go to school and get everything they can out of it.  Our best bet is gonna be our brains, not our brawn and not our numbers.  It's gonna be our brains, our intellectual capacity to deal in this place and deal in the marketplace and deal in the halls of justice and the halls of the--of [U.S.] Congress.  I am proud of the people I see there now.  We've got some excellent people.  I think Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], happens to be a friend, is gonna make a sterling mark, 'cause he's smart as all get-out, and he compete--he can compete with anybody who's out here.  Out-barred, nobody in this country that Charlie can't compete with.  And I look at other people I know out here who I think are ready for the combat, because it really is combat, political combat, whatever you want to call it.  But it's gonna be brain power.  And we're not shy on that.
Story_ID: 448894
Speaker 1: So when you leave Fort McClellan [Alabama], go back to law sch- I mean, to St. John [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York], you graduate, you decide pre-med isn't for you.  Who convinced you to go to law school?
Speaker 2: I don't think anybody did.  I think it was just that I knew that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know any other black lawyers?
Speaker 2: I knew only one black lawyer when I grew up.
Speaker 1: And who was he?
Speaker 2: A man named Reep [ph.].  He later became the local rent administrator.  I think he was on welfare at the time that I knew.  The man clearly had the ability, couldn't get clients.  Couldn't do it.  I mean, there were so few lawyers around, black lawyers, and even black people would say they want a smart white lawyer, smart white--they figured all the judges were white, they did better with a white lawyer.  Times have changed, tremendous change.  We've got some crackerjack black lawyers.  We always had good black doctors.  Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Lincoln [sic.] med schools, they turned out top doctors.  And now we've got--I could name them, you know, but there's a trial going on right now today in Washington [D.C.], and the leader turned to a fella named [HistoryMaker] Theodore Wells.  Teddy Wells comes out of Washington, lives in New Jersey (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna say he's at Paul, Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the management of litigation department of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind.  When Ted was in his early thirties he defended Donovan [Raymond J. Donovan], who was the secretary of labor in a big case in the Bronx [New York].  Ted's as good as anybody in this country.  He's just one of them, you know.  And we got others.  We've have no problem in that area.  We're moving.  We're moving well.  We gotta move other people along, gotta do other things.
Story_ID: 448895
Speaker 1: So who, who was it that in--you just decide--okay, I'm going to law school because I don't wanna go to--you said, I don't want to work or I don't wanna--or you couldn't get a job or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No. I finished college [St. John's College; St. John's University, New York, New York]. I figured I gotta do something 'cause having a college degree wasn't getting me a better job anywhere.
Speaker 1: Did you go back to the Port Authority [Port Authority of New York and New Jersey] to work after you graduated or where did you work right after that?
Speaker 2: When I left law school [St. John's College School of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York], I was working in a hospital.  I was working midnight to eight [o'clock].  No, I--I spoke to lawyers and they got me a job down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your first law job was where?
Speaker 2: Was with Levy and Harten, a law firm on Park Place in Manhattan [New York].  They did trial counsel and personal injury cases, accident cases.  They tried--involved the lawyers.  They were very good.  The lead--senior attorney in there was a tremendous litigator.  So all the lawyers figured they did better giving him their case than do it themselves.
Speaker 1: Were you the only black lawyer on staff?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There didn't have anybody else, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you the first?
Speaker 2: I was the first, the only one.  I didn't stay very long.  I worked on a case (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  How long did you stay?
Speaker 2: --where I thought--I got admitted while I was there in February; and in, like, July I located a witness nobody had been able to find and got a tremendous statement, and they made a lot of money on it; and they told me they were gonna put my name on the door, and I said I need more money, 'cause I was working then in an after-school program at night.  And they said, "You know, you're the highest paid law clerk down here," and I said, "But I have to work, otherwise, it doesn't make sense," and I got in a huff, and I gave them two weeks' notice, and I walked out, I opened up a storefront on Amsterdam Avenue and 140th Street, found a place that was there, and they had a tenant was paying part of the rent in back, and that's what I did, I went in there without a secretary.  You know, I look back and I realize there are stupid things I've done in my life.
Speaker 1: But that was a good thing.
Speaker 2: It turns out to be good, but it was brazen and didn't make much sense.
Speaker 1: Who did you at the time--I mean, you--did you--what type of law did you want to practice?
Speaker 2: Anything that walked in the door where they could afford to pay the fee.  I was the expert.
Speaker 1: So you had no lofty ideas of being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No lofty ideas.
Speaker 1: --like, Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 2: I would have liked to do personal injury because it was highly remunerative, but I couldn't get the cases I knew how to do it, anything that walked in the door.  I hired a little gal that used to jump rope in front of the store answer the phone four hours a day, got lucky.  Got lucky.  People came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your first big breaks as a lawyer.
Speaker 2: I think the most important break I got was that a young man I knew coup- a year or two older than me, he worked for a firm that I had done some business with, and he walked in one night, and he said, "I wanna join you."  I hardly knew him.  Now, I knew a brother of his, an older brother, he used to watch me play ball, and he said, I know all about you, I know who you are, and I wanna join you.  And we remained partners forever--I mean, he passed away.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Ivan Michael [Ivan A. Michael].  Ivan Michael.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the firm?
Speaker 2: Paterson and Michael.  That's what we became, Paterson and Michael.  And he was--he was an excellent lawyer.  He was the lawyer.  He was careful, he was--he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 448896
Speaker 1: Did they prepare you in law school [St. John's College School of Law; St. John's University School of Law, New York, New York] for actually what would happen in the real world of law, in practicing law (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: What did they not tell you that you needed to know?
Speaker 2: I think that most lawyers coming out of school don't know too much about the practice of law.  Matter of fact, this is gonna sound terrible, but I tell some of my colleagues that unless you practice law out there on your own, you really don't know what it is.  Most of the lawyers you run into now, they end up in big law firms, you know, and I call them civil service lawyers.  You know, they work long hours, they do great work.  They may do better work than others.  But unless you've been out there dealing with clients and paying that rent, paying the light bill, and paying for the books, and paying the secretary, and sometimes you go to the bank not to put money in but to get money out so you can pay your expenses and working sometimes nights to pay the bills, you haven't lived (laughter).  You haven't lived.   But you do that and you look at it and you say, well, you're lucky with it.  I was lucky with it.  I had a lawyer with me at one point, and got an offer to go to work--
Speaker 1: He did or you did?
Speaker 2: He did.  He got an offer to go work for the government, ended up pleading cases in the Court of Appeals [New York Court of Appeals], highest court.  I mean, very few lawyers get there, he was doing that.  And one day he came to me and said, "You know, I'm about to retire."  He said, "I'm sorry I ever left."  He said, "I should have stayed with you."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "I didn't have any real--I wasn't married at the time, I lived at home with my mother." He said, but the lure of that money was so great and the prestige of working where he went, I did it, he said, but you've been the lawyer, he said, "You stayed here, you and Ivan Michael [Ivan A. Michael] did this."  It depends what you want to do in life.  There are people that have to do things in their lives that they hate.  They gotta pay bills.
Story_ID: 448897
Speaker 1: I tell people I'm a very lucky lawyer.  I'm in a field that's exciting, just another happenstance.  It happened that when I was in the State Senate [New York State Senate], they came in with the proposed Latilla law [ph.] which stops public employees from striking, and I got up and debated it.  Nobody else would debate it.  And I argued that I didn't know whether the--why this?  And I asked the sponsor of the bill where did this concept that public employees could not strike come from, and he said, "I don't know, but you do, don't you?"  I said, "Sure I know.  It's the divine right of kings, thou shalt not defy the sovereign.  You think about it."  I made it up.  But people now say, that's it.  I think it was.  I think I was guessing it, but you think about it.  Why should public employees not be able to strike?  And when I was speaking, I said, "Look out the windows of Senate," I said, "you see the smoke rising from that smokestack out there, that chimney?"  I said, "That's the Niagara Mohawk [Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation], and they're going nuclear in a few years, and yet they can strike.  Nuclear power plant employees can strike, but the governor's gardener can't strike under this new law," and it turned out the unions heard that all the people that they had been supporting for office didn't get up and debate it.  Some guy they never heard about in Harlem [New York, New York] got up and debated against something they thought was draconian, and they came looking for me.  And later on, I ended up doing labor work, and it was much later, but that was my introduction to it.
Story_ID: 448898
Speaker 1: And I got to liking it, what I do now. I enjoy it, I negotiate, I got a lot of very good unions, they are high profile unions, they do good work, they are very bright leaders, Roger Toussaint on transit; Dennis Rivera, the 1199 [1199SEIU, United Healthcare Workers East], Randi Weingarten, teachers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So just because we're in the modern day, we'll go back to talk about, but I want to talk about Robert Toussaint and the most recent--Roger.
Speaker 1: Roger.
Speaker 2: Roger. And the most recent strike.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Were you opposed to the city workers going on strike or were you in favor of the city workers going on strike?
Speaker 1: I did not think you could have true collective bargaining without the worker having the right to withhold his labor.  Now, I'm one of the few voices out there that says that.  What has happened under Latilla law [ph.] that the power shifted so much to management that I've sat there and seen provocation.  I contend there was high provocation from the transit strike.  At the last moment--I'm talking fifteen minutes to midnight, the experts of the contract, the MTA [Metropolitan Transportation Authority] walked in with a proposal to almost--not double, they took up from--they were going from 4 percent to 6 percent pension contributions.  That's provocative.  As it turned out, it never happened.  They knew it couldn't go anywhere, no union leader could agree to that.  They brought that in, they did other things that were highly provocative.  But, listen, that's the way it is, that's the law, so you have to deal with it.  I've always thought the threat of a strike is probably more powerful than the strike itself.  Strikes don't benefit anyone.  They don't benefit the union, they don't benefit the worker, they don't benefit the management.  They should be avoided, and people try to avoid them.  I don't--I think the transit, the last transit strike a year or so ago, it was almost inevitable.
Speaker 2: What role did you play in that?
Speaker 1: I am a negotiator and attorney with the union (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were in the room with them.
Speaker 1: I was in the room.  I was in the room the whole way, and then later I was there designated to do the arbitration panel.  MTA put one person on, we put one person on, and there was a neutral.  And we ended up with the same contract we'd agreed to.  Roger's right.  Roger's always right.  MTA spent all that money not to do that contract, they ended up with that contract.
Story_ID: 364898
Speaker 1: Continuing. We will go back, but I just want you to speak on, do you feel the punishment has been fair towards--for Mr. Toussaint [Roger Toussaint] and--
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: And why do you feel--do you think race has anything to do with that?
Speaker 2: Well, they're gonna tell you the same thing that Commissioner Kelly [Raymond Kelly] says about the shooting of Sean Bell, can't be racist because there were three black cops there.  So it can't be racist because there's a black judge there.  All I know is that the law says specifically that in mitigation of damages--there are gonna be damages, if you violate the law, they're gonna inflict the penalty, but in mitigation, reduction of those damages, reduction of the penalty, provocation by the employer should be considered.  I thought a strong case was made for provocation.  From having been in the room, I know there was provocation, and that union got hit harder than anybody's ever been hit in history.  They sentenced Roger to ten days in jail, they took--mandatorily--they had to do it--two days' pay for every day they were out, they fined the union [Transport Workers Union] $2.5 million and suspend their dues check-off.  Well, now they're putting the dues check-off back in so they can pay off the 2.5 million, and once they are paid off, then the dues check-off, and I--very frankly I'm saying this now--and I'm going into court to fight that, I'm didn't argue it before, I'm gonna argue that one, but I don't know if the same judge will be there, 'cause he's just been elevated to the Court of Appeals [New York Court of Appeals], Ted Jones [Theodore T. Jones].
Speaker 1: So your position is that he--
Speaker 2: Ted Jones is a good judge.  I just thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what do you think your--
Speaker 2: I just thought this was an aberration.
Speaker 1: Well, weigh in.  What do you think--how do you think--what do your think your outcome will be?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm hopeful that they will restore their dues check-off.  That's the most important thing for a union.  It's very hard to get union members to pay dues if you don't have it being taken it out of their check.  If you don't write a check and mail it in, they just don't bother.  So that's the most crippling thing.  I think, though, that the union's stronger now.  Toussaint's been reelected.  Granted that he didn't win by 90 percent of the vote, there were a lot of candidates out there against him, he didn't get 50 percent, but I think they understand you've got to pull together, the strongest adversaries, said, let's pull together, and I'm hopeful that that's the way it will go.  It's a very tough job to--you know, for the uninitiated, for the people don't look at the job these people do, just think about a bus driver coming to the end of his run, he has to get on another bus.  When does he go to the bathroom?  What about the (unclear) on the train?  I mean, I sat there during the fact-finding, listening to things I thought I knew, it was eye opening.  You have bus drivers who won't drink liquids because they don't want to have to go to the bathroom.  I mean, you think about it.  We have doctors' testimony how crippling and difficult the job is, and we don't think about that.  It's a--it's a tough job, and relations between the MTA [Metropolitan Transportation Authority] and the union are very poor.  It's gratifying, though, to see that the new head of the MTA is now--just a couple of days ago had lunch or breakfast with the president, with Roger Toussaint for three hours.  That's a good sign, when people are talking to each other, but the problem in there as I've seen in the past several years isn't the top, it's when you come down, and to middle management.  How can you have sixteen thousand disciplinary actions against a work force of thirty-three thousand every year, about?
Speaker 1: So let me ask you this: is that middle management white and that--and then it channels down and the majority of the people in the (unclear) are black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  I don't know.  I can't answer.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I know there's something in the culture that's wrong, why these workers are being--you know, 16,000 out of 33,700?  Even the--I've spoken to some of the arbitrators who deal with these complaints, and they said they're ridiculous.  Ridiculous.  Shouldn't happen.  It's really an indictment of management.  They've been writing these people up rather than supervising them.  You think about it.
Story_ID: 364899
Speaker 1: So just going back to your days of hanging your first shingle.  Where was that office located [in New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: 140th Street and Amsterdam Avenue on the west side of the avenue next to the barbershop (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And where did you go from there?  I mean did you become (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I got--when I got comfortable with practicing law on my own--
Speaker 1: Michael Ivan [sic. Ivan A. Michael], it was Paterson Michael.
Speaker 2: Well, he hadn't yet come with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I got comfortable, I moved down to 116th Street off 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard].  That was my neighborhood.  I felt a lot--I always knew I couldn't be there when I started out because too many friends would come to me and say, I need help, and they wouldn't have had the money, and I couldn't have kept the place open (laughter), but--and I wouldn't know how to deal with it.  But by the time I went down there, it was different.  And it was comfortable.  I was, you know, a block away from where I lived.  It was there.  It was the neighborhood, I knew everybody there, and it was very helpful.
Story_ID: 364900
Speaker 1: Who were the other black lawyers in the neighborhood at the time who had offices who were working as you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time I guess--I think Percy Sutton was 125th Street [New York, New York].  That's nothing.  In those days you might have had seventy-five to a hundred black lawyers on 125th Street alone and maybe some on 135th [Street].  You don't have that anymore.  And what it did, you had block associations, you could get a lawyer pro bono, free, 'cause he's trying to build his clientele.  We couldn't advertise in those days.  So how did you get your name out there?  You represented block associations, tenants, councils, you got a lot of free work, you went to any club that was having a meeting, any kind of meeting, you went there and you handed out your card.  That's been a loss to the community because you don't have these lawyers there, the number of lawyers you used to have who are available to help, write the bylaws, the constitution, tell people how to run their meeting.  Those things were very helpful.  We've lost a lot of that.  But you say what did I do?  That's--there were--Percy Sutton was there, a fella named Henry Williams was there, Clifford Scott.  A lot of these people have now become judges.
Speaker 1: What type of law did Percy Sutton practice?
Speaker 2: Just like the rest of us.  General practice.
Speaker 1: General practice.
Speaker 2: Whatever walked in that door.  And suddenly you became an expert, you went and hit the books or you went to court and you learned what was going on, and you did it.
Story_ID: 364901
Speaker 1: Was there ever a chance that you were involved--did you ever have the opportunity to be involved in civil rights law?
Speaker 2: Well--well, yeah, 'cause I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I worked for the Legal Redress Committee [NAACP Legal Redress Committee], so--I remember a kid [James Powell] got killed at Wagner Junior High School [J.H.S. 167, Robert F. Wagner] in East Harlem [sic. Upper East Side, New York, New York], and I investigated that case for the NAACP, got shot by a cop, a detective [Thomas R. Gilligan].
Speaker 1: Tell me that--what was that case?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of it.  It's fairly well-known, but I can't remember the name of it.  Cops shot this twelve, thirteen year-old kid outside of school.  It erupted into a riot.  Some people led a march on the 23rd--28th precinct at that time was on 23rd Street between 7th [Avenue] and 8th [Avenue], and a minister led a march there and it got out of hand, and there was a riot.  It was--I'm guessing that was, like-- if I recall, it was, like, '63 [sic. 1964].  It was a big riot in Harlem [New York, New York], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know Robert Carter [HistoryMaker Robert L. Carter]?  Because he was also at the NAACP.
Speaker 2: Robert Carter was a general counsel of the national group, and at one time I was president of the New York branch, and we dealt with him a great deal.  I still know him.  He's a federal judge, quite a guy.
Speaker 1: So when did you become politically active, enough so to be president of the NAACP?
Speaker 2: I joined--I started--I went to court one day and saw a lawyer come out of the judge's chamber, and when the calendar was called, and his case was the first one called, he was representing the defendant.  And the woman who was the plaintiff never got a chance to speak, and every time she tried to open her mouth, the judge told her keep quiet or he's sending her to workhouse, and I said, hey, something's going on here.  And I never forgot it, it just bothered me.   And I organized my own political club, something we called the Young Independent Democratic Citizens [sic. Young Democratic Independent Citizens Club].  We had quite a group.  Well, you know, we got people together, but then we were naive.  We would invite speakers who turned out (unclear) in politics and they would say you all shouldn't be here, you all should be joining a political club, it makes more sense, and it broke up.
Speaker 1: So it was called the Young Independent--
Speaker 2: YIDC, Young Independent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The YIDC [sic.].
Speaker 2: --Democratic Citizens, yeah.  We had quite a group of people with us.
Speaker 1: Who were--who was in that group?
Speaker 2: Well, one person who became rather famous, Lorraine Hale whose mother started Hale House [Hale House Center, New York, New York]; Jean Booker who married Jimmy Booker [James Booker]; George Jones [ph.], George was still living up in the Bronx [New York].  We had quite--just people--not been in politics, we just wanted to do something.  We wanted to change the borough, but we didn't.  And then that one day I was coming from court, the court used to be on 151st Street in Harlem, and I was on the train with Percy Sutton, who I didn't know, and I said something to him about if he ever ran--I knew he had run for office before, I said, if you ever run again, I want to support you.  Well, it turned out when he decided to run again, I was in the club of the--Percy was running against, and he said, you promised me you--so I went to the head of the club, a man named Lloyd Dickens [Lloyd E. Dickens] who later became--who was the assemblyman, and he was district leader also, and I told him I made this promise, he said, "Nobody pays his promise anymore," and I said, "Well, I want to," and I said, "I want you to know I'm not mad at you, but I promised him I was gonna support him," and I went and helped Sutton.  He lost.  And the following year I ran against the same Lloyd Dickens [Lloyd E. Dickens] for the assembly [New York State Assembly], got wiped out, wiped out, and then got out of politics, and Sutton was active in NAACP, asked a lot of us to get active, we elected him president, and then after he was elected we--I'm trying to remember who it was--it may have been Reverend Richard Allen Hildebrand, later became a bishop of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, and then I worked for him.  I ran his political action committee, and then I ran against him along with some other people.  And I beat him, and he was some great man.  He joined me.  He joined me.  He was a wonderful human being.  How many people would do that, you know?  He said, hey, I'm gonna join you, and he was on my board, and that got me into it.  A year later I ran for the Senate [New York State Senate], got elected, and tried to do both jobs, and Roy Wilkins said there was another elected official, Roy Wilkins, who closed his branch, he was president of another branch, and he said "I gotta ask you to get out so I can get him out."  And I wanted to say, "Thank you, Mr. Wilkins, 'cause I've had--."  It was too much, you know.  But that's how I got into politics.  And how I got there.
Story_ID: 364902
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in the Harlem Clubhouse?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I--let's see.  I joined--a man named Amos Bowman, who later became a judge, he was somebody I knew.  I headed the--he was counsel of state in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and he urged me to join his club, which was Lloyd Dickens' [Lloyd E. Dickens] club, and I went, I used to go, used to run--I was captain of the district for him a short while, and I got to know how you did it, you know, what it was about it.
Speaker 1: And what were those clubhouses about, those political clubs?
Speaker 2: Those clubhouses were community service.  People want to talk about them badly, but I was on the city--what do they call it--they call it--a city charter commission--that mandated the community districts to take the place of what the political clubs used to do.  A man named Eddie Kasikian [ph.]--still alive, he's the (unclear) county leader in Manhattan, New York County [New York, New York]--he wrote an article saying that at one time there had been hundreds of these political clubs, and what did they do?  They helped people who were in trouble.  You had trouble with your landlord, where did you go, you went to your district leader.  You had trouble getting service from the city, who did you go to, the district leader.  They always knew the politicians and they were politicians, they knew the local assembly because they elected them.  They knew the state senator, they knew the congressman, they provide services, and Kasikian contended that with the demise of the local political club, there had been a shattering of services that had been afforded, so he came up with the community planning board concept, which we got passed.  But you say, what they do?  It's always sounded like it was a dirty word.  Now, I was not a big clubhouse guy.  Matter of fact, when I ran for office, I ran against all their organizations.  You name all the famous politicians, (unclear) they were against me.  They were supporting a very fine man who headed HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], he was a chairman of HARYOU-ACT, Andrew Tyler who became a Supreme Court [Supreme Court of the State of New York] justice, and he was the candidate of Raymond Jones [J. Raymond Jones], who was the county leader, and he was supported by Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], Percy Sutton, Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], Willie Jack [ph.], and I beat him.  Well, part of it may be I was the Harlem [New York, New York] guy, people--you could put up a poster but it would get torn down, you know.  People who had been my enemies growing up came and worked for me.  I mean, it was a wonderful experience seeing people--you know, you knew them.  While--no matter how bad you may have had relations when you were younger, you get older, you're friends, and I got a lot of volunteers came out, and I won it.  And that clubhouse, though, was very helpful to a lot of people.  And the people want to talk about it badly, I don't know what clubs they were in, the ones I've seen offered a lot of services.
Speaker 1: What is the structure of a clubhouse?  Do you have a clubhouse president and then you have ano- a board of people that you appoint (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they're not all the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the Harlem Clubhouse then--
Speaker 2: The ones that I saw were like--they would have--the local district leader would have the club, and he'd have a female district leader, both of them had to run for office and the only ones that could vote for them were members of their party, and the only ones (unclear) were the Democratic Party, 'cause that's Harlem.  Then they would have--somebody would be elected president of the club, usually somebody who--the district leader liked and wanted and somebody that worked hard for them.
Speaker 1: So it wouldn't necessarily be the district leader himself.
Speaker 2: No, very seldom, the district leader would never be president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Why?  Get somebody else to do some of the work.  And then you had a lot of other people and a lot of women, you know, people said to me, look at all these--I had a friend once said to me, I had never been in a political club--he said, "You might get along 'cause you do a lot of small talk," said, "I couldn't handle that, all these old people."  These are people who come to help.  They know they can't get a job, but they may have a son, daughter, nephew, niece, they wanna help if they need help, and they want to know somebody, that's how they get to know them.  And they do wonderful things.  They raise money for the clubs, they frequently are the people manning the polling places.  You can't pay people to do that stuff if they don't wanna do it.  The money they pay us is not gonna pay you for that time, but they do it.  This is how they work.  That's how they work, they try to stay in office, they run every two years for district leader, and those who are elected like Keith Wright, who is an assemblyman, he is also a district leader so he has to run every year.  He runs for district leader, and also runs for the assembly [New York State Assembly] and re-elected.
Speaker 1: And so each year he has to go through the same cycle--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Then the way you read stuff about, you know, the clubhouses in those days, I mean, it sounds like you, Charlie Rangel, Percy Sutton, David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] were almost like the rat pack (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All came out of the clubhouse, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you worked together, it was odd.
Speaker 2: The thing about that is that Percy Sutton got in by running against the clubhouse.  I got in running against--running against people who were in the clubhouse.  Charlie came from the clubhouse, and Dave Dinkins came from the clubhouse, but that has nothing to do with--with virtue, whether you were in or out.  I mean, some of the finest people I've ever met were clubhouse leaders, district leaders, great people.
Story_ID: 364903
Speaker 1: Who are the people, then, you--I mean, I didn't even know that clubhouses had reputations for not being good, a lot of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, that's the common thing in the media, oh, he's a clubhouse pol [politician].  Well, Robert Wagner was a clubhouse pol, and thought to have been great mayor, John Lindsay was in the Republican clubhouse, they even called that-- well, they liked you, you're not a clubhouse pol, they don't like you, you're a clubhouse pol.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about Robert Wagner.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The--what was your relationship to him?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know him.  I mean, I was a little guy.  I wasn't in politics.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  But--
Speaker 2: I got to know him really when I became president of NAAC- New York NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] invited me to a meeting at Gracie Mansion [Archibald Gracie Mansion, New York, New York].  I was glowing with pride.  He's a nice man.  I got to know him years later when we both served on the Port Authority board of directors, Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.  He was a wealth of knowledge.  He was some guy, and the one thing I always heard about him that I thought was incredible, was that he'd outwait anybody.  They used to call him Cast Iron Behind Wagner.  He just--and his theory was very good.  There are some things you can't resolve right away, wait for the right time.  He was a very wise man.
Speaker 1: You were little at the time, but did you know about Robert Moses, his appointing Robert Moses, and what Robert Moses was doing to the city [New York, New York] and the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous).  No, well, he--most appointments that Robert Moses got were not city appointments, they were state appointments.  And I met Robert Moses, I think it was '91 [1991] or '92 [1992], I was secretary of state, and somebody discovered a whole room full of artifacts and stuff, and New York was the third oldest department of state in the country.  It was 2000--it was 1970--no, no.  It was 1980.  Well, I came in, I think, in--I came in in '79 [1979] as secretary of state, so we had a celebration of 201st year, I rem- so we invited former secretaries of state.  Robert Moses had been a secretary of state, and he came.  Mayor Cuomo [Andrew Cuomo] was my predecessor to him, to lieutenant governor, ran for lieutenant governor, he came, and his sister's name I can't recall from Pennsylvania, she came.  She was a secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  But Moses came with a plan for redeveloping Albany [New York].  This man never stopped.  He was a brilliant guy.  But, no, I didn't know him in those days when he was doing his thing.
Speaker 1: So at the time you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know the products of it:  Jones Beach [Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh, New York], Sumner State Parkway [ph.], New York State parkway, all of these.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Serious question if he could do it today, you know, community opposition might stop him, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, community opposition would definitely stop him today.
Speaker 2: Well, I tried, I voted against the mall in Albany every time they had a vote, I voted against him, but they built it anyway (laughter).
Story_ID: 364904
Speaker 1: We're back in the '50s [1950s] when, you know--in your Democratic club days or Harlem [New York, New York] club days and you said that Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] and Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] were in the club [Harlem Clubhouse] and--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in '50s [1950s], no, Rangel was too young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think Rangel got active in politics 'til--I'm guessing now--my guess is not 'til the mid-'50s [1950s] at the earliest, when he was in law school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when did you recognize--when did the four of you recognize each other's talents and the sum became greater than the--
Speaker 2: Somebody wanted to write a book on this, and he came to me, he was a reporter (unclear) with the 'MacNeil Hour' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour'; 'PBS NewsHour'], and he said, "You know, I've looked back, and I can't find any situation where four politicians stayed together like you four."  He said, "What is it?"  I said, "We like each other."  Basically, that's--we like each other.  Actually, you know, the term was coined by a guy who's got a lot of play now as a political consultant, Hank Sheinkopf, have you ever run into--Hank Sheinkopf was working for Herman Badillo, and Badillo claimed that we stopped him from getting black and Puerto Rican support for mayor.  We didn't do anything.  We were in the room, we never opened our mouths.  We deliberately didn't open our mouths, and he said, "That's that Harlem Gang of Four," and Sutton [Percy Sutton] always said, he always says, he meant it as a term of denigration, and it became a term of compliment.  I don't know when we got together.  I think it started with when I ran for the Senate [New York State Senate]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was in 19--when did you run for the Senate?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: Dinkins was running for the assembly [New York State Assembly].  My people tore down all his posters.  I was supporting (laughter) a white candidate against him who was supporting me.
Speaker 1: Who was the white candidate?
Speaker 2: Franz Leichter.  He later became an assemblyman and a state senator.  Good guy.  But it just shows we were on other sides.  He was Jones [J. Raymond Jones] candidate, and I was running against Jones candidate, you know.  So we were--a year later after I got in the Senate, or maybe two years later, Dinkins joined my law firm.  It was then Paterson, Michael, Dinkins & Jones.  Clayton Jones, you ever heard of Louis Clayton Jones?  That was it.  We were--Clayton was with us and Dinkins joined us.
Story_ID: 364905
Speaker 1: Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] and Sutton [Percy Sutton], after I won, it was a one year term because they were doing reapportionment, they said, we're gonna reapportion you out, we've got, we got too--with our heavy hitters, and you're finished.  Well, what happened--I was finished.  I understood what they--they reapportioned me out of where I was strong, put me into mostly in Adam Powell's [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] district, so one of their people, unbeknownst to them, invited me to meet with Powell.  He liked me, he said, "I like ya," he says, "Come meet with Powell." And Powell said to me--one day I went down to see Powell--here's a story, but it's true--went down to see Powell, took my wife [Portia Hairston Paterson] and one of my sons, my other--I have two sons, the other son--and Powell, only thing he wanted to know was, he said, "Are you Sutton's guy?"  I said, "No, we used to be friends but he opposed me."  He said, "Are you Sutton's guy?"  And I said, "I don't think so, I think I'm my own guy."  He said, "Well, okay."  He said, "The four closest people to me all sing your praises."  I said, "Who are they?" "Livingston Wingate [Livingston Leroy Wingate] says you're his protege."  Wingate was his counsel, and I was Wingate's protege.
Speaker 2: What was that name again?
Speaker 1: Livingston Wingate.
Speaker 2: Livingston.
Speaker 1: He was his counsel, he later became a judge.  Wingate had always kind of looked out for me.  And then a guy named Chuck Sutton.  Remember, he was the editor of a local newspaper one time, and then he was his press guy.  Not Chuck Sutton--got the wrong name. Chuck Sutton's his nephew--Sutton's nephew--oh, his name'll come to me, but you know--you probably know the name, he was well-known in the black newspaper guild and all that--who I knew.  And then a guy named Wellington Beal, who did a lot of economic stuff for him, and sometimes would ask me to sit down and work with him.
Speaker 2: Wellington--what was--
Speaker 1: Wellington Beal, B-E-A-L.  And the last one was a fella named Lloyd Mitchell [ph.], who was his bodyguard, and Mitchell sang my praises to him, he said, he and his friends have always helped me.  Well, we were street guys, so of course we were his help, he was a nice guy.  So Powell said, "I'm interested, let me think about it."  I was asking would he help me.  He says, "Is that your wife and your son outside?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Bring them in, I'd like to meet them," so I bring them in, introduced my wife and my son.  About that time Daniel [Daniel Paterson] was--let me think.  If this was '66 [1966].  He was born in '57 [1957], so he was nine years old.  He hadn't yet turned nine, he was eight.  So he said to him, "How old are you, Daniel?"  He said, "I'm eight years old."  "When's your birthday?"  He said, "November 29th."  And Powell stopped, he said, "Either you're the luckiest guy going or one of the slickest people I've ever met."  He said, "Isn't this a school day?"  He was smart.  I said, "Uh-huh."  "And you took your son out of school and brought him down here?"  I said, "Uh-huh."  It's his birthday.  It's just one of those weird coincidences.  Powell's birthday.  So he said, I think I'm gonna support you (laughter).  And you know what he did, he sent his secretary to bring all kinds of things that had his name on it, he used to send birthday cards to my--to my son, and by that night word was out I was Powell's candidate, and I was now Jones' [J. Raymond Jones] candidate.  He called Jones.  Powell said, "I want this guy," and Jones said, "Okay."
Story_ID: 364906
Speaker 1: And then, of course, Percy [Percy Sutton] and Charlie [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] and I had always--Percy and I particularly always worked together before, and we got together.  It was easy, we all had the same outlook. Percy's was always pushing NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], he took me into the NAACP.  Percy and I always think alike, we always have the--it's the same viewpoint on the struggle, 'cause we've been there during that stuff.
Speaker 2: And what is that viewpoint?
Speaker 1: We're not moving fast enough.  We've made great strides, but nowhere near what we should.  And too many of us think that we've made great strides sufficient unto the time, and they're not.  We shouldn't be going through what we go through now.  We should by now have made this country aware that they need us.  Don't have to love us, but they need us.  I guess in time of warfare they know that, but--
Story_ID: 364907
Speaker 1: So what do you consider to be the first political office you held?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the State Senate [New York State Senate].
Speaker 1: The State Senate was what you consider to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah, it was the first, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the first.  But you had run--what else--I mean, then I should go back.  What else have you run for before?
Speaker 2: I ran for the Assembly [New York State Assembly] back in 1960 and lost, wiped out.
Speaker 1: Right.  But who inspired you then to run for the Assembly?
Speaker 2: Sutton [Percy Sutton].  I was in his club, and we won the candidate, and there were three of us vying for it, and they said, well, Basil [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson], you go, and I went.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was as simple as that.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't as simple to get it, you know.  There was a lot of politicking in the club to see who would go for it, yeah.
Story_ID: 364908
Speaker 1: So you talked about someone who considered you their protege.
Speaker 2: Livingston Wingate [Livingston Leroy Wingate].  Livingston Wingate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Livi- Wingate.  And how did you meet him?  When did he come onboard--
Speaker 2: I met him at a fraternity years ago.
Speaker 1: What fraternity?
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: So you're a Kappa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're pledged then?
Speaker 2: But it's a lot different.  Are you in a fraternity?
Speaker 1: No, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, it's a lot different when you pledge in New York City [New York, New York], because there was no campus, and it was cats who were going to college who were looking for a chance to meet gals, you know, and the sororities were it.  I dare say that Kappa Omicron Chapter which was New York City was different from many--well, all the frats, the Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], they had all the basketball players, Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] had a bunch of guys running around having the big parties.  Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] had a lot of better off black students, mostly students who were going out of the city and all that.  But we all had the same thing.  Most of us were working, going to school, and so it was different out there.  It wasn't going out--yeah, they paddled in those days.  That didn't matter.  It was who did you think was gonna be a good guy to be around.  It's not like I see these movies and they have people talk about fraternity, and I say that's not the same thing I was in.  It was different.  And it was different because of location.  We met at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)].  You know, we had no frat houses.  There's a frat house there now that many of us helped raise the money for, but it was a different deal.  You were going to school with, you know, in my neighborhood--I don't know how many of us went to college but, you know, you always had the Joe College thing going on, you know.
Story_ID: 364909
Speaker 1: Were you the first in your family to go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So are you the oldest of--let's talk about your siblings, if you can just list them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm the third in line.
Speaker 1: And if you can just list your siblings in the order.
Speaker 2: Well, Carol [Carol Paterson], Jacynth [Jacynth Paterson], Basil [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson], and Pat [Patricia Paterson].  Now, the brightest one of all was our eldest sister.  She never went to college.  It was clear she was brighter than all of us.  Then my next eldest is my sister who went to--she graduated with her daughter from college.  She went to nurse's training and then went to college later, and she graduated when her daughter graduated.  I think that is one of the great things going.  And then my youngest sister, she did fine.  She went right through.  But we always tell her she lived in a different family.  She didn't live in that walk-up tenement (laughter).  She lived on the second floor somewhere else.
