Story_ID: 31464
Speaker 1: Sir, could you state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Waverly J. Person, W-A-V-E-R-L-Y, P-E-R-S-O-N.  Waverly Person.
Speaker 1: All right, and what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 1st, 1926.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Blackridge, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 18, 2002.
Speaker 1: Mr. Person, if you could just scoot your chair to your right about an inch.  That's perfect.  Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Is today the eighteenth or nineteenth?
Speaker 1: Nineteenth I think.
Speaker 2: Nineteenth.
Speaker 1: Nineteenth.  I guess I was thinking about a earthquake yesterday.  You want me to say that again.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure, we'll do it again.  Are we--did you record that part?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we did, still rolling.
Speaker 2: We're still rolling, okay.  Yeah, well, today's date, we'll do today's date again.
Speaker 1: Today's date, June 19, 2002.
Speaker 2: And where are we?
Speaker 1: We're in Golden, Colorado.
Speaker 2: And we're at--?
Speaker 1: At the U.S. Geological Survey National Earthquake Information Center in Golden.
Story_ID: 31465
Speaker 1: All right, I have about five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that we always ask.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, I would say candied yams for vegetables.  That's one of my favorite foods and other foods and meat would be steak.
Speaker 1: Well, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is in a green and in the browns.  My favorite colors are in the browns.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The, my favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.  I--usually, I just go wherever I feel like I want to go when I do go on vacation, but no favorite.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite saying is "keep getting up".
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you were born, you said May 1, 1927--?
Speaker 2: Twenty six [1926].
Speaker 1: Twenty six [1926].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Blackridge, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 31466
Speaker 1: And can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Bessie, B-E-S-S-I-E, Butts, B-U-T-T-S, Person, P-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have any idea when she was born and where she was born?
Speaker 2: No, not right off hand, but she died in 1952, I believe '51 [1951], '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was--.
Speaker 2: She was about forty three or forty four years old at that time, very young.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was born in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, same place.
Speaker 1: And, and your father?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Virginia as well.  His name was Santee, S-A-N-T-E-E, Person, P-E-R-S-O-N.  And he was born in the Blackridge, Virginia area as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, Santee is an usual name.  Is there a story attached to that name?
Speaker 2: No, there isn't.  There is no story attached to the name because I cannot trace my father anywhere.  If you're looking for, like trying to, in the family history on his side and things like that, I cannot trace that.  He was born kind of during the slavery time, and I have no tracing of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you say he was--was he born during slavery?
Speaker 2: Well, his mother.
Speaker 1: His mother was.
Speaker 2: His mother was, and I only can remember meeting his mother, that's all, but I, I don't know anything that's on that side.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know what Santee means or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was a farmer.
Speaker 2: Farmer, right.
Speaker 1: Did he own his own place?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did, a very small farm, and we still have the farm.  The farm was about sixty, seventy acres.  That's where I grew up.
Speaker 1: It's in Blackridge [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us something about your mother and father, maybe start with your mother.  What kind of a person was she?
Speaker 2: My mother was a religious person, strong believer in God, and taught us to fear God, come up as a Christian.  And she was a very--believer of treating people right and always taught us to do the same kind of thing.  And one of the reasons for that, we grew up in the Southern part of Virginia where it was really, really a lot of segregation from when I was born up until--and I left there.  It was a lot of segregation.  And she was a strong person in praying and, and telling us that we would have to endure and pray that God would change the mind--hearts and minds of, of the white people that we were being oppressed by in the area.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific incidents that, that may have shook up the black community in those days?
Speaker 2: The things that I remember in my community was that, most of all that bothered me that, wasn't able to go to any state parks, wasn't able to go to any movies or anything like that.  We had none of that for us, that kind of a thing.  And, of course, we had our elementary school, but we had no high school.
Speaker 1: So most of the public accommodations were closed to black people?
Speaker 2: To--everything, restaurants, hotels, anything that was public was closed to us.
Story_ID: 31467
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your father [Santee Person]?  What do you remember about him?
Speaker 2: I remember about my father as being a very honest man, a hard worker, and he always taught us to be self sufficient in any way, whatever you had to do, work hard and be self efficient and not look for hand outs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you know how he came to own his own place?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  He worked on a farm, and he bought the land.  And then after we bought the land, I can remember even this.  We bought the land and everything.  We had to court to get the deed to it because at that time, we were buying this land from many different people, and then found out that when we bought it, it wasn't cleared from someone else who had had it and lost it and it went back to the original owner.  And then I, I kind of figured that they never thought that my dad would pay for the place.  And so when we finally did pay for it, we had to court to get the deed to it.
Speaker 1: So it was a struggle.
Speaker 2: It was a struggle.  And I, at that time, I, I was pretty young, but I, I was very aware of some of the things that were going on and knew some of the things that one could do.  And I worked very closely with my dad, telling him that we could do this because, you know, growing up in that area, and they coming up in that area, they were fearful of everything as far as trying to press forward to get anything what was rightfully yours.  But I, I just was one that said, look, this is what we've struggled for.  This is what we should have.  And I just guided him in the right direction and say, get a lawyer.
Speaker 1: And about how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was still, I guess I was still around sixth, seventh grade or something like that, I guess, somewhere back there at that time.  I don't think I'd entered high school.
Speaker 1: That's remarkable.  So, you were a source of inspiration and guidance to your father on this kind of a matter.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Also, I was, on that kind of a matter.  Plus, my mother [Bessie Butts Person] and my father had no education at all.  They--I don't think they--they probably didn't get out of grammar school.  But my dad had a business mind, and my dad, we worked sharecropping for so many years.  And at a very young age, I learned how to figure out how much of the crop that they should get, and how much we should get and, to make sure that we got our part of the sharecropping, and things like that.  I was always there with him doing that.  I learned fast.  I had to learn fast because I could see all the injustices, and it was very little we could do.  But usually when you let people know that you wanted what really belonged to you, and you were gonna, willing to stand up for it, there was a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even at a young age, very young age.
Speaker 1: Gee, well, can you tell us about an incident where you were able to keep track of what happened and, I mean, and get your family what they were due?
Speaker 2: Many times, you know, what, what we would do, you know, you--you're probably not familiar with this.  But when you sharecrop, well, you had--and one third of what you had go to the people you were renting the land from, and whenever you had the cotton, you had the peanuts, you had the wheat, you had to figure out how many bushels that you have and all this.  And you figured out how many bushels would go to your, your--the person that owned the land and all that.  And those were the instances I said, well, we are due this many bushels, we are due this many pounds of cotton.  We are due this many bushels of wheat.  We are due this many pounds of peanuts and things like that.  Those are the instances that I remember.  And I would do this with pencil and paper, just figuring it out.  And so when he would go--I didn't necessarily go with him.  I would give it to him.  I'd say, this is what you're supposed to get.  And so that's the way we did it.  You know, because it was always someone attempting to take away from you.  And I said, this is what we're supposed to get.
Speaker 1: So, I supposed your parents saw the value in a good education early?
Speaker 2: Yes, they pushed me all they possibly could.  Yeah, because in so many instances, so many people were just literally--things were taken away from them.  See, this is back too, I don't exactly remember the Depression [The Great Depression].  I remember the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  I remember all that kind of stuff or the NRAA [sic, NRA - National Recovery Administration] and all that, National Recovery and all that stuff that was put out by the government, Roosevelt [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] at the time, I guess it was, to kind of get people into doing something because I remember all of the, coming out of the Depression.  And so it was a struggle, and even on the farm I--I truly believe that had we not been on a farm, we might not have survived cause we could raise our food.  We raised there we, we needed except sugar and coffee and stuff like that.  And we didn't have to have that.  But everything else, we had it.  So we had the so-called health food that they got now.
Story_ID: 31468
Speaker 1: Let me try to take you back, and I'd like for you to describe, if you can, or, or reflect on some of the sights and the sounds and smells of growing up in the Virginia countryside there, and--?
Speaker 2: Virginia, sights were beautiful, a lot of pines, big tall pine trees that, that grew there, still grow there, that, that kind of a thing.  And spring and summer, very beautiful, wild flowers and all of those kinds of things.  And then during the spring, planting and watching the crop grow was beautiful.  Even cotton, which you probably don't know about, but cotton was a beautiful plant to grow, the blossoms of the cotton was beautiful.  They were kind of pink, and you look at it, most people would hate it because you got to pick it after it grows.  But it was beautiful growing.  Cornfields were beautiful, and you could smell the green sun--you know, the aroma from the corn and all this kind of stuff.  And so all of those things were things that made you think that there was something beautiful here.
Speaker 1: Did you live in the mountains or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, flat, Virginia is flat.  Virginia only has a few mountains.  I was flat, near, I was near the North Carolina border.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Blackridge [Virginia] is near?
Speaker 2: Blackridge is near--we're not, we're about seventy to eighty miles South of Richmond.  We're about fifty some miles, I guess or so, from Raleigh, North Carolina, down in the Southern part of Virginia.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of things would you do to amuse yourself (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: We, as a group in the neighborhood, we would play baseball.  We'd make our own bats.  We'd make our ball--baseball, (unclear) able to make our own toys.  We'd make our own scooters, make our own wagons and things like that.  We'd get the Sears Roebuck [and Company] catalogue and make, look at that, and make scooters and wagons and things from what we could scrap up and find in our area.  And so that's what we--we played--I don't ever replay--think of playing basketball or football.  But we played baseball.  We'd choose our sides and just play baseball, pitch and the whole thing and do that.
Speaker 1: When you were young, were you interested in how things were made and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was because we made 'em.  We made our toys.  And I would look at Sears Roebuck catalogue, Montgomery Ward [Incorporated] catalogue, and you'd see the toys there.  And you would see how they were made, and you could kind of take what you had and follow that and make it.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did, did you enjoy making?  I mean can you think of something that you made that you really--?
Speaker 2: Wagon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A wag--red wagon.  It wasn't red, but it was a wagon, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you made a wagon from scratch?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah, with scrap stuff that we could find.  We put it together.  It didn't last very long, but we made it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, money was kind of short.
Speaker 2: Money was short.  Well, it wasn't no "kind of" in it.  Money was short, very, very short.  We had no money.
Speaker 1: So you had to do the best you could.
Speaker 2: We had to do the best we can with what we had.  And I can just remember, as soon as I got old enough to--and remember, and you're working on the farm as soon as you get old enough, you, you begin working on the farm.  And so I remember, you know, at a very young age we were working on the farm.  And you always had a job to do.  You know, some milked the cows, some cut wood and some feed the horses, some feed the hogs, and stuff like that.  And so at a very young age, you worked--we had to work for survival.
Story_ID: 31469
Speaker 1: Now, when you were younger, were you innovative in terms of your usefulness, I guess, to your father [Santee Person] as a farmer in terms of making things that you would need to finish work and things like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, was I innovative in try-trying to help him to, you know, there are many times things would come up that was sponsored by the rural farmers, rural electrification, we got that.  And all that I was instrumental in working with him and getting that kind of installed, yeah, um-hum, yeah, cause you see, we had no electricity.  And then when the rural electrification came about, we went to many meetings, and, you know, and got people in the area to sign to say that they wanted it.  And get the right-of-way for the post and all that kind of stuff, I was into that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you have to like read the details, and kind of--did you have a, I mean your ability to analyze the data and put it in a--(unclear)--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Well, whatever was given, I could analyze it enough to know what they were talking about and what they wanted and to know, who was qualified and who should be getting the rural electrification and all that kind of stuff.  I was able to do that.  And we had meetings and things that I would attend with them and then I could help my dad answer the questions.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your grandparents at all--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.  My grandparents were, yeah, my grandmother and grandfather.  They owned their own farm, and I do remember my grandfather had a car.  He had a Model T [Ford Model T], and he was one of the few in the area that had a car.
Speaker 1: This is your mother's [Bessie Butts Person] father?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they had a farm too, of course, that wasn't too far from where we were.
Speaker 1: Well, did the Model--did the car interests you, I mean the--?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were you very interested in the car?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, yeah, I was interested in the car.  You got a chance to ride it once in a while, you know, yeah.  You know, and a car then was something else, you know.  Didn't very many people--you knew in the, in the whole area who had a car.  And it was very few blacks had cars, very few.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to try to drive it or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  Oh, no, never even got--un-un.  He wouldn't let me that, that close, un-un; get in it and ride, but not, un-un, no (chuckle).
Story_ID: 31470
Speaker 1: Now, well, I want to ask you about school.  You said the black people had a school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, elementary.
Speaker 1: An elementary school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you attended that school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Good Hope, Good Hope.
Speaker 1: Good Hope School.
Speaker 2: Good Hope School.
Speaker 1: And was it founded by the church or was it--how did they--?
Speaker 2: I kind of--I don't know cause our church that I was reared up into was Good Hope Baptist Church.  I'm not sure how the school was (owned?) (unclear)--all I know that the school was there.  It was, it was always a two-room school.  You had the primary grades in one room, and then you had from like the fourth to the seventh in the other room.  It was two rooms.  And I, only other thing I can remember that the school was there when I started.  I don't know, you know, how it got its name or--evidently, someone might have thought that we will call this area Good Hope, you know, you're hoping for the best or something like that.  But I don't know for sure, but it was--the church is still there.  The school is long gone, and it's still Good Hope Baptist Church [Blackridge, Virginia].  And the school was also that, named that, Good Hope School.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel about school or what were some of your early experiences in school?
Speaker 2: I felt real good about schooling because my parents always was interested in us going to school.  And I always wanted to go to school, but there again, we had a tough time going to school because we were working the farm.  And when time came to plant and harvest, you had to stay out of school to plant and to harvest the crop.  And so you missed a lot of time out of school.  But I was always anxious to go to school, but sometime we had to miss a lot of time -- because of that.  We had to get the crop in.  We had to get the--that was our livelihood.  We had to harvest, and we had to plant it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of time out.
Speaker 1: Well, were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was (laughter).  You know, I, you know, I, I--I was always interested in reading and writing and math and stuff like that.  And I thought I did real good in that.  I wasn't--I wasn't an outlaw student or anything.  I always was trying to learn whatever the teacher was trying to teach, you know, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you have--did you have a favorite teacher or--cause you only had a couple of 'em, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I only had a couple.  Well, the one, the favorite teacher that I guess I can remember the name, it was a lady by the name of Mrs. Travis.  And she, I was with her when I finally got, I think to seventh grade, I was with her.  And then before that I had one by the name in elementary, with the name, Mrs. Owens, there with the elementary part of it.  But I remember the one most because of, Mrs. Travis, because I was into seventh grade by then.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things do you remember about Mrs. Travis (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: At that time, we had to take a, we had to take a kind of what you call a proficiency exam once you got in the seventh grade to go on to high school.  And I remember her attempting to get all the extra work possible for us to review and to look at to try to prepare us to pass this test to start into high school.  And that's what I remember about her most.  She had a deep interest in all of us continuing on, going to high school and what not.  And so I remember her working very hard with us, trying to get us ready for the exam.
Speaker 1: Do you recall if she had any special thoughts about you as a student?
Speaker 2: No more than trying to encourage me to continue in education on through high school and continuing in it as much as you possibly can, (unclear) cause she could sense that--she could see potential that I would be able to do well if I continued to go on and, and do that.  I remember her telling me that and pushing me in that direction, yeah.  Her name was, that's--it was Mrs. Travis, yeah.
Story_ID: 31471
Speaker 1: Well, as you look back what kind of a young man were you?
Speaker 2: I, I was always nosy (laughter).  I always wanted to know what was going on.  I always made an attempt to find out what was going on.  And at a very young age, I began to think why were we deprived of so many things.  We were paying taxes and things like that.  I started to realize that at a very young age and felt that it was an injustice, and that why should be have to be subjected to this?  And one of the things that really disturbed, and this was in elementary school, was that our school would close before the white school because they say, well, they closed the school so that we could go work on the farm, and the white school would continue on.  We'd close in early May, and they would close in June; those kinds of things I took note of and was very concerned about, even though I couldn't do anything about it.  But I sure took note of 'em.
Speaker 1: Did you ask adults about those things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, but the people that I'd ask, you know, they didn't have any power to do anything.  Everything was controlled by the white in that area, you know, you couldn't, you know--.
Speaker 1: But basically, did they tell you that when you asked them?
Speaker 2: Well, they say, we got to work on the farm.  And, well, (unclear), well, and truly, they didn't say so right out, but they figured that, you don't need no education anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this kind of stuff disturbed you when you were young?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  And, you know, I realized the injustice very, very young.  And my mother and father would always tell me that, well, you can't always say what you think even though you know it's wrong.  You have to pray about it and go on, but you can't, you can't fight the system.  And at that time, you couldn't because it was just too big.  You couldn't, you couldn't, you couldn't do anything.
Speaker 1: Did you--could you imagine yourself living the rest of your life like that?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  At a very young age, I--no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were in grade school, what did you--did you have any inclination about what you wanted to be when you grew up to get out of that situation?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I didn't have any, really inclination of any particular thing that I really wanted to do.  One of the things that I somewhat leaned towards was to be a school teacher because that was a role model you'd see.  You could see black school teachers, but as far as anything, you didn't see.  See, you kind of looked at them as being school teachers, and so I had an idea that that's probably what I'd want to do because that's what you'd see, you saw school teachers.  And school teachers at that time was highly, highly respected and looked up to because they were the one that was teaching school.
Story_ID: 31472
Speaker 1: In South Hill, Virginia.  And with the transportation the way it was, you didn't get to those places very often, if you didn't have a car.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was asking about the kind of reading material you had access to.
Speaker 1: Not very much, no library.
Speaker 2: So you'd read--.
Speaker 1: Later on, we had access to a library, but that was way later on.  That was in (unclear), but at the time, we didn't have any library, anything like that.  And we just had the few textbooks that we had for school, that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: So around the home, you had the catalogues.
Speaker 1: Catalogues, Montgomery catalogue--I remember distinctly Sears Roebuck [and Company] and Montgomery Ward [Incorporated].  Those are the two catalogues that we had.  And those are the ones that we would read.  Those are the ones that we'd make, you know, these toys and stuff like that from.  And we'd order from there some time.
Speaker 2: And--.
Speaker 1: And then was a big time to order because the [way?] transportation was, you'd order things from those catalogues.
Speaker 2: And they would actually bring it out to you?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: They'd bring it--.
Speaker 1: They'd mail it.
Speaker 2: They'd mail it, okay.
Speaker 1: Mail it.
Speaker 2: So the postal service (unclear).
Speaker 1: The postal service, yeah.
Speaker 2: So the other reading material available is, you were saying, was the bible, and--.
Speaker 1: The bible was reading material, and then some time we'd get literature through the, the church, Sunday school books and things like that, but that, you know, for Sunday school stuff.  But as far as anything else, no I can, I can remember even when we got the first radio in our house, and it wasn't ours.
Speaker 2: Who did it belong to?
Speaker 1: We had a teacher living with us.  And he got a radio, battery radio.
Speaker 2: So about what year was that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that was, let me see--I can remember Julius Whiting on the radio--.
Speaker 2: In the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, stuff like that, stories on radio and stuff like that.  That was the first--it wasn't, he set it up there because he was staying with us and teaching school there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, did the radio kind of change your perception of the world any?
Speaker 1: Well, I can't say that it really changed that much.  I was able to find out what was going on in many parts of the world as far as the news is concerned, but I'm not sure that I was really too interested in that, you know.  And I was interested in trying to survive, you know, more or less.  But radio was good to listen to stories and things like that, and you got some sports, and you got some music and stuff.  That was the kind of stuff that, you know, hearing most of all.
Speaker 2: Did you have very many friends (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, all of us was out there in the same boat (laughter), everybody in the same area, you know.  We're all in the county and we all were farmers, and so, yeah, we were, we were a very close-knit area there and cause everybody was helping everybody else to survive.  If one didn't have, the other one had, they'd pass it on.  That's the kind of stuff, that's the kind of thing that we used to do.
Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like, you know, a caring kind of a community.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, definitely so.  I mean we would--we, we were together.  The black was together, and as far as if one family didn't have food to eat, and we had it, we'd share it.  And that kind of a thing, and so (unclear) we'd do for one another.
Story_ID: 31473
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said that you had a school teacher living with you at one time, was that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was that a common practice to have someone living with you?
Speaker 2: That's--all the teachers would come, and they'd live somewhere.  They had to live in the area cause they didn't--they would, they would come from other towns, and they'd come in to teach there.  And they would live with some family in the area.  So, yeah, this particular teacher was living with us, and he was the one that got the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you think of any favorite story from your childhood you'd like to tell us?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The only one that I remember about, and I might have been seen a book, was the "Three Little Pigs".  I think I can remember, you know--.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm talking about a story that happened to you.
Speaker 2: To me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, something that happened to you.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, to me.  I don't know.  I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Was there a time when something good happened, where something really good happened or?
Speaker 2: Well, the only time that I felt that something good was happening would be at Christmastime and when we would, so-called Santa Claus would come.  We would at least get something then.  We'd get some, you know, the apple and orange and some candy and stuff like that.  But, and then, I can remember the first toy that I got cause it was quite exciting for me, was a little car that I got for Christmas, that Santa Claus brought me and, you know, things like that.  And at harvest time, it was always a happy time for us in most times because harvest time, we always would have some money in the family.  And we could buy some clothes and things like that.  And so that was a happy time, but then there was times that it wasn't happy because it was just like it is here now, it would be a draught.  There was no irrigation or anything like that, and you didn't have anything.  So you had to figure how you're gonna survive until the next time around, and see how things work out, come out, yeah, the harvest time was always happy.  Thanksgiving and things like that was a happy time, near harvesting, you know.
Story_ID: 31474
Speaker 1: So when you were--now, in rural Virginia where you were, you said it was by no means certain that you would go to high school necessarily, but I mean had they--I mean the black community had a grade school.
Speaker 2: No high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you think that you would attend high school at some point, and if so--?
Speaker 2: No, no, because there was no, there was the white high school.  And two, two or three towns by--close by, but we couldn't go there.  So the only high school that I had hoped to go to was a boarding high school that was an Episcopalian high school, and that was in a place called Lawrenceville, Virginia.  And that was about twenty miles from us.  That was the only high school, and we had to pay a tuition to go there.  And it wasn't that much, but at that time money was really hard to get.  It was hard to even pay the tuition that we had to pay.  That was run by the Episcopalian church.  And that was the only black high school in the whole area.
Speaker 1: And so this is St. Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: It was a high school, high school and college on the same campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was no high school for blacks.
Speaker 1: All right, so tell me where did you go to high school then?  Did you go to St. Paul?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, that's where I went, rode the bus (there go to?) high, go--.
Speaker 1: Was it a painful decision for your parents to make to send you to high school?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.  It was that, that they were just worried about how they were gonna for--and we had to pay a, a small amount to ride the bus.  And then we had to pay a tuition, and they, they were quite concerned as to how we gonna get the money for that, you know, right. But you know, five dollars then was big money, you know, at--back at that time.  And any kind of money was hard to come by.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have--I forgot to ask you about your brothers and sisters or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was other brothers and sisters.  It was twelve in our family.
Speaker 1: Twelve?
Speaker 2: Twelve kids, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you name 'em all and tell us where you fell in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of the boys.  I'm the oldest son in the family.  And I had a sister that was older than I--two sisters older than I.  And I'm the third one.  I'm the oldest of the sons.  Yep, all of us was on the farm, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you being the oldest son, I guess you had--.
Speaker 2: That's why I was more or less the one that kind of was really helping my dad in every way possible at a very young age.
Speaker 1: Were you and your father [Santee Person] very close?
Speaker 2: Very close, yeah, both mother [Bessie Butts Person] and father, very close.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had a strong working relationship with your dad?
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, so, you know, you--well, did you think all along that they were gonna send you to high school or is it, did it surprise you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I didn't.  I really didn't, you know, cause I--one of the things that I realized at a very young age that I realized what we had.  I realized the resources that we had.  I realized why, where things had to come from.  And it was nothing there.  It was no where for it to come from, you know.  So I had enough intelligence, enough common sense to know it wasn't there.  It wasn't like, you say, well, I got to have this, I got (unclear), no, you--that wasn't, that wasn't even thought of.  We didn't have it.
Speaker 1: Did you feel guilty for using up the resources to go to school, and did you--how did you--?
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily because I, I wanted to go and some of my brothers, well, my brother that was next to me, he didn't want to go.  I wanted to go.  And so therefore, you know, in every way possible that I could, struggle to go, but at that time, my brother who come along behind me there, he, he wasn't willing to sacrifice the way I was to, to go to school.  You know, that wasn't--hey, I'm not gonna do this; I'm not gonna do that, you know.  He didn't, he didn't see the value, and I couldn't get him interested to say, look, you know, in the long run, this is what you should do.  So, no, I didn't, because I was, I was struggling myself in every way.
Speaker 1: What kind of sacrifices did you make to make sure that you could go to school?
Speaker 2: I made the sacrifices of working very hard, mornings and evenings after school and that kind of thing, to try to do my part on the farm and all of that kind of a thing.  And also, we had, we raised--we had chickens we had hogs and we had those kinds of things.  And we would struggle to have enough of those to sell.  Many times I can remember going to school, and this was a boarding school and many kids were there from, from the cities and what not, from all over really.  And I used to--we had chickens, I used to sell eggs.  I would carry eggs to the school and sell 'em to the students in the dormitory, and so I can remember doing that, you know, things like that to, to survive to get the money.
Speaker 1: So you were willing to earn your way?
Speaker 2: I was willing to do whatever I could to, to do that.  And I can remember, even working on the farm for people in the area, I worked for forty cents a day, working on other farms doing--if I had some spare time, all that kind of [thing?].  I was just the one that, if there was anything out there to do, that's why I always--my saying was, keep getting up (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, were your parents really proud of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were.  There was--they were proud.  They encouraged me.  They pushed me and they helped in every way possible because I was showing the interest and wanted to do it.
Story_ID: 31475
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was St. Paul like when you arrived at St. Paul?  Can you remember your first day at St. Paul?
Speaker 2: I was scared to death because I came in contact with all these other people.  I'd never been anywhere.  I had never been away from that elementary school.  And I--this was a boarding school and there were students there from everywhere.  And you had--we were called the country boys, the country kids, and they were from the cities, you know, and maybe all--Philadelphia and all those places.  And I was just really afraid to death, you know, I was scared.  I didn't know what to expect, you know, and what not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, Episco--there are some Episcopalians with some means, you know.  Were their children attending this school too?
Speaker 2: A lot of 'em were, um-hum, a lot of 'em were.  And one of the things that I can say about the faculty and who they hired and who they had there, who was the head and all, they were very caring people, and they were willing to do whatever [they] possibly can to educate their, the black.  And so they, they did all they could to help.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did they try to help you feel comfortable?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yes.  Yes, yes.  And the fact too, the--I can't remember--the teachers and all were very, very cordial, very encouraging.  And they took an interest in everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, though they called you country and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was something, I didn't really care about that.  I mean they, you know, how the city boys are, they figure they're hipped.  They know everything and all this kind of stuff.  I am--I wasn't, I, I came from the sticks.  I came from the country.  I didn't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: So you didn't worry their remarks--?
Speaker 2: I didn't worry about that.  No, it didn't bother me.  I was there for a purpose.  I didn't pay any attention to 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, but did you make friends there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I made friends.  I made friends.  And yes, I made friends with a, with a lot of 'em.  You know, once you get to know them and you have friends, and a lot of them were--they were from everywhere.  I can remember having people from Africa.  We had people from Panama, places like that, that was there in school, making friends with them, yeah.
Speaker 1: You still keep in touch with any of 'em or are there any of them (around?)?
Speaker 2: Not too many, no, occasionally, I might bump into one (unclear) (voice lowered), but not too much, no.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the teachers and the staff of St. Paul's like?  What were they like?
Speaker 2: They were good.  They were well educated.  They knew what they were doing.  And the curriculum at St. Paul's College was a good one for high school.  They were good and dedicated.  And they--most of, I'd say most of us there was not Episcopalian.  But the Episcopalians had their rules and regulations, and that's what you went by.  You either went by that or you were out.
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities there or coursework attracted you the most at St. Paul?
Speaker 2: History.  We had Afro-American history, and we had ancient history and government.  We had a course in government.  Government was really intriguing to me because that's when I found out about what Congress was composed, senators were, who made the decision, how presidents were elected, all that kind of stuff.  That was really, really enlightening to me.
Speaker 1: Were there any outstanding teachers there that you can--?
Speaker 2: I can remember the person that was really outstanding in government.  His name was Mr. Atkins.  He was outstanding in government.  He knew the government, knew it very well, and knew the functioning of the government, how they functioned, how many senators--I'd never knew anything about that really, senators for each state, House of Representatives, and how these kinds of things went through Congress and all that kind of stuff.  That was very intriguing, and he, and he knew that and taught that very well.
Story_ID: 31476
Speaker 1: Now, how did all this new information effect you.  Now, you're, for the first time, you're figuring out how the government works.  And you already figured how the sharecropper system worked and how to get you were due out of that.  Then you learned how the government worked.  I mean how did you feel?
Speaker 2: Well, my whole thoughts were then, was to try to think of ways that we could get our equal rights, try to think of ways why in any, in our area, and where I was living and everywhere and in all the towns, why couldn't we have equal rights to whatever was there since we were living there, and we were taxpayers, why not?  And then knowing about elected officials and what went on in Congress and what the laws and all that did, and all this kind of stuff, I started to think more and more, why don't I have the access to what is here?
Speaker 1: Did you reach any conclusions?
Speaker 2: I reach--I reached the conclusion that we was entitled to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you--?
Speaker 2: I, at that time, I was working just with some local NAACP [The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], things like that.  I was also very--I, I couldn't vote, but I was interested in getting black to qualify to vote cause I always felt that voting power was one way to change things.  And I, and after starting, going there, I just felt that, to try to motivate, to try to, to get people to--what they had to do to qualify to vote.  Our qualification for voting was different from the whites.  You had to do things different.  You had to do a--first, when you filled out application and all that kind of--it had to be different from what the whites were.  So everything was done to try to discourage blacks from voting.
Speaker 1: What specific things would they do to discourage you from voting?  I mean what--how was the application different?
Speaker 2: Okay, when, when the blacks would go to vote, they'd give you a blank sheet of paper, okay.  You know, when you go to vote, they give you a form to fill out.  They'd give you this blank sheet of paper, and you're to take that blank sheet of paper and put everything down in order as it's supposed to be, name, all of that, in order, wherein the whites was already made up.  You just fill it in.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you're saying that the actual slate of candidates was, was available for the whites to check off when they voted?
Speaker 2: Nah, no, no, you got to register to vote.  And I mean you had to pay what was called a poll tax or something like that, all that, that kind of stuff.  But all--also got to register.  And when they gave you an application to register, you'll start off with your name and address, occupation and on down the line.  Okay, so the application they gave the whites had that on it, all you do is fill it out.  For the blacks, they had a blank sheet of paper, and if you didn't put it in order, you were disqualified.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Now, that's a new one.  You know, I've heard different--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --ways, but that's a new one on me.
Speaker 2: And I, I was not old enough to vote at the time, but what I would do is to work with the people that could vote, and was old enough to vote and help them to memorize how this thing went so that when they're filling in that, they could put it in order.  And, see if you got anything out of sequence, you're disqualified.
Speaker 1: Now, that's--like I said, that's a new one.  I hadn't heard that one before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what other--so you were involved with the NAACP there in Lawrenceville.
Speaker 2: In a very--yeah, right, in a very small manner.  And that's when we--that's when, you know, we first started to try to seek some rights as far as blacks were concerned, and they were the only source of trying to do something like that.  We had a local one there in Lawrenceville, which I guess the headquarters or bigger one was in Richmond, Virginia, places like that.  That's where we--like we would have a drive on to get people ready to vote when the voting came around.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did that make you feel being able to get people to the poll and get 'em--?
Speaker 2: I felt good about it.  I felt that I, you know, I was accomplishing something, and I was event--I was moving toward our goal cause I was thinking that one of these days our vote's gonna count.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could see some progress?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Were a lot of young people volunteering then?
Speaker 2: No, not very many.  Just a few of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were sort of out there just as a pioneer group.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 31477
Speaker 1: Okay, and what other activities were you involved in, in high school?  Were you involved in any social activities or musical activities.
Speaker 2: In the glee club, singing with the glee club, involved in that.  And then we had, oh, we had a little organizations called, something progress.  A group of us fellows got together and we would meet.  We were just a little club like, but I can remember in high school it was singing in the glee club, and of course, I belonged to like a history club and stuff like that.  But the big thing was the glee club, high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used to sing pretty well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, can you still sing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I sing at my church, but I'm not very good any more.  I kind of quit (laughter), it quit me, and (unclear) get back to it.
Speaker 1: And what kind of songs did you all sing?
Speaker 2: We would sing secular songs more or less at high school, you know.  That's the kind of thing, you know, we'd sing those kinds of songs.  And we would sing some spirituals and things like that, but in high school, we sang a little bit of every--you know, different kinds of songs.
Speaker 1: Okay, as you engage in this new experience in high school, were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I can remember being on the honor roll for maybe a few--a semester or something like that or something.  But I wouldn't say--yeah, I, yeah, I could say that, you know, I, I wasn't--let's put it this way, I passed the courses, cause I worked at it.  But, you know, if you would say I was a smart student and all, well, everything I got, I had to dig for it.  I wasn't just automatically brilliant, nothing like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: And how did you feel about your preparation in grade school?
Speaker 2: It was good, very good because I, really that was one of the things in learning to read and read and that kind of stuff.  And, and that's what the teachers stressed, reading, writing, arithmetic and stuff.  So that helped me a lot in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you graduated in what year?  What was the--(unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Well, I was taken out of--I was, in my senior year, I went to the Army.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was in 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  And I, I was drafted, I was, that my--that was my senior year, and I, I tried to, to get--in fact, the head of the school tried to get me deferred to finish high school.  In fact, they had given it to me, but at that time, they had a quota that each county had to, had furnish for the army.  And they weren't taking eighteen-year old's at that time, but they couldn't the people that could pass the physical or pass the test to go in the Army, and they kept coming down so they got down to, in my country, Brumsey County.  They got down to me, and I, I was eighteen so I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how'd you feel about that, being drafted for the Army in your senior year of high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a deep sense of--I thought that--I never fought it; I never tried to do anything.  The only thing I wanted to do, I did want to finish high school, but I never fought not wanting to go into the military and defend the country.  I never thought that.  I always thought that that was my duty.
Speaker 1: Now, this is World War II--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 1944, and we're at the, this is almost at the close of the war.  A lot of--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: --allied victories were already--?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were, you know, the whole country was geared up towards winning the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--now, this is, a lot of people figure that this sounds very crazy, but I always thought that it was proud to defend my country, even though I was not given my rights as a citizen.  But I always felt that what I had I felt that I should defend it.
Story_ID: 31478
Speaker 1: We're rolling.  So you're drafted.  It's 1944, you're in the Army.  It's the closing period of World War II.  What happened?  I mean what was the Army like?  Was it what you expected?
Speaker 2: No, cause I went to Fort McClellan [Anniston, Alabama] in Alabama for basic training.  And Alabama is one of the worse segregated states I had ever placed my foot in.
Speaker 1: Worse than Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So it was, you know, going through basic--seventeen weeks of infantry basic training and maybe I got a chance to go in town, and I went in once or twice; didn't want to go back to town anymore, you know, (unclear) (insulting?), and you know.  It was segregated everywhere I went.  And the officers, I don't think, maybe once in a while I'd see a black officer.  Most of the officers were white.  So it was the same thing.
Speaker 1: So was it just the Alabama community that was segregated or was it the Army itself?
Speaker 2: The Army was segregated.  Everything on the post was segregated.  Blacks was in one place, and whites in another place.  It was completed segregated in every way.  We didn't train together--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I trained infantry, the doughboy, infantry all the way.  That's what I trained on.  I trained for fighting combat with a rifle on foot.
Speaker 1: Is that the toughest kind of training?
Speaker 2: That's the toughest kind of training you can get in the Army.  I wanted to get in the paratrooper.  I couldn't get in.  The paratroop was probably tough.  I wanted to go to paratrooper.  I couldn't get in.  They sent me overseas (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, after basic training--I mean were there any incidents in basic training you want to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the thing of it is in basic training you know, you're all, all the blacks are together.  And the only thing that in basic training was that, you know, you, you worked to survive.  That's all cause that basic training was tough.  It was infantry basic training, hiking and exercising and on the rifle range and doing all this kind of--it was tough.  So, and I was young at that time.  I think I maybe weighed about a hundred thirty pounds and carrying all that stuff and tackle was tough.  Basic training was tough.
Speaker 1: So you were glad when that was over?
Speaker 2: I was glad when it was over, yes, in deedy.  I said, I'm ready to go to the battle front (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you expected to go right into battle?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I had been chosen to because I had, I had done everything in basic training, I had gone through it very well.  And they wanted me to stay at Alabama as a carry, where, you know, you train the other people.  But then they said, no, they couldn't do that.  They had to have people to go to replace the people who were in the, over in the Pacific.  And so that was eliminated.  And so I, I left and went on furlough and then straight overseas.
Speaker 1: When did you go?
Speaker 2: I guess it was forty--'45 [1945].  I think it was '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: So in 1945.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?  What did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I went--first place I went, I went to, to the Philippines, went to Manila, northern Luzon, that's where I went to when I went overseas; went there to a staging area for a while.  And then we shipped away from there down into New Guinea.
Speaker 1: Now, New Guinea is a land that not too many people know anything about.  I mean even now it's not a lot known about New Guinea, but--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but how did you feel about going to New Guinea?  Had you ever heard of New Guinea before or did you know--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I didn't feel very right. I knew it was hot and humid.  I knew it was a hot country.  I knew it was mosquitoes, the ones that carry the malaria and all that kind of stuff.  Yeah, I knew all of that.  But, nah, I didn't know anything about New Guinea.  But at that time, see, we went down there as a service unit to the Thirty-Third Division [33rd Infantry Division].  The Thirty-Third Division was fighting and we were the quartermaster [33rd Quartermaster Company], service group to that, to that group.
Speaker 1: What did New Guinea look like?
Speaker 2: Mountainous, jungles, hot, rain all the time, humidity high and all kinds of insects, snakes, all that.  It, it's just jungle.
Speaker 1: And did you get to appreciate the place?
Speaker 2: No, no, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, how long did you--well, not how long, but I guess I what I really want to ask you, what--did anything memorable happen there that's--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember that snipers, Japanese snipers were still in the area, and we had, we had rifles and things prepared for that.  And every so often, we'd run across Japanese snipers and things like that.  And I remember we were getting supplies out sending supplies on up into the Philippines and what not, getting ready for the invasion of Japan.  I remember that part of it.  But there was a lot of Japanese snipers in New Guinea, and they were very, very--they could hide very easily because of the jungles there.  And we always had to be careful because they were sniping.
Speaker 1: Did you ever run across any yourself.
Speaker 2: Very close to them.  I heard them, but I really never did see them per se cause that's where your thicket was and we were always camouflaged too to look like the terrain and everything.  But as far as shooting at some or some shooting at me, I don't recall that that happened.
Story_ID: 31479
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, you left New Guinea, where did you go then?
Speaker 2: I went back to the Philippines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went back to the Philippines and went into an area, and we were, we began to train for the invasion of Japan.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything--so you were part of the invasion of Japan?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But what happened was, the bomb was dropped when we were on the ship going to--and we landed just the way we would have because we were landing Wakayama, Japan, those troops there didn't know the War was over.  The Japanese didn't know the War was over.  So it was just like the War was still going on.  And so we, we went ashore.  It's just lucky we were going for fighting.  We had our battle gear and everything.  We were being shot at and the whole thing, you know, because they didn't know the War was over.
Speaker 1: So what happened next?
Speaker 2: Well, we went in, and we, we staged there in Wakayama in tents for quite a little while.  And again, we were just kind of mopping up the Japanese snipers that were left and that kind of a thing because, you know, those that were in the pill boxes and all that kind of stuff, they had no communication.  They never knew the War was over.  So they were still very dangerous as far as being in those things.  And I can remember the Thirty-Third Division using flame throwers to bring those people out of those pill boxes and things like that because they never--they didn't know the War was over.  And we landed on the beach of Wakayama, Japan just like it was during the War.  We had, we had the battle ships, we had the fire coverage.  We had everything.  We had the PT [Patrol Torpedo] landing boats that went down and you'd storm out of that onto the beach with all of your gear into the water and onto the beach.
Speaker 1: What were the things you saw there?
Speaker 2: Um?
Speaker 1: What things did you see there?
Speaker 2: What I saw I, our, our plane coverage was really covering us.  We had some of the Japanese planes that were still flying attempting to bomb but our, our, all of our battle ships and everything was right out there.  And they shot them all down and everything like that.  So we landed safely and everything.  But that's what I remember very, very vividly.  And I remember get--when you go in, and you go into these--some of the parts, the water--see, you couldn't go but so far in the water.  You got to get out of the, that, that PT boat or whatever call them, and then let that thing down.  You got to get out of there and storm the beach.
Speaker 1: Pill boxes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was, it was some of those places--and that water was deep.  Sometimes the water was up to here.  You know, you had all your gear and everything, you're going to the beach, but you had the, the firepower over you to cover for you while you in.
Speaker 1: So that's how you hit the beach?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Then we got there, and then we went on up into Kopik (ph.) and we went into the occupation in Japan.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I spent--I don't know how long, but I spent quite a while in Japan.  And we, we started the occupation of Japan.
Speaker 1: Now, in the midst of all this War and, you know, and this Army training, is there any inclination, I guess--I mean, do you--looking back, do you see any, do you see yourself developing an interest in science?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I always, still at that time, I was developing the interest, I wanted to teach.  That's what I still wanted.  And I tell ya' I wanted to teach, and I, I just developed something about leadership because when I was in the Army, I advanced to first sergeant.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's, that's significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and see, and then that's, you know, where you're over the troops, administrating, carrying out the company's business and all that kind of stuff.  I developed that, and I guess the superiors saw that in me.  And I advanced really rapid from, say from a private to a master sergeant, first sergeant.
Speaker 1: So you had a--you achieved a position of some importance in the Army--(unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I would say so.
Story_ID: 31480
Speaker 1: So, is there anything that you want to tell us about the War?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went back a second time.  I also was in the Korean War (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you served a second term.
Speaker 2: You bet ya' I did (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That was in the reserves, and I went back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that was during the Korean War when I was in the reserves, and I didn't go overseas, but I was--still went back as a first sergeant, and, of course, I was training the other troops to go.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any observations about the desegregation of the Army--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because it was taking place right as you were--?
Speaker 2: It was taking place as I was getting ready to get out, out of the Korean War.  Yeah, and at first, while we--in fact, I can remember them bringing, putting troops together at that time.  And then there was a little, going of it even before then.  Let me see.  Yeah, because they started to, at that time, we started to do some training together, a little bit of training when we went to, different classes and what not together.  I could see it coming.  It was coming gradually at the time, and then I was about ready to get out of there.  And so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but I saw some of it coming, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did it ever reach you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Un-un, no.
Speaker 1: So you came out of the Army in--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty one [1951], I guess it was, '50 [1950], '51 [1951], somewhere, '51, 1951.
Story_ID: 31481
Speaker 1: And what did you do when you came out of the Army?  Did you go back home?
Speaker 2: I went back home and went back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, back, back to Saint Paul's  [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Saint Paul's was a college and high school(simultaneously) institute--?
Speaker 2: And a, and a, yeah.
Speaker 1: You finished your college--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there at Saint Paul's College, and all of it was--then, at that time I always had a strong --wanting, math, science and I wasn't one that would shy away from that.  And so I, I always had that background in math and science.  And I really thought--at that time, I had kind of said to myself that I really wanted to teach math and science in high school, that kind of a thing.  And so that's what I was concentrating on, and also I had a, I had a business mind. I always thought about some time maybe I'm gonna be a contractor and (unclear) the over contractor for everything.  I always wanted to manage something, and that kind of a thing.  And so, yeah, and I always--I liked math, I liked science, and I liked English--and I liked history and I liked government.  Those were my favorite things that I really liked and wanted to excel in.
Speaker 1: Do you think you were a different kind of student there cause you were, you were older than--?
Speaker 2: I was, oh, definitely.  I had a mission.  Oh, yeah, it wasn't no fooling, oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  All of us that came out of the military and went back to school, we had a mission.  It wasn't none of this playing around stuff, you know.  You, you were older and you, you went out on your--.
Speaker 1: You were pretty clear so--.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you--so you achieved a bachelor of science degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, at St. Paul.
Speaker 1: So what did you do that after, after you got our degree?
Speaker 2: After I got through that and all, and that, you know, I, I did a little bit of working around with my brother and building construction and what not and doing that kind of stuff.  And my brother was doing that.  And then I decided that, you know, I didn't particularly want to do that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 31482
Speaker 1: So I went into the federal government.  And I went into the federal government as a physical science technician.  And I, what I was doing was scribing maps and things like that, that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: And how did you find out about a job like that?
Speaker 1: Oh, just listening to people, friends and getting literature and stuff like that, and apply for it.  You know, through many ways and just reading and knowing people that was into it, and just going to apply for it.  And so this was in the Agriculture Department and so I, I didn't particularly want to do that.  And so I saw this job come up, they wanted physical science technician in geomag [geomagnetism] and seismology.  I didn't hardly know what it was.  And so I applied for it.  I applied for it with my, you know, with my education and everything, applied for it, and I got the job.  I was interviewed for the job, and I got the job.  And so there again, when I got in the job, in the particular work that I was doing, now, right off the bat, there were other blacks there.  There were other blacks in the, in this place.  We were physical science technicians and at that time, we were doing work on what they call--where we collected, they collected a lot of data geomagnitism and about the earth and all that kind of stuff.  And we were scaling what we called magnetograms and so that's what I was doing, was scaling those and writing the values down.  And you had to look at it and scale the waves and all that kind of stuff.  And then all of a sudden that, that job, it ended.  It, it came to an end.  I was a veteran, okay, I'm a veteran.  All right, so they came around told me, said, we got to fire some people because this job is, is over, and we got to let people go.  And I was the one, one of the one's they was gonna let go.  So I said, wait a minute.  I said, there are people here that are not veterans.  I said, I'm a veteran, and I have a right, and I said, you can't do that, but--and keep them, and let me go.  There again, I'm, you know, I know, I know my rights.  And so the supervisor told me, he said, well, that's just the way it is.  I said, no, it's not the way it's gonna be.  So what I did then, I went to personnel, I went into the personnel office, and I said, this is what is going on.  And I say, you're getting ready to lay off, and I'm the only one that's gonna be laid off, and I'm a veteran.  And I said, some of the people that they're keeping are not veterans.  I said, I'm a veteran, and I have veteran preference, and I said, you can't do that.  And so, they realized that I knew then, personnel, what was going on.  And so they, they got in touch with the supervisor and everybody and said, you can't do that.  So then, they said, okay, well--I didn't stay there, but they transferred me then into earthquake, seismology where I am now. That's when they transferred me in there.  And I was still a technician when I went there.
Story_ID: 31483
Speaker 1: So I had this background in math and science.  I had a good background in math and science, and usually whatever I really set my mind to do, I could do it.  So I was working in there, so I can remember the very day that I went there, they started me off and saying, you know, you got to interpret these seismograms.  You got to change these records, and, you know, all that stuff.  So kept looking at these things, and I said, all this recording here, recording earthquakes.  And I said, what is all this stuff?  I said I got to find out what this is.  What are we recording?  What are they doing?  And they started talking about locating earthquakes, picking p-phase, picking  s-phase and all that kind of stuff.  And I said, well, I want to do this.  And, you know, and so I'm a technician, I'm working there.  I went back to school because I had my background in math and science, so I went back to American and Geo- Washington University [American University and George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia], and I took all of the math and the science and everything that you needed to become geophysicist, and I'm working there in it.  And so I was developing more and more interest in it and everything.  And I'm working the whole time.  And I went on, went back and so I, I'm still a technician.  And so I became qualified with everything that was needed to become a professional geophysicist, and I applied for it.  The first couple of times I was turned down, not because I didn't qualify but because of my color.  At that time, you had to put down what your race was.  And so I got disqualified to even get on the register to be hired because my race was there, and I know what was going on.  When they were doing the, the registering and, you know, looking at everything, well, automatically, I get disqualified because I'm black, okay.  So I said, okay, I'm still working here, I'll keep working, and I kept working and everything.  And then I kept applying.  I kept applying.  I'm getting experience all the time cause I had this project then that I was working on by myself, and at that time, they were building Flaming Gorge [Flaming Gorge Dam, Daggett County, Utah] and Glenn Canyon Dam [Glen Canyon Dam, Coconino County, Arizona] and they wanted somebody to work on that to look at what is happening here in the way of blasts and what is happening with, as far as earthquakes are concerned.  What happens once they start building?  What happens when they put the water in and all that?  And I'm working on that.  So I kept applying, and so by that time, I had advanced to a grade that was higher than what I could come in as a geophysicist, and I was a higher grade.  And so I applied again.  And I got on the register.  Okay, and then there came a time--at the time that this guy--I had developed a very close relationship with several people there.  And we were, we were very, very close friends and they liked me because I did the work.  And so they pushed for me.  So I got the job as a geophysicist.  And I had to go down from a GS-7 to a five [GS-5] to come in because they, I couldn't come in as a seven [GS-7].  I had to come in as a five [GS-5].  So I was willing to take the downgrade because the potential was there.  I could see that, so I took it.  And that's where I got started, and I'm still the only Afro-American, and I'm conspicuous in every way, everywhere I went.  But that didn't bother me because I, you know, I'm doing--I'm gonna do my work.  I don't care, and I've had a lot of things said to me and a lot of things.  I've seen a lot of things that were not right, you know, it's different things.  I didn't pay it any attention.  I had a goal.  I said, that's okay.  I'm still gonna do my work.  And I, and I just kept working, you know.  And so I had people there that had began to respect me for what I did and for what I knew and how I carried myself in doing the work.  Nobody gave me anything, nothing.  They're not gonna give you anything--no one gave me anything, but I did the work.  And so there were people that started to realize, you're doing the work.  So therefore, you should be moving.  And so that's how I got to moving, and then I'm still the only Afro-American.
Story_ID: 31484
Speaker 1: Now, what year did you start really as a geophysicist?  And what kind of a degree do you have to have to be a geophysicist?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to have, not--you have to have a combination of the math and science that would give you the background to qualify for it.  You can have a degree in anything, but you have to have those courses.  That--.
Speaker 1: It's a test.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  You've got to have that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you have to be able to train--(unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Train, yes, that's right.  You got to have those courses.  If you have those courses, you are capable to be trained to do whatever is necessary, what is to be done in geophysics.  And so that was what you had to do.
Speaker 1: So they don't tell you, you have to have this degree, but--.
Speaker 2: But they tell you, you have to, got to have those courses and then you're efficient in those and those, that's what quali--so that's when I got in there just like that.  But see, the whole time that I'm preparing my [self]--I'm getting experience because I'm doing this work.  I knew how to do all this stuff right beside them cause I knew how to interpret records.  I knew how to interpret local earthquakes.  I knew how to interpret distant earthquakes.  I knew how to compute.  I knew all that stuff.  And so I'm working all the time.  And so that's how I got in there, and I earned the respect of the rest of the people that was there for what I did, not necessarily my color, but for what I was doing.  And so that's how I got into it.  And so I looked back, and I figure from the day that I was on that farm as a kid, I always wanted to excel in whatever I did, no matter what it was, I wanted to excel and was willing to pay the price.  And I never gave up.  NO matter what somebody would say or no matter what someone would do, it didn't discourage me.  I'm, I'm gonna continue on, cause I had things happen to me that the average person today would not put up with it.  They would say the heck with this, I'm out of here; I wouldn't take this stuff.  But I said, no, un-un.  I'm gonna do it.
Speaker 1: I think it's important in this interview, as you tell me, that you give us an example of something that happened, and, you know, and you can tell me as much as you want, but if you, please, sir, if you'll give me an example of something that happened so people have some idea of what we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay, many times during and not so--when I'm talking on the phone, people usually can't tell my race.  They can't tell whether I'm Afro-American or whether I'm white, okay.  So they're assuming all the time that I'm white.  Okay, and so they're setting up interviews.  They're setting up visitations and all this stuff, and they would come, and when they get there, they would say, I'm looking for a Waverly Person.  I said, this is he.  And, ah, man, you could see it, almost fall out, almost fainted, almost just passed out.  They were without words, that type stuff.
Speaker 1: So there's been a lot more than you really can tell us, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was some things that I don't want to--I--it just hurts so much to tell it, I don't--but that's something, that's one of the incident.  But there's been man--one of the things that also hurt me so much was when I first went into the federal government, I could not hang my coat rack on the same rack with the white.
Speaker 1: You couldn't hang your coat on the same coat rack.  And they actually told you that--?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the government, the federal government, yes.  And there are many other incidents that was really painful that I, I just don't--but through all of it I kept the faith.  I remember what my mother always told me, keep the faith and keep getting up.
Story_ID: 31485
Speaker 1: Sixty, I went into seismology in sixty, I think in '64 [1964] or '65 [1965], that's when I became a professional geophysicist.
Speaker 2: '64 [1964] or '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: And you were that--we're rolling right now, and I just wanted to reemphasize that you said earlier that you've had to deal with this kind of stuff all your life, practically--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the government's just another--
Speaker 1: Another, the government, you felt, it was the federal government.  You felt that you was in Washington, D.C.  The president is there, everybody that you felt that you would get away from it, but you did not.  It was there, very, very, very openly.
Speaker 2: Did you ever ask yourself if it can go on here, then where can you be free from it?
Speaker 1: Well, it, at a whole time that, you know, I was there and was seeing that, that was the beginning of Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] and things, and things were going on, things were happening.  And I could see that eventually this has got to change because it's too much pressure.  People are becoming more and more educated, and they're--the Afro-Americans are not just gonna stand for it.  They're gonna, they're gonna pressure the, the elected officials.  They're gonna pressure everybody and say, hey, look, we got to have our rights.  We're paying taxes.  We're gonna have to have the same treatment.  We're gonna have to be allowed to vote.  I could see all that coming.  And so then, you know, you start thinking, well, after all, all of the things that I've put up with, and all the things that I've gone--all the things that I've contributed in my small way, in a nonviolent way, is paying off, yeah.
Speaker 2: Do you think that soldiers who came from World War II and Korea, the black soldiers when they came back, came back with a different attitude?
Speaker 1: You bet ya', I did, most of us did.  We had in our minds, say, hey, we fought for the country.  We want our rights.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now, you're working in Washington, D.C., and you're working at this very important job.  And yet and still the federal office you work in won't let you hang your coat up on the same coat rack with the rest of the people.
Speaker 1: I wasn't a professional at that time.  I was in the government, but I wasn't a professional.  That changed once I got out of this particular--I was the Agriculture Department.  I got out of that.  I got into Commerce, and that wasn't there, but it was in the Agricultural Department.  But at that time, in the '60s [1960s], still there was a lot of places, eating places in Washington, D.C. were segregated, still segregating, yeah.  And as far as colleagues going to eat together, things like that, that didn't happen.
Speaker 2: So did you feel isolated?
Speaker 1: No, not really.  I, I, you know, I don't know.  I just say it's okay.  And, you know, and I, you know, they would think many times that--there were many of the employees that thought that they were hurting me, and I was happy all the time and doing my thing.  And eventually, they came around.  You know, it didn't bother--I just said, well, I've been going through this all the time, so what's new.  One day it will change (chuckle).
Story_ID: 31486
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about the work of--your work.  Now, you are currently the--.
Speaker 2: I'm Chief of the USGS [United States Geological Survey] National Earthquake Information Service, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long have you been in this position?
Speaker 2: Twenty years, more.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this has been the core of your work?
Speaker 2: This has been the core.  This is, has---this has been the, I would say this has been the really highlights of my career since I've been in this position.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the U.S. Geological Survey [USGS]?
Speaker 2: The U.S. Geological Survey is earth science.  That's what we are.  We are scientists, earth science in every form.  That's what the U.S. Geological Survey consists of.  A lot of people figure that the U.S. Geological Survey only made maps.  Well, that's a big part of it, is the mapping, but they also have the earth sciences and earthquakes is one big part of it, and geomagnetism is a big part, landslides and those kind of things.  But earthquakes is one big part of the U.S. Geological Survey.  Our office here [Golden, Colorado] and our office in Menlo Park [Menlo Park Science Center, Menlo Park, California] is a big part of the U.S. Geological Survey.  But it's earth science, and it's a water qua--you know, a lot of water, you know, the qualities of water and things like that.  And parts of it also is working with dams, years ago, building dams, all those kind of--Bureau of Reclamation, and all that kind of stuff.  That's, that's what the U.S. Geological Survey is all about.
Speaker 1: So you basically provide information about--.
Speaker 2: Information and know-how about these things.  Now, for me, you know, we play a very important role, and if you want me to go into it, I will.
Speaker 1: Now, this is just so we're clear.  You're the head of the National Earthquake Information Center.
Speaker 2: Right.  Service.
Speaker 1: Oh, service, all right.  Okay, now, what is the roll of the (unclear) there?
Speaker 2: Well, well, first of all, we cannot predict, we cannot forecast earthquakes.  And in the United States right now, there's no work being done on forecasting and prediction of earthquakes.  So my role is--the very first thing we do is called earthquake early alerting.  Now, when I say that, you think that I'm able to tell you when and where the next earthquake is gonna be.  I can't do that.  But what we can do, with technology today, we are the only center in the world that locate, compute magnitudes and disseminate data on significant earthquake world wide.  And we do that here.  So that's the very first thing that we do.  Any earthquake that is potentially damaging anywhere in the world, that could possibly kill people or cause damage, we're going to get the answers right now.  And we're gonna pass this information on to the proper authorities, mostly to organizations that respond to disasters, and earthquakes is one of them.  Get there, and begin your rescue effort.  And if you get there quickly, you can rescue a lot of people.  When buildings crash and come down on people, if you can get there quickly, you can get a lot of those people out alive.  You can get the seriously injured to the hospital.  This is after the earthquake occur.  For U.S. earthquakes, anywhere in the United States, we can have that information right here within thirty to forty minutes.  We have that information, and we have hotline here that we can any emergency office anywhere in the United States.  And the minute that we get that information all ready, we get on the phone, and we call them and say, here is where the earthquake is.  This is the location, this is the latitude, this is the longitude.  This is the magnitude, and they get that.  When they see that, they know the population and they know everything about it.  That's when they fall into action to start rescue.  If the earthquake is in a foreign country, it takes us maybe, sometimes a hour or more to get the information ready.  We get it ready, and the first thing we do, once we get all that ready, we give it to our embassy or consulate in that country if we have one.  And then the next place it goes, it goes to our State Department in Washington, D.C. cause they're supposed to know where all Americans are in the foreign countries.  They get it, okay.  Then they have all these observatories around the whole world that are cooperating with us.  They are hooked into us to get our electronic mail for whatever.  We locate magnitude and everything.  Even though they might be doing their own in their country, they want to know what we got because a lot of those people are giving us data on a daily basis, real time basis, coming in by satellite.  So that's the way it go.  So that is the very first thing that we do.  And it's designed to try to save lives.
Story_ID: 31487
Speaker 1: For instance, if--there was a earthquake yesterday in Evansville--(unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on June the 18th [2002].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Indiana, yeah, Evansville, Indiana.
Speaker 1: And was it a significant--.
Speaker 2: Magnitude five point zero [5.0] which for that area, yes.  Magnitude five point zero is a moderate earthquake, moderate earthquake, 5.0, and 5.9.  And if it's right on in a town or a city, it could cause a lot of damage.  As it was, it didn't cause that much damage, knocked things in a grocery store in Illinois and in and around Indiana, and there's a--part of a roof feel down and one person was injured slightly.  Some chimneys were cracked, foundation was cracked and that kind of stuff, but not anything significant.  Now, had this been a six or greater, it would have been a lot more damage than that.  But that particular earthquake, right in there on, in our area there, right there, we were--just got through with another earthquake in Chili, Chili/Argentina border.  And that one was a magnitude of six point five [6.5].  And we knew that that probably had caused some damage.  So we were getting all that ready.  And we're getting all that stuff out, getting it to the right people.  That's foreign.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, when an earthquake or six point five [6.5] is--hits, does it knock out the communication system of the place where it might hit?  I mean (unclear) (in light of), I mean, I guess what I'm getting at is the role you all play is crucial because if a real strong earthquake hits, the people that are in it really can't communicate what happened.
Speaker 2: Sometime they can't, sometime they can't.  We're communicating to them.  And see, you got to remember too, a lot of these countries have equipment, but their equipment is not up to what the United States is.  Now, people like Japan, OK, Taiwan, Russia, they're up to snuff with equipment and all that, but all the--a lot of the other countries are not. So they're depending on us to get all the information.  And so they're depending on us to say where it is, how big it is and they, now, the website is the thing now.  As soon as this information is available, we're giving it out, but it's on our website.  That earthquake yesterday, within an hour's time after the earthquake occurred, it was up on the website telling you where it was, how big it was and the whole thing from right here.
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned the numbers five and six and (unclear) I mean, how, can you kind encapsulate, I guess how earthquakes are ranked and--?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll give it all to you.  A minor earthquake is 3.0 to 3.9, that's minor.  A light earthquake is 4.0 to 4.9, that's light.  A moderate earthquake is 5.0 to 5.9.  A strong earthquake is 6.0 to 6.9.  A major earthquake is 7.0 to 7.9.  And a great earthquake is 8.0 and above.  That's the way they classify it.  And usually, when you get into the moderate earthquakes, sometimes they can have considerable damage, but in most cases--I think I know of one case in the U.S. where some people were killed, with one that was about a five, nine [5.9].  Usually, you're in a magnitude of six [6.0] when you get deaths in the United States, but many of the foreign countries, a lot less because their structures are not near as strong as ours here.  But that's the way we classify them.  And I don't have my pager on today.  A pager, we carry pagers all the time that, information about these earthquakes come to us all the time.  Every time it locates one, it comes to us.  You push the button and you got it.  It's coming in, all of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you get the reading for--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have two people that are always on call to respond to whatever happened, and these people are experienced.  They know what to do with certain magnitude earthquakes and where to go with it and all that kind of stuff.  And it's my job to make sure that all of this is done and done properly.
Story_ID: 31488
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to this, I'm thinking about whether I should do this or not, and maybe, and this may sound elementary, I'm sure to--(unclear) but what is an earthquake?  I just want you to tell us.
Speaker 2: Well, an earthquake--the best way that I can explain it to you, stress builds up in the earth crust, where the rock is.  And, okay, sometimes it builds up for hundreds of years.  Sometime it builds up for thousands of years.  Sometime it builds up for millions of years where this stress is continuing to build up in this rock.  And when that stress exceeds the strength of that rock, something has to give.  It breaks, it shifts, it shifts one way or another--one part of the earth's crust shift into the other, then you have an earthquake.  And the more stress is released, the more energy is released at that time, the bigger the earthquake is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we don't know where all the faults.  Earthquakes occur on faults, F-A-U-L-T-S.  And that's nothing more than the shifting of the rock within the earth['s] crust.  And you know you have a fault if you can trench or you can find that somewhere during geological time, one part of that earth['s] block shifted in relation to the other.  And then you know that you had an earthquake.  Maybe it was a million years ago.  We don't know, things like that.  And many faults are mapped, like the San Andreas Fault [California], The Wasatch Fault in Utah and New Madrid fault [The New Madrid Seismic Zone, Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee and Mississippi] in--and those are all mapped and know that they're there.  And we know what size of an earthquake those faults are capable of producing because we had it.  So we can have it again.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the biggest disaster in terms of an earthquake that you've been involved with?
Speaker 2: Mexico was one of 'em in 1995.  It was a magnitude of 8.0 in Mexico City.
Speaker 1: And that's a great earthquake.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a great.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: That earthquake was located about 235 miles from Mexico City, but as you know, and many people don't know, that Mexico is built on a lake, lake bed.  And even though the earthquake was near the coast, the waves gravitated to the Northwest--or Northeast from there, and Mexico started to shake like a bowl of jelly, and it brought down so many buildings.  And more--they'd never have admit it, but more than 20,000 people was killed and many buildings were damaged.  And in the United States, I would say that the earthquake that probably, that probably put us to the edge in every respect wasn't the biggest one.  It was the Northridge [Los Angeles, California] earthquake in 1994, six point seven [6.7].  That earthquake got more coverage, more attention since I've been working here.  That was the one that--I mean I went, I mean a lot of us went steady for seventy-two hours without stopping, and doing and answering, (going?) on media, all kinds of stuff, not necessarily the biggest one, maybe not the most, but just for some reason, that was it.  The World Series earthquake [Loma Prieta earthquake 1989] really put us to the test too because they were getting ready for the World Series in San Francisco, and then the earthquake occurred, a magnitude seven point one [7.1], and that one killed something like sixty-some people and caused a lot of damage.  And that's when the bridge collapsed in Oakland and all of that.  That was a time too that we were put to the test.  And that's just giving information, answering questions, trying to calm people, things like that.  And in my case, I'm the spokes person, and I had to do a lot of talking.  I'm the one that gets before the media, and get before everybody and talk.  And I think I have a way of talking to people so that they can understand what I'm saying, but yet tell them the truth and don't talk over their head.  You know, you don't have very many scientists out there.  You have regular people, well educated people, but they don't know anything about earthquakes.  So you have to talk in a way so that they understand what you're talking about.  I can do that, and I like to do that.  I like to talk to people (chuckle).
Story_ID: 31489
Speaker 1: Yeah, I noticed when I came in here, the place was filled with maps and globes--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on displays and visual displays--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and do you, are there people who tour here?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  We had one--when you were there it was one over there when you came in.  They come in here from everywhere and during the school year, all of the students from fourth grade up are allowed to tour this place.  And we have all of them coming in, and we show 'em; we talk to 'em.  We're trying to get the young people interested in science.  And I do a lot of this in the metropolitan areas, especially in the inner city.  I go in and talk to the kids and talk to 'em and say, look, you can do this.  You can be this.  If you want to do this, you got to work and do this.  And so I do a lot of that.
Speaker 1: I know people call and ask you--even though you just said that you really can't predict when--we don't have the technology, and with all of this, to actually predict when a quake is gonna--when and where it's gonna hit, but people call you up expecting you to be able to do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I can do to the people, when they call me up and ask this kind of thing, the only thing that I can tell them, I can go on the history.  I know the history of the areas.  I know what has happened there in the past.  I know what we know about the area, and I tell them that, look, this did happen there, and there is a reason for it.  And that reason is still there.  And so it can happen.  I don't know when.  I don't know exactly where, but, yes, it can happen because you have a history of it.  Now, if somebody call me from Florida and ask me about it, I'd say no, you don't have any history of earthquakes.  It's no earthquakes there.  You got to worry about hurricanes and tornadoes (laughter), you know.  And so I--that's the kind of thing I tell them.
Speaker 1: But still, you can't really predict it's gonna happen--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I just know--.
Speaker 1: --but the history is--?
Speaker 2: History is there.  And that mean that if you've had it once, you can have it again.
Speaker 1: So you know the probability of--?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I can say, I don't know when.  I say, but we do know that that fault is there, and that fault is capable of producing at least a magnitude eight [8.0] earthquake.  I know that.  So, it can happen again.  I don't know when.  But, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, the most famous fault in the United States is the San Andreas Fault.
Speaker 2: That's the most talked about one.
Speaker 1: In California.
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: And it runs right--?
Speaker 2: And the New Madrid [The New Madrid Seismic Zone, Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee and Mississippi] falls in there right behind.  People, more and more today are knowing--are learning about the New Madrid fault, and they learn it because--.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that one?  I think--can you spell that one for us, I mean, cause I never heard of it.
Speaker 2: New, N-E-W, M-A-D-R-I-D, I think that's the way they spell it.  They, pronounce it a little different on that, New Madrid.  That fault is running from Mock Tree, Arkansas all the way up through New Madrid [Missouri].  And see we had a tough time yesterday because many people wanted to say that that earthquake yesterday was on the New Madrid fault.  It was not.  It's not a part of the New Madrid at all.  There's a fault system (unclear) that we think might be what is called the Wau-Was--Wabash Valley fault system, that it might be on.  But we don't know yet.
Speaker 1: Now, this New Madrid fault, is--you say it runs from Arkansas--?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All the way to California?
Speaker 2: No, no.  To New Madrid, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Oh, New Madrid, Missouri.
Speaker 2: That's a city, that's a city there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, good thing I asked that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause it's a city.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And that one is--?
Speaker 2: We know that that fault is capable of producing a magnitude eight [8.0] or greater because of the history [New Madrid Earthquake Sequence December 1811 to February 1812], but we don't know when.  That's the one that made the Mississippi River flow backwards for a couple of days, formed the Reelfoot Lake [Lake/Obion counties, Tennessee] and ran church bells all the way into Boston.
Speaker 1: Now, what--when did that happen?
Speaker 2: 1811 to 1812, three of 'em.  So that's the kind of thing that I can talk with people when they ask me about, I'm thinking about moving here.  I'm thinking about moving there.  What do you think and all this?  And I just can say, well, if you're asking me to predict or forecast an earthquake, I can't do that.  But I can tell you what the history is there.  And I can tell you that there's a probability that you might have that because you've had it once before.  And so, you know, I can tell you that.
Story_ID: 31490
Speaker 1: So with all the talking, you hear a lot of talk about, you know, California and well, part of it falling into the ocean and all of that?
Speaker 2: No, there is no scientific reason why California should ever fall into the ocean.  But California are gonna have their earthquakes, but they're not falling anywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we don't have to worry about--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --like (unclear).
Speaker 2: No beach property over here (chuckle).
Speaker 1: In Colorado (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no, un-un, no.
Speaker 1: Now, you get, now people who are, who believe in proficiency and who believe in, who have an interpretation of religious text call you as well, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they do.  And see, I know a little bit about the Bible too.  And so I can talk with them because a lot of them that are, are really scholars.  They're religious scholars.  They'll call me and tell me when, just like the most fun was when, at the end of the century--you know, century, 1999--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--.
Speaker 2: They were all, was calling me and said the world will end at midnight.
Speaker 1: They were doing a favor to call you and tell you (laughter).
Speaker 2: They're calling (laughter), they're calling telling me to tell people, tell them to get their house and order and all.  I said, look, I said, you're a Bible study or Bible scholar, right?  You know the Bible.  Yeah.  I said, well, did you miss the part in the Bible that said that you would not know the day, the hour or the minute that the Lord will come again.  He will come like a theif in the night.  I said, did you miss that?  Uh?  I said, well, go back and read it.  So what makes you think you know?  Didn't call no more (laughter).  You know, you, you get, you just go ahead, and you talk to 'em but you tell them that.  You say, you don't know.  What makes you think--who, who gave you that information?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Do you find it interesting too, that people would call who have been told something by some religious interpreter?
Speaker 2: Religious interpreter and psychics.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Psychics are very, very prominent in this field.  Psychics.
Speaker 1: But do you think it's strange that they call a scientist to double check what--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, I have to say this.  A lot of those people would be willing to believe a psychic rather than to believe us.  Don't ask me why, but they do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think that this is getting better or worse as we go forward into the twenty-first century.  Do people--are people starting to rely more on science for information?
Speaker 2: They're starting to rely more on science, and people today are beginning to do more thinking for themselves.  And now, I can--you know, by dealing--I deal with the whole world, and I deal with all ages, you know.  And I find that people are beginning to rationalize.  People are beginning to think for themselves and beginning to put some meaning behind what people are saying and why and all this.  And so they're beginning to, to, to think more about it.  And one thing too, also, people are beginning to understand earthquakes more so than ever because we make sure that it's in the media.  Everything is out there.  Whenever earthquakes occur, it's out there, what fault we think it's on or everything we know about it, after-shocks and all that kind of stuff.  So it's out there.  So people are beginning to become educated.  You know what, now, people are beginning to ask when they go buy a house, hey, did you take into consideration when you built this house what kind of earthquake you might have in here.  Those were unheard of questions up until now.  So, yeah, they're becoming more and more--.
Story_ID: 31491
Speaker 1: We're talking about involved in this world-wide project to monitor all this.  And, you know, it's--what does all this costs, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well, it's in the millions for us.  See our headquarters is in Reston, Virginia.  The director of the U.S. Geological Survey is in Reston, Virginia, just out of D.C [Washington, District of Columbia].  That's where are our headquarters are.  And Congress appropriated a certain amount of money.  I'm not just sure how many billions it is.  It's appropriated for the whole U.S. Geological Survey.  And then once that comes in, the different groups like earthquake studies and what not get a certain amount of money to come into each group.  Like for my particular group, now, that I have, the ones that I have, that we're doing the work, it's fourteen of us that are doing the work, that I just explained to you what we're doing.  And our budget for that is about a million.  That's what, for me, but then all the others have their parts of it.  And we, whenever there's--the budget time comes around, we have to go in and, and fight for the money and say what we need.  But one of the things that our--we get funded.  We don't get as funded as much as we want, but we get funded because we're visible.  And everybody want to know the answers about earthquake--when an earthquake occurs, the elected officials and everybody else want.  And what they'll say, you know, like, they'll say, well, those guys, whenever I want to know anything about an earthquake, they got it, you know, things like that.  And that helps our budget, you know.  So we're visible.  Then a lot of parts of it are not cause see they do--in this building here, and lots of research and other stuff is going on where they're doing, and that's where they got, they've got probability maps, they got risks maps.  Say, if you're living in New Madrid, Madrid, Missouri area, this is the risk you're in.  If you're living in California, this is the risk you're in.  If you're living in Florida, you're not in the risk of earthquakes, things like that.  Those are coming out from here.  And this is where it all starts because we locate all the earthquakes.  We locate approximately 20,000 earthquakes per year throughout the world.  And so we located earthquakes all over, and they're using these data to project what can happen in the area.  Now, for us here, we have earthquake early alerting.  We have a daily publication.  We have a weekly publication.  We have a monthly publication, and all of this is done, there're done in those stages, and every earthquake that we locate goes into our historical database.  Anyone that wants to know what the history of earthquakes look like anywhere in the world, they can go there and get it.
Speaker 1: Well, for instance, we're located in Chicago.  What are the, what's the probability for Chicago?  What--?
Speaker 2: Not for--Chicago has no history of a destructive earthquake in Chicago, but you can be affected by the earthquakes in Southern Illinois.  They have a history of them.  But Chicago itself, there's never been a destructive earthquake centered in Chicago, right in Chicago.  And so we don't expect it.
Speaker 1: And, you know, we're now, we're sitting here in Golden, Colorado.  What's the probability for--?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a fault running right down here.  We're sitting on it.  There's the Golden Fault (laughter).  But we, they trenched down, and they found out that somewhere back in geological times, the fault shifted.  That's how we know it's here.  One part of the crust shifted rather than the other.  So we know the fault is there.  But since we have had instrumentation, we have never recorded an earthquake on it.  So to some of us we'll say that the fault is inactive.  In other words, it's been active, but it's not active anymore.  We're not recording any earthquakes on it.  But when you look back at it, that's not saying a whole lot.  I know, and a lot of the other people know, because we didn't start recording earthquakes in Colorado until 1906.  So what happened before then?  We know there're a couple of--historically, like the largest earthquake in the State of Colorado was in 1882.  We had no instruments at that time.  But indications are, and what we studied and what we was able to read, what we were able to look at geological features and everything, we know that that earthquake occurred.  And we were able to, to compute the magnitude.  It was a magnitude six point six [6.6].  And it was centered just to the West of Fort Collins.  We know that.  That kind of thing we can do.  So, you know, that's how we get the history of New Madrid earthquakes, the history of many of the historical earthquakes.  And so that's why I say, you know, if there was a big earthquake in any area, somehow, we're gonna know it.  We'll find out--.
Speaker 1: Well--.
Speaker 2: --even though we didn't have instruments.
Speaker 1: Is the earth moving all the time--?
Speaker 2: Some parts of it is moving all the time.  Sometimes they move.  Like the San Andreas fault, well, I'm able to find out that that fault is slowly moving.  They were trying to figure out by the slowly moving that it'll tell us anything when they might get a big earthquake, anything like that, and it hasn't done that.  We've tried everything possible to try to see if we can forecast when this thing might really move, might snap, you see.  See, sometimes, faults break for miles.  Sometimes a fault can break along this, within the earth, it can break for forty or fifty miles, you know.  And so you've got the breakage of the fault, and the energy given off that much.  And anything along there could be damaged.  So, yeah, so that's, that's, that's where we are.  And so we are--I like to refer to us as the now people because if there's an earthquake anywhere, I don't care how small, especially, in the East, they're gonna call us.  Everybody in the world has our phone number.  They're gonna call us and say--well, we get a lot of false calls.  A lot of people, especially if you have an earthquake like you had yesterday.  A lot of people from that area are gonna be calling us now and say they felt an earthquake, when in deed, they haven't.  You know, it's something moving or something like that, and they think it's an earthquake.  But a lot of false calls.
Story_ID: 31492
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the black community, how do you--I know you're concerned about there not being enough people involved in earth science and other forms of science.  How, what do you see as--how can we motivate, you know, more black scientists to--?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, you know the young generation today as well as I do.  And you have to face it.  The young generation today, many of the young generation, especially Afro-Americans, they all figure they're gonna be athletes.  They all figure they're gonna be professional football players.  They're gonna be professional basketball players.  And that's where they concentrate, okay.  They see a role model.  And they think they're gonna be one too.  All right, the next thing they see a lot of lawyers.  They see a lot of doctors.  So, that's where a lot of them want to concentrate into those fields because for us, they don't see many of us.  And in many cases, we don't make the money that those people make, you know, the professional [athletes].  We don't make that kind of money.  There're kids today, what they're thinking about, how many bucks I'm gonna make, what kind of car am I gonna drive?  I go many places to talk today to the kids.  The first thing they ask me, "what kind of car you drive?"  I say, I drive a bug.  What?  I say, yeah.  So, you know, they see role models, and what they're looking at, is that person out there that's making big bucks and they figure that they're gonna do it too.  And you know as well as I know how many professional football you're gonna have, how many professional basketball players you're gonna have, how many really make it and how many don't.  So--.
Speaker 1: And it's not many.
Speaker 2: No, so, it's hard as for earth science because they don't see that many role models.
Speaker 1: But, you all get paid--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do.  We make a decent, and we got a good retirement, good vacation.  We make a, we make a decent living.
Speaker 1: And you don't have to cheat anybody.
Speaker 2: No, un-un.  No.  I'm happy with what I'm doing.  Well, everybody want to make more money, yeah, why not?  You know (laughter), but I have peace of mind.
Speaker 1: It's exciting work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exciting.  That's me.  I come to work every day.  I never dread coming to work.  I come to work every day, I'm, I'm happy.  I'm coming, I'm looking for earthquakes (laughter).  If I got an earthquake, it's different (unclear).  This morning I came in, had one on the borders of Texas and New Mexico, small earthquake, you know, things like that, it's just always exciting, you know.
Story_ID: 31493
Speaker 1: Well, now, I didn't talk about--now, you, you're married, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you all met back in, after the war--?
Speaker 2: High--in college.
Speaker 1: In college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife is a retired school teacher.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: We don't have any children.  It's just my wife and I, and we have everybody else's (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when did you move to Colorado, I know--?
Speaker 2: In 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been living Boulder ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you like it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like it.  I didn't like it at first.  I didn't like that lifestyle (laughter), too casual for me.
Speaker 1: Is it really?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Everybody want to hike.  I don't want to hike.  I hiked in the Army.  I'm not hiking any more (laughter), yeah.  I'm involved in the community more than I want.  At first I couldn't.  But now I'm involved in the community.  I'm a community person.  I'm doing all kinds of things in the community connected to a lot of things, knowing what's going on and this kind of thing, enjoy that kind of stuff too.
Speaker 1: And what do you--now, this has been like a journey that you couldn't have predicted--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when you were in Blackridge, Virginia--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What do you--you've come this far--I guess you didn't know you were going this way, but what do you think your legacy would be?  I know you've still got--you're--you could retire any time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: You're (unclear) retirement, so you could retire if you wanted to?
Speaker 2: Right now, um-hum.  Well, my legacy would be anyone that I have come in contact with, anyone that I have had dealings with, I've always been one that was willing to help in any way that I can.  I've always been one trying to motivate the person.  I've always been one that had time to talk to anyone.  I've never been to the point where I thought that I'm too busy or I'm too important to talk to anyone.  I just feel that I have been, and still is, just a regular person that anyone can talk to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And enjoy doing it.  I don't really have any hang-ups about that kind of a thing.  In other words, I am always humble.  I'm always one--I don't care who it is.  It doesn't matter to me, I don't care where you're coming--I don't care.  I look at the individual.  What can I do?
Story_ID: 31494
Speaker 1: Okay, and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered that, one that imparted all of the knowledge that they had to everyone and remembered as being one that tried to be fair in dealing in every--with everybody, everybody I came in contact with and be willing to share with whatever I had knowledge and what not with everybody.
Speaker 1: And if your parents were alive now, what do you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, they would be so proud.  Oh, my mother would be so really proud.
Speaker 1: She died young, didn't she?
Speaker 2: She--very young, in her forties.
Speaker 1: So, education, it wasn't wasted.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  So, I, you know, I just wish that, you know, she could have been here to see some of the accomplishments and things that I was able to make.  She would have been so proud, yep.
Speaker 1: Just one last thing--well, it might be two last things.  Is there anything that you want to say that you haven't, that I haven't asked you and that you'd just like to say.
Speaker 2: Well, I can't--I think most of the things that I would have wanted to say, I've said it to you.  One of the things that I truly say that, of all the, my dealings and all of my goings and all of my comings and what have you, one of the things that I'm just so proud to see that I can wherever I want to eat, and I can go wherever I want to stay because that was tough for me because I never could go to a hotel and figure that I could spend the night there, and never go to a restaurant and figure that I could eat there.  I was always turned down, we don't serve colored, and they'd say, we don't serve colored, that kind of--and I'm so proud that that's not happening, and I think I had a part in that.  To be free, as--well, not totally free, but pretty free, as a citizen.
Speaker 1: And that makes you proud?
Speaker 2: Makes me proud because I think I had a part of it.  And I think that I have contributed to that, and in many cases making the young people appreciate more or less, what they have, and they didn't have to go through what I went through.
Speaker 1: And last question, and we're engaged here in an oral history project.  Well, what--how do you gage the importance of what we're trying to do here?
Speaker 2: I think it's a very important thing because I want people to know what price we had to pay to get where we are.  And I think it's important for the younger generation or anyone to know that you got there in spite of what went on.  And you got there because of endurance and continuing to work for what you thought you wanted, and what you thought was right.  And I feel that this kind of thing can shed some light to many others and let people know that things didn't come easy.  And they're still not gonna come easy.  They might think so.  Even though you have all of the--you can go to any--go anywhere you want to go, no one is gonna give you anything.  And I keep instilling that to them.  So I think it's important to know what we had to go through and didn't have the opportunities that they have.  They have the opportunity, all you got to do is, is to go, get there, apply it.  We didn't.  We had to fight for the opport--and then do it after we got there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, thank you, Mr. Person.
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) Yeah, yeah.  So I think that it's important, very important for people to know this.  You know, people don't--but I talk to kids today.  They don't believe that I went through this.  They don't, like they said, I'd never go through that.  Are you kidding me?  I wouldn't do that.  I would say, take it; I don't want it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, it on a level, they didn't even understand it cause they never had to do it.
Speaker 2: Un-un, no.  They said, no.  And then, too, you got to look at this way, I tell 'em all the time, many kids have affluent parents these days (laughter).  That makes a difference.
