Story_ID: 578265
(ANNOUNCER):  Major funding for the following program was provided by Discover Financial Services.  Additional funding was provided by News Corporation, Verizon and other participating sponsors.
Story_ID: 578266
(ANNOUNCER):  From a young boy raised in the Bronx [New York, New York] to one of the greatest military leaders of our day, [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell is an American success story.  The HistoryMakers, the nation's largest African American video oral history archive, is proud to present 'An Evening with Colin Powell.'  And now to our host, renowned journalist [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams.
Story_ID: 578267
Speaker 1: The art of autobiography is at the heart of The HistoryMakers' project.  Tonight, we will all have the pleasure to hear from a man whose autobiography ['My American Journey,' Colin Powell and Joseph E. Persico] has sold more than two million copies.  The story of [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell.
Speaker 2: Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming General Colin Powell.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Story_ID: 578268
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] General [Colin L.] Powell, thank you so much for being here this evening.  You honor us with your presence.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, [HistoryMaker] Juan [Williams].  And I'd like to express my thanks to The HistoryMakers and to Julieanna [Richardson] for bringing us all together this evening on this important occasion.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't, I know I don't wanna divulge anything too secret, but I hear you just had a birthday.  Happy birthday.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughter).  Thank you very much.  I'm one short of seventy now.
Speaker 1: One short.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, don't think of it that way.  To me you're looking good.
Speaker 2: I'm looking forward to seventy.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because I'll still be here.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Story_ID: 578269
Speaker 1: You know, I remember when I first met you, you were the--President Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] national security advisor.  And what had caught my attention was a picture of President Reagan, Soviet leader Gorbachev [President Mikhail Gorbachev] having a meeting up in New York City [New York, New York].  And there were you, an African American, at a table with these world leaders.
Speaker 2: I remember vividly.  It was at Governors Island [New York, New York] in New York Harbor.  And it was just a few weeks before President Reagan was to leave office and Gorbachev came to see him.  And they had done so much together to create conditions that were bringing the Cold War to an end.  And I worked very closely, not only with President Reagan, but with President Gorbachev to be there at that magic moment when Gorbachev was still trying to control something that couldn't be controlled, still trying to preserve something that couldn't be preserved, the Soviet Union.  And so it was a privilege to be at that meeting and a privilege to have been with President Reagan for the two years that I was.
Story_ID: 578270
Speaker 1: The other thing that so impressed me about you was that you're a man who's able to speak Yiddish, Jamaican accent--
Speaker 2: (Speaking in Jamaican accent) Hey, man.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: --Southern accent--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --British accent, Jamaican, I mean it doesn't stop.  You can do it all.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a product of the environment in which--I grew up in the South Bronx section of New York City [New York, New York], where everybody was a minority of one kind or another, Eastern European, Jewish, Puerto Rican, American blacks from the South, Jamaicans and all kinds of other West Indians.  So I picked up a little of each of that.
Story_ID: 578271
Speaker 1: Now, you're on a speakers circuit.  You're participating in new business adventures.  Can you tell us a little bit about what it's like to be [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell, private citizen?
Speaker 2: Well, it's very refreshing.  It's the second time I've retired, and it's really nice to get back to being normal and not to be surrounded by people, to be able to drive yourself.  The only real disadvantage is that instead of my [Air Force Boeing] 757, I now have the Delta Shuttle.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I always have enjoyed going into retirement.  And in this case, I'm back on the speaking circuit, but I'm also involved in a number of business interests and some nonprofit work.
Story_ID: 578272
Speaker 1: One of the things that we've had in common since we've known each other is a great love of African American history.  And I wonder if you would share with us a little bit about African American military history?  And here I'm thinking of names like [Lieutenant] Henry O. Flipper.  I'm thinking of the 10th Cavalry [Regiment].  I'm thinking of the Buffalo Soldiers, and Buffalo Soldiers, of course, you've been involved so much with that monument at Fort Leavenworth [Leavenworth County, Kansas].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But when you hear these names, how do they fit into the [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell story?
Speaker 2: Black military history is a rich history.  And it's not that well known.  And it goes back three hundred years.  Blacks were always brought into [U.S.] military service when there was a need for additional bodies and blood.  But when the conflict was over, then blacks were sent back into servitude.  And it was the case in the Revolutionary War, where [President George] Washington had a number of blacks serving under him.  It was the case in the War of 1812 when black men were promised their freedom and property if they fought for their country.  They didn't receive that.  But nevertheless, they fought.  And every war we've ever been in, blacks stepped forward because it was the one place they could demonstrate equality.  They weren't slaves.  They weren't being oppressed.  They may be in segregated units, and they may not have gotten the same pay or rations or equipment as white soldiers, but nevertheless, they were able to show that they were as brave and courageous as any other group of Americans.  And they also knew that every time they did that, they would put the lie to racial discrimination to the test.  With every step forward, they knew there would be progress.  And it was really after the Civil War, when for the first time, blacks were allowed to remain in the military, not in an immediate time of war.  And they created those four regiments, two cavalry and two infantry.  And some of them were at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas.  And when I went there as a brigadier general, maybe almost a hundred years later, there still was no monument to them.  There's a monument to [General William Tecumseh] Sherman and all of the other great generals of our time.  And I said, "Where is the monument to the black soldiers who were here?"  It took us years, but we put that monument up.  And I'm very proud of it because those black soldiers, the Buffalo Soldiers, as they were known, wore the same blue uniform as the white soldier.  They had brass buttons.  They carried a weapon and they had U.S. on their--U.S. on their collars, and they were every bit the American as their white counterparts.  In fact, the Confederates started to recruit blacks, and a Confederate general wrote to Jefferson Davis and said, "Don't do it.  Use blacks for whatever purposes you may find them useful, digging ditches, chopping trees, cooking food, doing laundry, but do not make them soldiers because if a black man can be a soldier for the Confederacy, then the Confederacy is living a lie, and our whole theory of slavery is wrong."  And he was right.  It was wrong.  And when a black man put on the uniform and showed that he could fight, then no question in due course he would receive equality.  It took another hundred years.  We had to go through the Tuskegee Airmen.  We had to go through the Montford Point Marines, when the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] were finally integrated.  We had to go through the Golden Thirteen in the [U.S.] Navy.  Officers were finally allowed into the Navy.  We had to do all of those things to reach the point that we have reached now, where the military is the most integrated institution in American society and has shown the rest of society what you can do when you give everybody an opportunity to move up based on performance.  And when, yes, you do use some affirmative action, as we have over time, to redress the grievances of the past.  And Exhibit A is not just myself, but all the generals who are sitting here tonight, who came through that process.
Speaker 1: In fact, Frederick Douglass made that point when he argued with President [Abraham] Lincoln that black people should be allowed to fight in the Union--
Speaker 2: He fought for it.  And as a result of Frederick Douglass's lobbying for it, it happened.  And hundreds of thousands of blacks served during the Civil War.
Story_ID: 578273
Speaker 1: Let's come to your growing up, growing up in the Bronx [New York, New York] with your mom [Maud McKoy Powell] and dad [Luther Powell]; Maud, who was a seamstress.  And I've read where she used to put together those tickets on Thursday nights so she could get paid on Friday, and then your--
Speaker 2: Piecework, piecework.
Speaker 1: Piecework, and then your dad--now, your dad was only 5'3", you've told me.
Speaker 2: He was at best 5'3" and mom was about 5'1".
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: We don't need to go there, [HistoryMaker] Juan [Williams].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, now, don't get nervous.
Speaker 1: They were two short people.  And the family story is that I take after an aunt, a very distant aunt (audience laughter), and, therefore, I was a little taller than the rest of them.  But they were two remarkable people, two very, very strong people.  And everybody asks me, you know, who are your role models.  And it was these two, these two people.  But it was more than just them.  I lived in a neighborhood that could best described as a village or a tribe.  It really was a tribal set up in the South Bronx section of New York [New York], with aunts and uncles and extended family of cousins, and with neighbors and the tradespeople and the priest at our Episcopal Church and the teachers in the public schools, all of us living in this little compressed melting pot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is Kelly Street.
Speaker 1: Kelly Street, South Bronx section.
Speaker 2: And you go to P.S. 20 [Bronx, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: P.S. 20, P.S. 39 [Bronx, New York, New York], P.S. 52 [Bronx, New York, New York], Morris High School [Bronx, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: And you describe this neighborhood as such a polyglot, but did people get along?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they got along.  It's not to say that it was perfect.  I mean it was a tenement neighborhood, and we all had to put bars on the windows and bars behind the door.  And drugs had started to really come into the neighborhood at that time.  But it had not yet reached that tipping point.  And it was a nice, family upbringing.  And the big thing that I remember, most vividly, than anything else, is the way in which all of these adults, aunts, uncles, cousins, and teachers and priests and everyone else, kept the kids in play.  We were not allowed to fail.  It was unacceptable for anybody in my extended family to be a failure.  It didn't mean you had to be a general or doctor or lawyer.  In fact, it was the furthest thing from my mind when I was a kid in New York City.  But you had to stay in school, and you had to do well, and you had to meet our expectations.  We didn't come to this country for the next generation to blow it.  As long as you did well, took care of your family, and as long as you didn't shame the family in any way, then this is what was expected of you.  So we were never asked if we wanted to go to school.  We were never asked if we wanted to go to college.  It was expected.  That's all it was to it.
Speaker 2: Now, you've described a strong Jamaican family.  Let's take a look.
(ANNOUNCER):  They were like other immigrants to America, coming in search of a better life.  It was 1920 and [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell's father, Luther Powell, came on a banana boat from Jamaica to New York.  Luther would meet his future bride, Maud, while renting a room in her mother's home.  They would marry and start a family.  Their first child, Marilyn [Powell Berns], would be followed by the birth of a son.  Alice "Gram" McKoy watched Colin and Marilyn while their parents worked in New York's garment district.  The Powells would then move to Hunts Point [Bronx, New York, New York], New York to a neighborhood known as Banana Kelly.  Here, life centered around the neighborhood, Jamaican food and culture, calypso music, St. Margaret's Episcopal Church [Bronx, New York, New York] and home.  Colin would graduate from Morris High School at age seventeen and enroll at City College of New York [New York, New York].  Here the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] caught his attention.  Colin came under the tutelage of Ronald "Ronnie" Brooks, his role model and friend.  It was here, as a member of the Pershing Rifles, that the seeds of Colin Powell, the soldier, would be born.
Story_ID: 578274
Speaker 1: So what was it about the Pershing Rifles that caught your attention?
Speaker 2: I entered college [City College of New York, New York, New York] at age seventeen, and went into engineering because my parents [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell] said that's where the money is.  Go into engineering, and no skill or aptitude for it.  And so that lasted about six months.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: I think you once told me a story about someone asking you to visualize the intersection--
Speaker 1: Visualize a plane intersecting a cone in space.  And I said, "I can't do it."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And the next thing you know, I was majoring in geology.  But I was majoring in geology just because they wouldn't let me drop out.  And I didn't have any interest in geology either.  But about that time, I discovered ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and I discovered this group within the ROTC, the Pershing Rifles, that were quite elite.  And that caught my fancy.  I liked the discipline.  I liked the uniforms, I liked the sense of purpose, the sense of mission that they had, and I liked the comradery.  And I found I was pretty good at it.  I give this story to youngsters all the time.  Find out that which you're good at and which you love doing and that's what you ought to be doing.  That's what I found in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: So what'd your dad think of this, because from--the way you describe him, I think of him as a disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: No, they pretty much knew that you would do the right thing if they guided you.  So there wasn't, there wasn't stern discipline, but it was sort of family expectations that created the discipline.
Speaker 2: So no anger over what happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, this was--well, no, they were disappointed, but they weren't angry.  They got a little uneasy though when my interests went entirely in the direction of the Army.  Nobody in the family had ever gone in the Army and stayed in the Army.  And it looked like I was heading in that direction, but nevertheless, they were proud that I was staying in college and four and a half years after I began, I graduated with my bachelor of science in geology and my commission to go in the Army.
Story_ID: 578275
Speaker 1: Now, during this time, you went to--I think in '57 [1957], it's Fort Bragg [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--for summer training, and then later, you go for infantry training to Fort--
Speaker 2: Benning.
Speaker 1: Fort Benning [Georgia].  So what was the first experience like at Fort Bragg, the summer training?
Speaker 2: Well, Fort Bragg, I took the bus at the New York [New York] Port Authority Bus Terminal.  And my father [Luther Powell] was standing on the side, looking at me through the window of the bus as I headed off to North Carolina.  And he swore he would never see me again (audience laughter).  And nevertheless, I got there okay, and then driving back--I drove back with a couple of sergeants from my ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] detachment, members of the cadre.  And I learned what it was like being in the South.  Fort Bragg, itself, was okay, but we weren't ignorant of what the South was like.  And so we drove straight through, as you used to do in those days.  And we hit all of the gas stations with the three restrooms, you know, white men, white women and blacks--or whatever they put over the top.  They had lots of names for us in those days.  And I knew that this wasn't something I could ever be happy about.  I was disappointed and mad that these kinds of things happened in the country that I was getting ready to serve.  But once I got back to New York, things were fine.  But I was also told by my commanders that you just do the best job you can.  Don't try to change the society in the South.  They were essentially saying, "Be a good soldier and let things change as you go forward."  So they wanted me to do well, but they also wanted to make sure that I understood the social circumstances in which I was serving.  But it wasn't always easy, especially after I got into the [U.S.] Army and [HistoryMaker] Alma [Powell] and I took our first trip south as a married couple in 1962, shortly after we married.  And, you know, Alma was expecting Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], and you had to just keep driving.  You didn't stop.  Some people forget that there were only two black motels on the north-south roads in those days.  And if you couldn't get to one of them, you'd better have a relative and a lot of chicken in the back of the car (audience laughter).
Speaker 1: And infantry training?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Infantry training (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that segregated?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The Army was completely integrated.  In fact, an interesting story here is that, if I had come in ten years earlier or if any of the generals here this evening had come in ten years earlier, we never would have become generals.  We sort of cut or caught the post-Truman [President Harry S. Truman] desegregation era.  Truman did it as an executive order [Executive Order 9981] in 1948.  He integrated the [U.S.] military.  He did it as an executive order because he never would have gotten it through [U.S.] Congress to change the law.  But it took another five years for the services to truly desegregate, and they did it under the pressure of the Korean War.  Most of us here tonight came in, in that early '50s [1950s] to mid-to-late '50s [1950s] period when the Army looked itself squarely in the face and said, we have to do what we have been told to do and we have to do everything we can to correct for past discrimination.  And as a result of that, all of us were able to be judged on the basis of our performance.
Speaker 1: So the bus that you rode down for the summer group and for infantry training, was that an integrated group or a segregated group that rode down?
Speaker 2: No, when you go into the South, then it was segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But coming back, of course, I drove in private cars, and that was integrated as long as you didn't try to go and eat anywhere.
Speaker 1: And was it difficult to get into that infantry training?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  The infantry training for me didn't turn out to be that difficult 'cause I was well prepared for it.  And I discovered that I'd picked up a pretty good education in the public school system in New York, and I could compete from the very beginning with West Pointers [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and others from better schools.  And in the [United States Army] Infantry School at Fort Benning, Georgia, the only color they recognize is green, infantry, you know, and green and blue, infantry color being blue and green being your uniform.  And that's the only thing that mattered to them.  And if you perform, we'll move you on.  If you don't perform, we don't care what color you are.
Story_ID: 578276
Speaker 1: So you're in the [U.S.] Army now.  Germany is your first stop.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So let's take a look.
(ANNOUNCER):  [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell's first assignment was [Coleman Kaserne] Gelnhausen, Germany, a base twenty miles east of Frankfurt [Germany] and the place he would return to twice again during his career.  Basic training was followed by his promotion to first lieutenant and then again to captain.  It was 1962, and Colin Powell would go on a blind date that would change his life.  He met [HistoryMaker] Alma [Powell], who was from a distinguished family of educators in Birmingham, Alabama.  Their attraction was immediate, and by August, they were married.  Stationed at Fort Bragg [North Carolina], they settled into base life only to have Colin transferred to Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] on Christmas Day.  An injury won Colin Powell a Purple Heart.  Joining his wife and newborn son, [HistoryMaker] Michael [Powell], Powell returned to a country in the midst of racial unrest.  Birmingham was caught in the eye of a storm.  Four little girls killed at 16th [Street] Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], police dogs, civil unrest and turmoil, all of this happening while black soldiers fought for their country in Vietnam.  During Colin Powell's second tour of duty in Vietnam, he saved fellow soldiers' lives in a helicopter crash.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated in 1969 [sic. 1968] and Colin Powell returned to the United States.  Settling in [Washington] D.C., he entered business school at [The] George Washington University [School of Business, Washington, D.C.], graduated, and in 1971, became a White House [Washington, D.C.] fellow.  Here Colin Powell began his Washington years.
Story_ID: 578277
Speaker 1: Now, a moment ago, we were talking about driving south with your wife, [HistoryMaker] Alma [Powell].  But it would be interesting, I think, for everybody to hear how you met Alma Powell.
Speaker 2: Met her on a blind date.  A friend of mine was interested in her roommate.  She was living in Boston [Massachusetts], going to Emerson College [Boston, Massachusetts] to get her master's degree in audiology.  And so my friend, Mike Hengberg [ph.] was interested in her roommate, and I was brought along to conduct a pickoff play (audience laughter).
Speaker 1: The wingman, as they say.
Speaker 2: The wingman, yeah.  And I don't Mike ever saw the girl again.  But Alma and I found each other.
Speaker 1: Well, what was it like?  What did you say to her?
Speaker 2: Well, we--
Speaker 1: Please baby, please (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, you really ought to have her tell the story, 'cause she tells it better than I do (audience laughter).  But she apparently fussed at her roommate for setting this all up.  And she said, "I don't date soldiers."  I--and her father [Robert Charles Johnson] would not approve.  But when I came to the door, she says, I looked so young and whatever (audience laughter) that she ran back into the room and put on some makeup and straightened herself up.  And we married about nine months later.
Speaker 1: Well, one of the things that I read about Mrs. Powell is that she said, she couldn't--she was meeting people who wanted to avoid [U.S.] military service.  And here comes this young man--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who says that he wants to be in the military for a career.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Boston, you may recall.  And there were a lot of people then who, you know, avoided--you tried to not get drafted, and you certainly didn't volunteer for service.  And here I come, I'm not from Birmingham [Alabama] and not from Boston.  I'm from New York [New York], and I'm stationed at Fort Devens, Massachusetts nearby, and I walk in and it's not anything she ever expected.  And, but it worked, clicked.
Speaker 1: Now, in the video we just saw, there was mention of the fact that you were in Vietnam [for the Vietnam War] when your first son, [HistoryMaker] Michael [Powell]--when your only son, Michael, was born.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the jungle along the Laotian border.  I was an advisor to a Vietnamese infantry battalion, and Michael was born, and we had a system set up where I was supposed to get notification through [American] Red Cross, 'cause we were way out in the jungle.  And we could get on the radio maybe once every three days or so.  And nothing came, and suddenly a little airplane came over and dropped out some mail to us.  We recovered it in the jungle, and there was a letter from my mother [Maud McKoy Powell].  And she was telling me all the news of the family.  And at the very end of the letter, she said, "Oh, by the way, we're so happy about the baby."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And I--what baby?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And so we got on the radio, radioed back to the base, and they had a letter from Alma waiting.  And Michael had been born a couple of weeks earlier.  But it was another seven months before I saw him for the first time.
Story_ID: 578278
Speaker 1: Now, we also saw in the video images of Birmingham [Alabama], her [Powell's wife, HistoryMaker Alma Powell] hometown, which was going through such turmoil with the civil rights era, and then we saw a mention of the '68 [1968] assassination of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  Now, you're in Vietnam [for the Vietnam War] during this period.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This, in this ten-year period, roughly, I consider one of the most difficult periods in our national history.  We were going through the second civil war, the first one in the 1860s and force of arms.  And this time, we were gonna do it peacefully, but we had to finally win rights for all Americans, especially African Americans.  And it came at a time when we lost a president, President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy.  We had race riots.  We had anti-war riots in the country, and then as noted in the video, we lost Martin Luther King in April of 1968.  We lost Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy].  And a few years later, we lost the president [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and the vice president [Spiro Agnew] who had to resign in disgrace.  I can tell you the Russians [sic. Soviets] and the Chinese in those days thought, see, we told you.  This place is gonna fall apart.  But we came through it because of the resiliency of our society and the fact that we have a constitutional system and that the people ultimately make the choices.  But it really was a tough time, especially in the South.  Alma stayed with her parents [Robert Charles Johnson and Mildred Bell] in Birmingham when I went to Vietnam the first time.  She stayed the second time as well.  And while I was walking in that jungle along the Laotian border, my father-in-law was standing guard with a shotgun at his house in Birmingham when the riots were taking place in 1963.  I didn't know all that.  I really didn't understand all of that until I got back after being away for a whole year and seeing the turmoil that the country was in.  But then we also had the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and I was able, the day after it was signed on July 4th [sic. July 2, 1964], to go back to the hamburger joint in Fort Benning, Georgia, just outside Columbus, Georgia, the same hamburger joint that had refused to serve me six months earlier, when I had just gotten back from Vietnam, and all I wanted was a hamburger.
Speaker 1: Were you in uniform when they refused you?
Speaker 2: No, but they knew who I was.  In fact, I was trying to set up a home in the Columbus area to bring Alma down from Birmingham with our infant son, Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Powell].  And I was just on the way back to the base, and just pulled in for a hamburger.  And it was a nice young lady, but she said she couldn't serve me.  She tried to help.  She said, are you an African student?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You should have told her you were a prince.
Speaker 2: It might have worked.  But you know, she said, "Are you Puerto Rican?"  No.  "Are you an African student from one of the African countries serving at Fort Benning?"  I said, no.  She said, oh, you're--I said, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: She said, "Oh, I'm sorry.  I'm from New Jersey, and I don't understand all of this.  But I can't serve you."  You'll have to go around the back to get your hamburger."  I said, "No thanks."  And I left.  I went back on about July 5th or 6th, the following year, right after the civil rights bill was signed.  And they served me with delight.  And they needed that.  They needed the law, they needed the law of the land so they could start to change hearts and minds.  And we have come a long way in the last forty years since those days.  But we still have a long way to go.
Story_ID: 578279
Speaker 1: Let's go back to Vietnam [Vietnam War].  We know about the turmoil here, but you're saying, among the white and black soldiers there, you didn't feel the tensions?
Speaker 2: There was tension.  The [U.S.] Army is a reflection of the society and every manifestation of that.  And so the racial problems in the United States affected the troops overseas.  But because of their shared sacrifice and the need to work together, they were still able to work together as a proud force.  And those young men and women who served over there, either as volunteers or draftees, did a great job for America, even though ultimately, Vietnam fell.  But now, thirty years later, we are once again friends with Vietnam.
Speaker 1: And you would hear news of Malcolm X, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  Could any of that come through to you as a soldier?
Speaker 2: Very little of it.  Some of it came through, but we were far away.  And this is long before the days of the Internet and live television and cable channels.  But we were not unaware of these things.  And we were kind of torn because we were in the [U.S.] military.  We followed orders.  We were agents of the state, the power of the state, and yet there was this turmoil, there's Dr. King and his peaceful ways, or the more militant ways such as Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture] and some of the others advocated.  As I think back on that period, I think we needed both.  We needed Dr. King with his message of peace and reconciliation, but we also needed some strong-willed individuals who pointed out to the rest of the country that you have to find a way forward now because the militancy could take over.  And we found our way through that.
Speaker 1: Were there many black officers in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In the '60s [1960s], we really started to have an infusion of black officers.  And in our [United States Army Command and General] Staff College [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas] and in our [United States Army] War College [Carlisle, Pennsylvania], there's more and more black lieutenant colonels and colonels being selected 'cause the Army realized if you're going to have an Army that could be as high as 30 percent black--and it hit those numbers--it's much lower now, then you had better have an officer corps that reflects that and reflects the diversity of the country.  And that's why the Army worked so hard for diversity, for affirmative action in order to show that the Army looked like the society that it reflected.
Story_ID: 578280
Speaker 1: Well, in fact, now, when you're back at one point, I believe at Fort Leavenworth [Kansas], you ask to go to graduate school, and you're told that your grades aren't good enough.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they were right.  I mean they weren't good enough.  But nevertheless, I was doing well in the [U.S.] Army, and the officer who was giving me counseling said, "Your grades from CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] just aren't strong enough to get you in graduate school.  Sorry."  But I pressed it.  And so I took the graduate records exam, and got into this university, [The] George Washington University [Washington, D.C.].  And when I arrived to get my masters of business administration, I had eighteen months.  And my guidance counselor here, Professor [Jack] McCarthy, took one look at my undergraduate record, and he said, "You can't do it in less than two years.  You're not very smart."
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: And so I, sitting in his office, he called the Army and said, "He looks like a great officer, but you gotta give him two years and a couple of summer schools."  And the Army agreed.  And it took a full two years, and McCarthy was right.  But I graduated from this wonderful university with an A average, and Dr. [Stephen Joel] Trachtenberg is here now. I don't wanna embarrass him.
Speaker 1: (Applause).
Speaker 2: And I learned a great deal here.
Speaker 1: You know what I was actually thinking about when I asked the question was the fact that you graduated second in your class at the [United States Army Command and] General Staff College [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas], right?  And that's what got the attention of people in the military.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by the time I got to Staff College or got ready for graduate school, some habits of discipline had kicked in, and the Army had taught me enough about hard work and studying.  And I had a family to take care of, that I couldn't fool around like I did in undergraduate.
Speaker 1: So, if you're talking to a kid today, who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't follow me.
Speaker 1: Right.  Let's take the good parts of the story--
Speaker 2: My family hated when I wrote in the book ['My American Journey,' Colin Powell and Joseph E. Persico] that I was such a bad student.  But it's true.  I have the records.  I got the transcripts--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We trust you, we trust you.
Speaker 2: Well, it's true, and--
Speaker 1: What's the--so how do you go from being a guy who's a bad student to a guy who's suddenly second in officer school?
Speaker 2: I had to work very hard.  I had to study very hard, and I had to put in extra effort, which is what I tell young people now, that there's no substitute for putting in the work, making the effort, and believing in yourself and just going after it.  And those were traits that I learned in the Army.
Story_ID: 578281
Speaker 1: Well, then after you graduate from GW [The George Washington University, Washington, D.C.]--this is 1969?
Speaker 2: No, '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], what'd you do next?
Speaker 2: Went to the [U.S.] Army for--back to the [United States] Army [Command and General] Staff [College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas] for a while, waiting to see what would come along next.  And then the Army told me to apply to be a White House [Washington, D.C.] fellow.  And I applied and was selected to be a White House fellow, which started me in my political career, such as it was then.  And I worked in the Office of Management and Budget, as deputy--in the deputy director's office.
Speaker 1: Caspar Weinberger?
Speaker 2: Caspar Weinberger initially, and Frank Carlucci initially.  They became great friends and mentors over the years.  We just lost Mr. Weinberger recently.  But they went over to HHS [United States Department of Health and Human Services], or then HEW [United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare] to run it for President [Richard Milhous] Nixon.  And I worked for Fred Malek for nine months.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the experience as a White House (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was great.
Speaker 1: --did they give you serious responsibility--
Speaker 2: Serious--
Speaker 1: --or were you treated as this [U.S.] military guy?
Speaker 2: It was also a great educational experience, because a lot of the time was spent meeting cabinet officers, meeting all kinds of people in Washington [D.C.].  So I learned the Washington scene quite well.  And they also allowed us to travel, and in 1972 and '73 [1973] I was able to go to the Soviet Union and cross the Soviet Union from the east coast in Siberia, taking the Trans-Siberian Express [Trans-Siberian Railway] for three days and then flying to Moscow [Soviet Union; Moscow, Russia].  And that was an unusual thing for an Army lieutenant colonel in those days.  And then the next summer, in '73 [1973] before I went back to the Army, I went to China for three weeks.  And I was one of the first Army officers allowed into China since the Revolution of 1949 [Chinese Communist Revolution].  So at that point in my career, I had seen the two great Communist giants that I was preparing to fight at some point in the future, if that ever came to pass.  So it was quite an educational trip.
Speaker 1: Well, why did they give you permission to go?
Speaker 2: Because they thought the White House fellows was an important program.  They didn't know they were also gonna get a couple infantry officers to go along with the program.  But they, once they realized we were infantry officers, I can assure you they kept very close watch on us.
Speaker 1: You go from work in your career from President [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] to President [Ronald Wilson] Reagan.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I've worked for lots of presidents.  I mean I've worked for the last six, I guess.  But I was a White House fellow under Nixon, and then I was a colonel under President Carter, and did some work on the Panama Canal treaty [Torrijos-Carter Treaties], but got back into the Army, which is where I wanted to be, and was a brigade commander in the 101st Airborne Division, but then found myself back in Washington toward the tail end of the Carter administration, working for then secretary of defense, Harold Brown.  And then Nixon came--excuse me, Reagan came in, and I went to work for Frank Carlucci and Weinberger again.
Speaker 1: And shifting from one party to another, no problem?
Speaker 2: I was never in a party, if you mean political party.  In those days, I was a professional soldier and had no party affiliation and never expressed any political affiliation whatsoever.  In fact, as Reagan's national security advisor, I was a three-star general, and nobody in the White House dared ask me what party I might be in (audience laughter).
Story_ID: 578282
Speaker 1: Now, around this time, you got involved in a remarkable project that we talked about earlier, the creation of the Buffalo Soldiers Monument [Buffalo Soldier Monument, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas].  Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just a simple case that at Fort Leavenworth, which is one of our most historic posts and one of our oldest posts, everyone that ever served there had been memorialized.  And I was walking around the post and I never saw anything that recognized the black soldiers that were there.  And finally, the historian said, "Oh, no, no.  There are two streets down by the cemetery."  So I went to look for these two streets, 9th and 10th Cavalry Avenue, and they turned out to be two unpaved roads going through an abandoned trailer park.  So I went back to my headquarters.  I was a brigadier general, and I called in the historian.  And I said, that is not gonna make it.  And so you need to put your thinking cap on, because I wanna see an equestrian statue with a Buffalo Soldier on it erected on a prominent place in this post, on this post.  And it took years.  I left and others followed and continued the work, but I was very honored to go back and dedicate the statue some eight or nine years later.  That's one of the major tourist landmarks in eastern Kansas.
Story_ID: 578283
Speaker 1: Well, your career was still on a fast track.  So let's take a look.
Speaker 2: (CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN BURGER):  "I, [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan, do solemnly swear."
Speaker 1: (PRESIDENT-ELECT RONALD WILSON REAGAN):  "I, Ronald Reagan, do solemnly swear."
Speaker 2: (CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN BURGER):  "That I will faithfully execute."
Speaker 1: (PRESIDENT-ELECT RONALD WILSON REAGAN):  "That I will faithfully execute."
Speaker 2: (CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN BURGER):  "The Office of President of the United States."
Speaker 1: (PRESIDENT-ELECT RONALD WILSON REAGAN):  "The Office of President of the United States."
(ANNOUNCER):  By 1986, the politics of the nation had changed, and [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell was appointed deputy assistant to President Ronald Reagan.  This appointment forced him to leave Fort Leavenworth, Kansas and return to Washington, D.C.  By November of 1987, General Powell made history when President Ronald Reagan appointed him national security advisor.  This was the time of Iran-Contra, the Persian Gulf conflict, Panama and [Manuel] Noriega.  Powell traveled around the world.  By 1989, he became commander-in-chief of [U.S. Army] Forces Command, responsible for one million troops and all U.S. Army field forces.  Colin Powell entered a significant period in his career.
Speaker 1: (PRESIDENT GEORGE HERBERT WALKER BUSH):  "I am most pleased to introduce the man that I have selected to be the next chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Colin L. Powell."
(ANNOUNCER):  His appointment was historic.
Speaker 1: "I'm very pleased to be joining your national security team and I look forward to working with you, the vice president [Dan Quayle], and all the members of the team, as you face the historic opportunities and challenges that are before us."
(ANNOUNCER):  Now a four-star general and the 12th chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Powell would become the soldier of soldiers.
Story_ID: 578284
Speaker 1: Now, you're the youngest.  But you're also the first ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] man ever to become chairman of the Joint Chiefs [of Staff].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Tell me a story.  Did the whole ROTC explode with joy?
Speaker 2: The whole ROTC--yes, they did, matter of fact.  Not--previously, it was expected that West Pointers [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] or academy graduates would ascend to that.  But I was the first ROTC graduate to become chairman, but there were two other chairmen who had direct commissions or OCS [Officer Candidate School].  So I wasn't the first non-West Pointer.  There were others.  But it was an extremely proud moment for me and for the ROTC program.
Speaker 1: Now, you had twenty-eight, I think is the way we've counted 'em up for HistoryMakers, twenty-eight crises that you dealt with during this time.  Does one and one story stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Desert Shield and Desert Storm [The Gulf War], perhaps, is the one that stands uppermost in my mind.  The whole nation was watching this.  It was the first televised war, and not to offend you--
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: --but it was the first CNN war.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I say that in a generic sense, not the particular network.  But it's the first thing that was ever covered like that.  And it was also the first time the American people got to see this professional, all-volunteer force at work, and the most technical war anyone had ever seen, with cruise missiles and GPS [Global Positioning System] systems and all sorts of other things that--we were using stealth fighters.  And a lot was on the line.  The presidency was on the line, and we said to President [George Herbert Walker] Bush that, you know, if we can't avoid war, we've gotta do it with enough force to get it done right.  And we did, and we accomplished the mission which was assigned, which was to kick the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait.
Story_ID: 578285
Speaker 1: Now, you're in private life.  What made you decide to write the memoirs ['My American Journey,' Colin Powell and Joseph E. Persico], and just let me throw a second part to that question, which is you also then found America's Promise [Alliance].  What were you trying to accomplish with that?
Speaker 2: Well, the book was something that I was anxious to do.  I didn't really think about writing a book until some people said, you know, you really owe this to your family, and you owe it to the American people, kind of describe your life.  And so I found that to be an exciting experience, once it was over (audience laughter).  I don't like--you're the master of this, though, not me.  But then after the book was out, and I decided not to enter political life, looking around for things to do, we were quite busy, but looking for something else to do.  And President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came to me and we talked about having a summit for America's young people [The Presidents' Summit For America's Future], where we bring all the living presidents together and launch a campaign--Mrs. [Nancy] Reagan represented President [Ronald Wilson] Reagan.  He was suffering too badly from Alzheimer's by then.  And so we created America's Promise from that summit.
Story_ID: 578286
Speaker 1: Well let's go now from the personal back to the professional because your career in government wasn't over.  So let's take a look at this.
(ANNOUNCER):  In January, 2001, [HistoryMaker] General Colin [L.] Powell again made history when he was appointed by President George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] as the first African American secretary of state.
Speaker 1: "It's a pleasure to be with you this afternoon, and I am honored, honored to be given the opportunity to return to public service as the sixty-fifth secretary of state of the United States of America."
(ANNOUNCER):  Nine months later, America would be thrown into chaos because of the events of September 11th [2001; 9/11].  In time, Secretary of State Powell would advocate a more deliberate consensus-building approach.  This approach was criticized by those advocating a more aggressive military response.  Secretary Powell called himself a reluctant warrior.
Speaker 1: "The terrorist threat is global in scope, many-faceted and determined.  The campaign against terrorism must be equally comprehensive, multidimensional and steadfast."
(ANNOUNCER):  He attempted to assemble an international coalition and oftentimes, he was the lone voice of moderation as Americans struggled to understand September 11th and its aftermath.  War was waged on [Osama] bin Laden, the Taliban and Al-Qaeda.  Afghanistan led to a war on Iraq and Saddam Hussein.  Powell stayed the course.  After the re-election of President George W. Bush, Powell decided to return to private life.
Speaker 1: "It has been my great honor and privilege to have been once again given the opportunity to serve our nation.  And I'll always treasure the four years that I spent with President Bush and with the wonderful men and women of the [U.S.] Department of State, and we accomplished a great deal."
(ANNOUNCER):  Condoleezza Rice replaced him, accomplishing yet another first, consecutive African American secretaries of state.
Speaker 1: "I think there are still challenges out there, but I think there are far more opportunities out there."
(ANNOUNCER):  General Colin Powell, a loyal servant and eloquent spokesman.  The son of Jamaican parentage, this soldier of the highest order, this public servant who has risen to the highest ranks of American government, was now entering the next chapter in his life.
Story_ID: 578287
Speaker 1: Have you ever thought what your time as secretary of state would have been like without 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I mean 9/11 was a defining moment.  And it came nine months into the administration.  We were just starting to get our sea legs.  We were beginning to engage with the Russian Federation on reducing more nuclear weapons.  We were just getting over an incident with the Chinese, remember, when our two planes crashed, which could have blown up the relationship, but didn't.  And so things were moving in the right direction.  And then 9/11 came along, and we found that America had to respond to this new enemy that had infiltrated into our country and caused such a terrible disaster.  And the first thing to do was to go after Al-Qaeda where they were which was in Afghanistan.  And so that's what we did, and we quickly took out the Taliban.  And now, several years later, we see that Afghanistan has a freely-elected government, a freely-elected president [Hamid Karzai].  Women are back in civil society.  Girls are going to school.  The job is not yet done, but we should be very proud of what we did in Afghanistan.  Iraq came along, and I always try to avoid war.  I've always been called a reluctant warrior, and more power to those who call me such because I think war should always be a last resort.  And I recommended that we take it to the United Nations [UN] first, and we did.  And we tried to see if we could find a solution.  But it was not forthcoming.  President [George Walker] Bush and a number of other leaders decided that military force was appropriate.  And I supported that.  I would have supported a peaceful solution and hoped for a peaceful solution.  When that didn't happen, war came, and I supported using military force.  And I'm glad that Saddam Hussein is no longer the president of Iraq and he's standing in the dock, and I'm glad the Iraqi people now have the opportunity to select their own leaders and decide how they will be governed.  And they have a constitution.  It's gonna be difficult to bring all of this about in a democratic way.  They are under enormous pressure from insurgents, from terrorists, and now there's a danger of sect-on-sect violence.  It is increasingly in the hands of the Iraqis to work this out.  They are now a sovereignty and they have their own sovereign government.  And we're gonna have to stand with them, but increasingly, the burden is gonna be on their military and security forces and gonna be on their political system.
Speaker 1: Now, in the clip that we just saw, we saw you giving testimony, if you will, before the United Nations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were making the case that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had George Tenet, the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] director, seated right behind you.  Later, it turned out that some of that was not right, not true.
Speaker 2: That was--some of it was wrong.  The information with respect to his intentions, his capability to have such weapons and his history of having used such weapons.  I've been to the town in northern Iraq where he killed five thousand people one Friday morning in 1988 with nerve gas.  But even though he had intention and capability, he didn't actually have the stockpiles that we thought he had, and we said he had.  And that was a failure of the intelligence community, but it was what we all believed at the time.  And it is what the [U.S.] Senate and the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] believed when they passed a resolution four months before my presentation.  And in the previous administration, President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton had to face similar kinds of issues in 1998 when his intelligence folks were telling him that this was a real danger, and he undertook Operation Desert Fox, a four-day bombing campaign against those kinds of targets.
Speaker 1: Now, during this period, there are lots of reports about difficulties between you and some people who had been your patrons, for example, Vice President [Richard "Dick"] Cheney, the very man who had recommended you to become chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, now as vice president, now has a very different point of view about the war effort.  Donald ["Don"] Rumsfeld, another person that you'd worked with closely before, different points of view, lots of contention as you go to the president.  What about these reports, and does that lead you to decide that you don't wanna stay on for a second term?
Speaker 2: There were serious debates about all of these issues because these were issues of enormous importance.  In most issues, we had agreement, whether it was dealing with the Russians or dealing with the Chinese, sending troops into Liberia to help the African Union, get Charles Taylor out, keeping our troops in the Balkans as opposed to bringing them out, all of these are difficult issues and they were all debated.  With respect to Afghanistan, there was no disagreement.  We might have disagreed about, you know, what mixed force to send in, but it was successful.  The big issue that everyone talks about is Iraq.  And I went to the president and said he should try a diplomatic solution.  Now, some of my other colleagues didn't think a diplomatic solution would work, didn't think that the UN would be able to deal with this.  But nevertheless, the president accepted my recommendation and the others joined in once it was clear that this the better way to go.  And so we went unanimously with a presentation to the United Nations by the president in September of 2002.  So there were debates.  There were disagreements.  I can't cover it up.  We had strong differences of view on different issues.  But, you know, I'm not the president.  Mr. Cheney isn't the president.  Mr. Rumsfeld isn't the president.  The president heard all of these different points of view.  And he is the one who made the decisions.  And our jobs, myself, Don, Condi [Condoleezza Rice], the vice president, our responsibility was, give the president our best advice in the strongest terms we could.  And that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Well, is that why you're not in the administration any longer?
Speaker 2: I thought four years was enough, and I thought that toward the end, there was sufficiently strong views that were so differing in moving forward that it'd be better if I ended at the end of one term.  And I said to the president I thought it'd be best if I left after one term.  And then we left on very good standing with each other.
Story_ID: 578288
Speaker 1: Yes or no: so if the president or anyone else comes back in the future and says, "What about secretary of defense?"  What does [HistoryMaker Gen.] Colin [L.] Powell say?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, [HistoryMaker] Juan [Williams], you learn in this business never to answer the hypothetical question.
Speaker 1: (Audience laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, tell me about your legacy.  When people are watching this tape in the future, some day when you won't be with us, maybe I won't be here as well, but what do you want people to think about Colin Powell?  What's the legacy?
Speaker 1: I'm pretty much now, what I think I was at the beginning of all of this, fifty almost year ago.  The one who captures the past is my youngest child, Annemarie [Powell].  And she got asked not too long ago, "What was it like growing up with Colin Powell as your father?"  And she just looks at them.  She's a bit of a smarty.  And she said, "Well, he wasn't Colin Powell then."  (Audience laughter) And the point is, don't take yourself too seriously.  And I've been a national security advisor, I've been a chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and have been secretary of state.  I've been privileged to have many great jobs and assignments and work for lots of wonderful people.  But if it all had ended as just a lieutenant colonel, serving twenty years and then going into retirement with my pension, that would have been good too.  But I'm just privileged to have had the opportunity to serve, and if people remember me as someone who served well and faithfully, that's enough.
Story_ID: 578289
Speaker 1: What is [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell thinking about when he's alone these days?  You're approaching seventy.  You are now a wise man of American life.  What are you thinking about?
Speaker 2: I think about the world a lot.  I think about the problems that we still have to work our way through.  But you can't just live on problems.  You can't just live thinking about problems.  It'll depress you.  So I also think about the good things that we've been able to do, and the new world that we have been able to help create.  I think about the fact that we were able to get the peace agreement in Sudan between the north and the south [Sudanese Comprehensive Peace Agreement].  If only we could do something now in Darfur [Sudan] to end that terrible problem.  So I worry about those things.  But I also think about, how can we continue to build our relationship with Europe?  No world war in Europe.  The first time in two hundred years nobody's facing a world war in Europe.  How do we continue to build on that and bring all the nations into the democratic column?  How can we continue to move in the right direction with China and push back on this suggestion that China is going to be an enemy?  China is not gonna be an enemy.  They're selling too much stuff to Walmart.  (Audience laughter)  They're not crazy.  And they're lending us the money to buy it.  And so I think about how do we build on that?  I think about some of the business interests I have in Silicon Valley [California], and we're looking at new ways of sharing information.  We're looking at biomedicine.  And we're looking at fuel cells and new battery technology.  I'm trying to think through how we use these technological breakthroughs to improve the human condition and especially, to help kids in need in our country.  And more importantly, how do we help kids in need throughout the world.  What can we do about infectious diseases and HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]?  But I always see problems alongside of opportunities and opportunities alongside problems.  I always try to see the good with the bad.  Otherwise, you can become rather jaundiced in your view of the world.  And it's a great world still.  And it's a great country we're living in.  It's a country that's still looked up to and respected, even though sometimes it is resented and looked down on.  But there're still lining up at all of our embassies to come here.  Walk through any community in America and you'll see a diversity that doesn't exist anywhere else in the world.  And these people come here.  Just get a New York City [New York, New York] cab and drive around for a little bit and talk to the driver, and he'll tell you what the real America is all about.
Speaker 1: General Powell, I can't say thank you enough for sharing with all of us your remarkable journey.  Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: (Applause).
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 578290
Speaker 1: (Credits roll).
(ANNOUNCER):  Major funding for the preceding program was provided by Discover Financial Services.  Additional funding was provided by News Corporation, Verizon and other participating sponsors.
