Story_ID: 127449
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Joan, J-O-A-N, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Prince, P-R-I-N-C-E.
Speaker 1: And Ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 14, 1954, and my place of birth is Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an educational administrator.
Speaker 1: Alright, and you're currently the...?
Speaker 2: Vice Chancellor.
Speaker 1: For?
Speaker 2: Partnerships and Innovation at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 28, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my office, which is in Chapman Hall at the--on the campus of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
Story_ID: 127450
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Compelled by management to ask.
Speaker 2: All right.  Ask away.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Dessert Bananas Foster.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, red.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, the holidays, Thanksgiving to New Year's.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "It is what it is."
Story_ID: 127451
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Oh, all right.
Speaker 1: I'm going to start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Jeanetta, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-A, her middle name is Jane, J-A-N-E, and her maiden name is Woodard, W-O-O-D-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is January 21, 1926, and she was born in Roswell, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Roswell?
Speaker 2: Roswell, home of the aliens. (laughter)
Speaker 1: That's right, this is the alien capital of America.
Speaker 2: Alien capital of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Roswell, New Mexico.  Alright, so we'll get back to that, but what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I can't trace them back very far.  I know about my grandparents--her father and her mother, but I don't know a lot more past that, before that.  She was from a very large family and when she married my dad [Eugene Prince], they left, and most of the family is deceased, only one individual, so I don't have a lot--it was difficult to try to get a lot of history out of it.
Speaker 1: Were her parents from Roswell?
Speaker 2: No, her mother was from Oklahoma, and her father was from Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, that makes sense in some ways.
Story_ID: 127452
Speaker 1: Okay now, do they, is there--are there any stories in the family about migration to Oklahoma?  You know, there's a book about black migration to Oklahoma, called 'The Exodusters,' by Nell Painter.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It talks about all the migration from the southern plantations to Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Over to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Yeah, after the Civil War.
Speaker 2: I don't think we had any stories that have been passed down that I remember.  I'm the youngest of the siblings, so there might have been stories, but none that I remember.  I do remember meeting my grandfather [Reuben Woodard].  He died when I was seven or eight.  No, I think I was a little younger, I was probably six or seven.  So, I have vague memories of him.  He lived the remainder of his life in Roswell [New Mexico], so we actually traveled down there when I was growing up.  But, the stories that I remember--he was the sheriff of Roswell years ago, and he married my grandmother and they moved down to New Mexico because they were looking for--just opportunities, and there were opportunities down there at that time.  There was an army base and he was actually looking for work.  He didn't get work on the army base, but he was sheriff of the town, and my mother [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] actually ended up working on the army base.  That's how she met my dad [Eugene Prince].
Speaker 1: Okay, now this would be in what time period?  What time period was he sheriff, do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd have to--my mother was born in the late '20s [1920s] so he was sheriff during that time between the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay that's significantly interesting that there was a black sheriff in New Mexico.
Speaker 2: There was a pretty large, I don't know what large means, but there was a significant size African American population there, those that had moved from Oklahoma and from other areas that heard about coming to that area, to Roswell, looking for opportunities--work opportunities, just trying to find a place where it didn't make a difference who they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, was the army base there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was the, is that the same base that is mentioned in all the Roswell lore?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: This was prior to the establishment of the Air Force as such, right?  So, there was a U.S. Army Air Corp operating out of that base, I would guess?
Speaker 2: Right, I was a little confused about this, but my dad was in the Air--I thought he was in the Air Force.  Are they combined now, I don't remember?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well before the end of World War II, it was the U.S. Army Air Corp [sic, U.S. Army Air Corp 1926-1941, U.S. Army Air Forces 1941-1947], then they made it the United States Air Force, right after World War II.
Speaker 2: Right.  Then he was in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay. But he was, he was stationed in Roswell.  He was stationed in Roswell. That's how they met.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because my mom worked on the base.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, they met the year of the alleged sighting of the UFO.  So, that's the story that I grew up with.
Story_ID: 127453
Speaker 1: Now is there any family lore about the Roswell [New Mexico UFO] sighting?
Speaker 2: Well, the family lore is that it actually happened.  My dad [Eugene Prince] used to tell us stories that he felt that it actually happened because his friend, who was stationed there with him, one of his close friends, was assigned to that particular barrack--I forgot the infamous barrack number.
Speaker 1: The hangar?
Speaker 2: The hangar.  Hangar 17 [sic 18], or whatever it was, and he never saw him again.  He never saw him again, and that's the...
Speaker 1: He just disappeared?
Speaker 2: Never saw him again.  They came and got his belongings and everything out of the barracks that they all shared.  It was him and two other of his friends out of their squad, their division, whatever they're called, and they never saw them again.  Never had contact with them again.  And, growing up, he used to tell us that that's what happened to a number of--all of the people that were assigned to that hangar were never--they never heard from them again.  So, those are the kind of stories that we grew up with, that it really happened.
Story_ID: 127454
Speaker 1: So you say your, your grandfather [Reuben Woodard] was a sheriff?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, are there any stories associated with him being a sheriff?  It would seem like it wouldn't be an easy thing--
Speaker 2: It wasn't--
Speaker 1: --to be a black sheriff in New Mexico.
Speaker 2: It wasn't difficult.  Well I don't think it was very difficult.  Most of the people--it was, it wasn't an organized town as one thinks of Roswell [New Mexico] now.  Then, Roswell was Mexican, Native American, Creek Indian, a lot of Creek--
Speaker 1: They're originally from Florida.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, that's actually what my grandfather is, part Creek.  And, you know, the stories are really stories about typical town issues.  I remember he carried a gun--that much I remember about him, he carried a gun.  He was a very tall man, very tall, good looking man.  And, like I said, he died when I was very young, I was maybe six.
Speaker 1: There are no specific stories?
Speaker 2: No specific stories that I can think of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother [Jeanetta Woodard Prince], did she grow up in Roswell?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Roswell, yes, went to high school there.  She's one of sixteen, and...
Speaker 1: That's a big family.
Speaker 2: It's a huge family.  In fact, I remember they had houses on both sides of the street.  So, they had the main house, and then across the street was another house, so that the family, as they were getting older, I guess, had sleeping quarters.  Yeah, they had a big family, a big family, and only two are alive now.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name, the sheriff?
Speaker 2: Okay, you'd ask that.
Speaker 1: His last name was Woodard, right?
Speaker 2: It's Woodard.  Reuben, R-E-U-B-E-N Woodard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother's name was Alberta.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was he the sheriff when the flying saucers happened then?
Speaker 2: Now, that I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah I don't know how much local law enforcement was involved in that but I just wanted to--
Speaker 2: I, I--that I don't know.  He might not have been by then, but I really don't know.
Story_ID: 127455
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] have a--what did she say about growing up in Roswell [New Mexico]?  What was it like for her?
Speaker 2: She said it was, you know, she--they had their own little team because there were so many of them.  And, my mother is the second oldest girl, so her growing up wasn't as carefree as some of her siblings, because she--her and her older sister, Geneva, really were the helpers.  They were the ones that helped take care of the younger kids, and did a lot of the cooking and the cleaning and all of that.  So, I don't think she had, from what she used to tell us--I don't think her younger years were probably filled with a lot of the things that you would hope young people would do, because she really was a mother figure, her and her oldest sister.  But, it's what she knew.  From what she says to us, she enjoyed growing up there, but it's what she knew.  She said she always wanted to go see something else and do something else because it always felt very small-townish to her, and she always wanted to leave and go do something else--things she used to read about.  And she did, she left.
Speaker 1: When did she leave?  After she met your father [Eugene Prince], right?
Speaker 2: She left for a year before she met my dad, and she went to Los Angeles [California] to live with her older cousin.  And, she was only there a year, and her mother got sick, so she came back home.
Speaker 1: What were your mother's aspirations?  What did she want to be?
Speaker 2: She wanted to be a teacher.  She wanted to be a teacher, she wanted to go to college, she wanted to be a teacher, and she didn't do either one, but she said she had such a love of teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay, so after she met your father she--I know they wound up in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: They wound up in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Was that related to the [U.S. Army] Air Force[s]?
Speaker 2: No, that was related to my dad.  His father [Timothy Prince]--his father came from Ohio to Milwaukee, so Milwaukee was home for my dad at that time.  So, he brought, you know, his wife home to his home here.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 127456
Speaker 1: Now, let me move on to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Are you sure there are no stories about where your family was before they went to Oklahoma, or...
Speaker 2: None that I knew growing up, no, none that I'd heard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Sherman, S-H-E-R-M-A-N, Prince.
Speaker 1: Prince, okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 2, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born in?
Speaker 2: He was born in Santoy, Ohio.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-A-N-T-O-Y.
Speaker 1: Santoy, Ohio.  Okay, and you say that's near Zanesville?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's near Zanesville.  It wasn't incorporated, so I don't even know if you can find it on the map anymore, I don't think it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know my grandfather lived until I was ten, so I got to know him, Grandpa Tim, Timothy Prince, Timothy Sherman Prince.  He was a chauffeur for a family--I can tell you their names if you give me a second--my mind just blanked.  But, he was a chauffeur for this family, and he drove, you know, drove the family all around.  So, my father and his two sisters stayed a lot with a person they called Granny, but really was--wasn't their grandmother.  It wasn't their biological grandmother, but she was actually the next door neighbor that ended up really wrapping their arms around my father and his two sisters.  So, my grandfather was on the road, he was driving quite a bit.
Story_ID: 127457
Speaker 1: Now, now where was their--the children's [Prince's father, Eugene Prince, and his siblings] mother?
Speaker 2: The, my grandmother whose--my biological grandmother, whose name is Magno--was Magnolia--Magnolia and my grandfather had split up.  Now, interesting family story, no one quite knows what that means.  They, the story growing up was that she left him.  We found out later that that's probably not what happened, that she left him and just left, so they never saw her again until they were adults.  And, that was an interesting reunion, but they never saw her again until they were in their forties.
Speaker 1: So, if she didn't just leave then what happened to her?
Speaker 2: Well, the story from my grandfather [Timothy Prince] is that she left.  The story that we got back from her was that she left because he was abusive, and in those days, you couldn't just grab your children and go, unless you snuck away.  So, she left.  She left and moved to--my mind is blank, New York--but I'll tell you in a moment--the same city where the Delany sisters [Bessie and Sadie Delany; Mount Vernon, New York] lived.
Speaker 1: Oh...
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, it'll come to me in a moment.
Speaker 1: I should know that, but I don't.
Speaker 2: Oh, I feel dumb.  I can't think.  It'll come to me in a moment.  But, anyway, Grandma Magnolia re-married and had eight more children.  And, the way--it's in--the reunion story is quite interesting.  One of--my dad never, ever knew--he grew up thinking his mother was dead.  And, when I was a young person, I was probably twelve, I remember two men walked up to our front door, and I thought, "Oh, they look strange, now what do they want?"  And my dad invited them in and sent all the kids to their rooms.  But, afterwards what he told us was that he had a half-brother that he didn't know he had, who was applying for a job, and they were doing a background check.  And, although they didn't know about him--I'm sorry--he didn't know about them, that they had three siblings somewhere, because the mother had told them.  So, they were able to find my dad when they were doing a background check for Uncle Ralph, I'm sorry, Uncle Percy.  And, that's how the siblings got reunited.  So, when I was, I think I was about twelve, that's when my dad and his two sisters actually reunited with the other eight siblings they didn't even know they had.  And, we all have been a family ever since.  Grandma Magnolia died, she died about ten years ago.  But, it was an interesting story, a sad story in a way for the time lost, but it didn't make any difference to the siblings.  They just grew up being sister and brother.  For my dad, it was a wonderful opportunity to have three brothers he never knew he had.  He always thought he was the only boy, and that he was the youngest, and he wasn't the youngest.  And, over the years, we've lost some of the aunts and uncles from that group of ten children, we've lost some.  But, they're still close, they still talk weekly, they come to visit.  The brothers have passed, have all passed, except my dad, and one of the sisters has passed, but they're still close.  They're still close, so, that, that was great for us.  That really helped us see that we have relatives that we never knew we had.  We had always thought we had a very small family, so the nice thing was that now we know we have a larger, larger family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 127458
Speaker 1: Did your father [Eugene Prince] have any--is there any idea about what your ancestors were doing, you know, before?  Did they come to Ohio from someplace else or did they--?
Speaker 2: They came to Ohio from Mississippi, and we're trying to track now where they came from.  My grandfather Tim, who was the, the chauffeur, his father's name--my great-grandfather, all I know is that his name was John Prince.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, right now, myself and my two cousins are working to try to reconstruct that piece of a family tree.  That's what's going to keep us going for the next couple of years, to do that, because we'd really like to know more.  My dad didn't know a lot, because my grandfather, Grandpa Tim, didn't really tell them a lot.  It sounded, from what I've heard, that he wasn't very open about discussions, about discussing it.  And, he didn't have the best relationship with his dad.  So, once they came up here, there really wasn't a lot of contact there.  So, we're struggling now trying to put some pieces together while we still have some people, some oral historians, alive and with us.  So, we're slowly picking up pieces, but hopefully in the next, next year we'll at least have a good outline or a sketch of a family tree, on both sides.
Story_ID: 127459
Speaker 1: So, so your father [Eugene Prince] grew up in this little place that's outside of Zanesville [Ohio], Santoy [Ohio]...
Speaker 2: Santoy.
Speaker 1: And, what was growing up like for him?
Speaker 2: He said that they were very poor, very poor.  He went to school there, one room schoolhouse.
Speaker 1: Was it a segregated schoolhouse?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely.  Definitely segregated schoolhouse, a one room schoolhouse there, very segregated, totally segregated.  That--Santoy was a little closer to the Kentucky border, I think that's what he used to tell me, so they used to go over to Kentucky and over to West Virginia at times with this woman they called Grandma, because she was looking for day work.  So, she would try to find work, and my grandfather [Timothy Prince] would send money back, but he was on the road a lot, a lot.  And, finally, he decided to try to pull his family together and leave there and come here to Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  I always try to figure out what the Milwaukee connect was, and why he chose to come here, and the only thing that my aunt could tell me, because my dad, being the youngest out of the group, didn't really remember an awful lot.  He was, I want to say ten, when they came here.  In my grandfather's travels, being a chauffeur, he met a man who was a jockey, a horse jockey, who was moving to Milwaukee to take care of the horses for the Pabst farm here.
Speaker 1: Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, my grandfather thought, I'll give it a shot.  He also told him that there were some jobs.  They were starting to hire people to clean at the Old Milwaukee Railroad, and that there might be an opportunity for a job for him, and so he came here, brought the family here, came here and moved into a rooming house on 6th and Walnut.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did your father have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: He did, he went to school here, and his two sisters went to North Division High School.  And, in that time, North Division was probably, from what I've seen in a yearbook, about 80 percent white-85 percent white.
Speaker 1: Is that known as a German school?
Speaker 2: Yes, back then it was German, very German based, German Lutherans.
Speaker 1: You can say that Milwaukee is kind of a German town?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.  That's the background of Milwaukee, definitely a German town.  As you can tell by the breweries, you know, Pabst and Schlitz and a number of the breweries, at that time that's where the jobs were.  And, the jobs weren't necessarily there for African Americans, but the jobs were there for whites who really lived in those areas.  African Americans that started working at the breweries tended to be those that cleaned, so they were the custodial help, or the cooks.
Speaker 1: I'd never thought about this before, but I would suppose that prohibition probably really dropped the economy base out of Milwaukee for a while.
Speaker 2: I would think it probably would have, I would think it probably did, because this was a community that had the beer barons.  So, I think prohibition definitely had an effect on Milwaukee.  This was the brew capital of the world.  If I think back, a lot of those beer barons are actually buried in the cemetery here--Forest Homes Cemetery, huge monuments to them.  But, it was definitely the beer capital of the world, so they definitely had some issues when prohibition came along.
Speaker 1: So, when your grandfather moved here, I think it was the end of prohibition and they were starting back up again, I believe, because prohibition was around 1930, in the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: I would say it should have been in the '30s [1930s] so, I think my dad came probably mid to late '30s [1930s] I would think, as I think about the timetable.  He never really said a lot about prohibition, about that piece, because he was really too young at that time.  But, he used to talk to us about growing up here, because he did high school, he did high school here, it was a predominantly white high school at that time, excuse me, at that time.
Speaker 1: At North Division [High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: At North Division was.  And, he was the youngest of the two--of the three siblings that were here, so my aunt, both my aunts, had graduated.  They are a couple of years older than he is.
Story_ID: 127460
Speaker 1: Now, did he [Prince's father, Eugene Prince] have any particular aspirations when he was in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad always--he's, he's very, very good, he loves music.  He loves music.  He's an excellent drummer, and I--he used to tell us that he really enjoyed playing the drums, and I think he would have loved to be a musician.  His best friend eventually is the gentleman that married my aunt, and so my uncle.  And, he has a beautiful voice.  My uncle was a Tuskegee Airman, but a beautiful voice.  And, so him and my dad growing up, what I remember is that we would go visit my uncle and sit down in his basement and it was always music going, because my dad and my uncle really liked music.  So, I think my dad wanted to be either an electrician, or something to do as an electrician, or a musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And life didn't work out that way, for either my mom or my dad, because when they came here--when my mother [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] came here when my dad married her--got out of the service and brought her here, it really was the time when the industrial piece was happening in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], meaning there were openings in the factories, and a lot of hard work, but that's where African Americans could at least try to get hired.  So, my dad was hired at A.O. Smith, and my mom was hired at Briggs and Stratton.  So, they lived their lives as factory workers, really looking for opportunities and income to help the family.
Story_ID: 127461
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Jeanetta Woodard Prince and Eugene Prince] met?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My mother was working on the [U.S. Army Air Forces] base in Roswell [New Mexico], and my dad had been transferred there.  And, she was, she was a cook.  She was a cook on the base.  And, my uncle who--the person who is now my uncle, who married my dad's sister, who's my dad's best friend, they were in the service together, and he was there with them.  And he spotted my mom and decided to introduce my mom and my dad.  So, that's really how they started talking and started dating.  And, my dad was, like I said, he was stationed there and that's--it all happened from that moment.  My dad tells a story about how he had to meet her dad [Reuben Woodard] and her family, and he did that one day that he came over for dinner, the first time he came over for dinner, and he said it was a madhouse because she had so many, she had such a large family.  Some of the kids had married by then and had small kids, and so there were people running in and out of the house all the time, that it was really quite interesting.  But, every Sunday this family went to church together and then they figured out how to fit everyone into one house for Sunday dinner, because they all had to sit down together.  And, so, he said what they ended up doing was, they took the doors off of the living room, you know, so that the house was just one big open area, in one of the homes.  The sleeping quarters were across the street [laughter].  And, so that's how they put tables up, so that everybody could be together for Sunday meals.
Speaker 1: That's amazing, sixteen children.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sixteen children that lived.  They had eighteen, I believe.  I think there was a set of twins that died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, everybody's scattered now.  There's no one left in Roswell, from my mom's side.  Everybody is scattered, a lot of them have passed away, but we do have reunions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We do have reunions, so it's interesting to see the, the cycles of families of children--
Story_ID: 127462
Speaker 1: Now have your mother [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] or father [Eugene Prince] been contacted by any of the History channel--
Speaker 2: They've been contacted by a number of--
Speaker 1: --Or, the Discovery channel, or Sci Fi [later Syfy] channel about...?
Speaker 2: Sci Fi, yes, but my mother refuses to have the discussion.  She said for her it was growing up--it was home, and she's not going there.
Speaker 1: Okay, for those that are watching this and don't know about this, we want to say that Roswell [New Mexico], in 1948 [sic 1947] there was a sighting of a spacecraft, and there's been speculation about it, pro and con, as to whether the government was concealing the alien bodies--and there are reunions there every year and all the Roswell believers...
Speaker 2: Those are not our reunions, but those are reunions of Roswell people who believe that this alien did land and was captured by the armed services and that the body was--not just the body, but two, that one was alive and one was not, and that it's well documented somewhere but supposedly it's a secret.  Those papers have been classified and have yet to be found, they're missing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they claim that the bodies were taken to Dayton [Ohio] or Youngstown [Ohio], for some reason.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, to Wright-Patterson.
Story_ID: 127463
Speaker 1: Any rate, so now, when you think about your parents' [Jeanetta Woodard Prince and Eugene Prince] personalities--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I look at my parents and I think I've got a little bit of each of them in me.  My mother is very, very, very outgoing.  She will speak to a doorknob, and hold a great conversation.  And, I think I get my love of people, of talking, of just being around people, from her.  In fact, I know I do.  My dad is much more quiet.  He's a very reserved person, and he has this great love of music, and I think I get that from him, because I have a great love for jazz and various forms of music, and I think that's directly from him.  Both my parents are readers, avid readers, and I know I get that from both of them, because I love to read.  I try to read two books a week, and I know I get that from them, because that's how we were raised, that's how we grew up, and they are both to this day, very good readers.  I think I got my religious faith from them.  I'm very faith based, and I think I got that from them.  I think my temperament definitely is a combination of the two of them.  My mother is more easygoing in her temperament.  My father is stricter, and I think I've got a mold of both, because I'm very disciplined regarding a lot of things, but I can also be very easygoing and passive.  So, I think I got--I think I have a lot of traits that I've either learned from watching them, from living with them, or that I probably inherited.
Story_ID: 127464
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, earliest childhood memory.  My parents [Jeanetta Woodard Prince and Eugene Prince]--probably, my mother, worked in a factory, as I mentioned, and she worked during the day, she worked the day shift.  So, as the youngest, I remember being home with my dad all day, because my dad worked second and third shifts, he worked two full-time jobs.  He worked second shift in the factory, and then left there and went to Spic and Span, as a custodian, third shift, full-time.
Speaker 1: That should be a good--well, you'd never run out of supplies, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  I remember being a child at home with my dad, so we did a lot of things together.  We went everywhere together, so I have those stories of just tagging along with my dad.  We'd go to the bank, we'd go everywhere, you know, and as a little kid, everybody looked taller, they looked like giants, because you're always looking up.  But, I remember those stories.  I remember stories of our family vacations, driving to Roswell, New Mexico in a car.  I mean, that's the kind of things we did.  You'd pack up the food, you'd pack everyone up, and you'd drive, and you would sleep in the car, because places were still so segregated, and you weren't always sure where you were welcome, and where you weren't.  So, we'd do the roadside sleep, but we did a family trip every year.  We went somewhere, in either a brown Dodge station wagon, or a red and white Chevy with the tire on the back.  But, those are probably my earliest memories.  I have memories of my mom, working so hard, and as a young child I didn't--as an adult--I still don't sleep much, but as a young child, I did not sleep well at all.  And, I remember sitting in the kitchen--my mother would wrap me in a blanket, put me in a chair in the kitchen at night, while she would cook.  And, she would cook, cook, cook for the week, cook a dinner for my dad or something so that he would have food whenever he came home.  And, I remember she would put me in the kitchen and let me stay up with her, because I could never fall asleep.  So, my earliest memories are my mom in the kitchen--the smells that would come from her, and I'd always get a little sneak peek, a little preview, of what we were going to have for dinner the next night (laughter), sampling the food, and, and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 127465
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time, or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: We didn't move around a lot at all.  I don't remember our house on 6th, our home on 6th and Reservoir [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  I don't remember it, I was too small.  But, for my growing up years, we were in one house, and that was on 12th and Center, 2739 North 12th Street, here in town on 12th and Center.  And that's what I remember, because we were in that house until I was an adult.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it a big house, or...?
Speaker 2: Not a big house.  You know, the houses were all the same.  It was across the street from North Division High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and it wasn't necessarily a big house.  It was a duplex, and we lived in the lower end, and my dad [Eugene Prince] rented to people above us, the Rostens [ph.]--the Rostens, so I remember growing up with their two children.  We had a tragedy in the house, as well.  Our house burnt down, and I remember very well, as a young person, the house catching on fire.  It was the night before Thanksgiving.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was nine.  It was the night before Thanksgiving, and the house caught on fire.  I remember the smoke.  I remember watching the smoke come up out of the radiator, because I didn't sleep.  We had bunk beds, and I used to crawl in the bed with my sister, into the lower bunk with my sister [Deborah Carter], because I couldn't sleep anyway.  And, I used to just lie awake at night, lie awake with my eyes open and the bathroom--my dad would leave the bathroom light on for me.  And, I remember watching the smoke come up out of the radiator, and it was really sad.  We didn't lose any life, but we lost everything when the house burnt.  Not only did our house burn, but the houses on both sides caught on fire.  And, what I remember is my dad and my older brother just getting everybody out of the house.  It was freezing outside.  Snow was--it was very cold.
Speaker 1: This was about 1963?
Speaker 2: Probably '63 [1963] yeah, early '60s [1960s]--and people screaming, and it just being very, very, very cold.  But, not only did our house burn, but the houses on both sides burned down as well.
Speaker 1: Did you rebuild on that same site?
Speaker 2: We did.  My dad rebuilt on that site.  There were--you know, now that I'm an adult I haven't really talked to him a lot about it, but they weren't sure if someone--if it was a faulty furnace, or if someone actually threw--almost like a cocktail--through the window, because they did find the front room window--the upstairs as well as the basement windows were broken.  They said they found some materials inside, but as a kid I don't remember the whole story.
Speaker 1: Since that time, have you learned about any reason as to why someone would have...?
Speaker 2: There was a time, our block during that time, was changing.  The whites that had lived there, mostly German, had started to all move out, they were starting to move out.  But, they hadn't all left yet, and there were some people who didn't want African Americans to have homes there.  So, there's been some talk about whether or not this was, was planned, that someone had a purpose of trying to burn down some houses.  Ours wasn't the only one inside of a couple of month period that, that had a suspicious fire, but nothing was ever ever investigated, nothing.
Story_ID: 127466
Speaker 1: At that time also there was--we were moving in that sort of preliminary civil rights era, and around the corner from where we lived was a church, a Catholic church, St. Boniface, and that church had a white priest named Father [James] Groppi, who was leading a march on Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  And when I say march, they ended up doing a physical march, but he was really leading an advocacy type of campaign--
Speaker 2: Demonstration, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, against segregated housing, redlining, those kind of issues.  And, so we never knew, nobody ever told us, whether it was related to the activities that were going on in that area, but there's been some talk that there was.
Speaker 2: Now, Father Groppi, he's fairly well-known in Milwaukee--he's an advocate of civil rights.
Speaker 1: Fairly well-known, fairly well-known. Right, right.
Speaker 2: Were your parents a member of his church?
Speaker 1: No, no, but the church sat around the corner from us, so the church did a lot of outreach in the community that it was in.  So, everybody knew him, we knew the sisters there.  We'd go over there and play after school, and they had activities for young people.
Speaker 2: So, would you say now looking at it, did he have a community organizing type organization?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, a strong community outreach.  He was a community organizer.  He was a Father, a priest, but he was a community organizer at heart.
Speaker 2: Like in the style of Saul Alinsky?
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely in that style.  And, the block from my house, which was still on 12th Street, which was in front of the old North Division High School, was really the area that was blocked off during the civil rights era, where people would come up and give speeches.  That's where I first saw [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., the first time I ever saw him.  I was a young kid, we were all crowded there on that street, and he came up and was talking... Ralph Abernathy.  That's the first time I saw Lena Horne.
Speaker 2: Here in Milwaukee?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she came up, Lena Horne, and Pearl Bailey.  I was a young kid.
Speaker 2: What was it, was there a particular crisis that drew them?
Speaker 1: As I think back, it was--Martin Luther King, Jr. had, he was going around the country talking about promoting equality and equal rights in a number of cities, and he was tied into a number of the churches.  And, so he had been invited here, and he had friends--he had people who knew him here.  And, at that time, a lot of these individuals stayed in homes, so they would stay in the homes.  They either couldn't afford the hotels, or some of the--most of the hotels were still segregated here, in the good old North.  And--
Speaker 2: The myth that everything was All right here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the myth.  It's a myth, it's a myth.
Speaker 2: It was supposed to be a southern problem, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it was very segregated here as well.  But, they came up for those kinds of rallies and demonstrations, and at that time here, and again, I was still young, but as I remember, the discussion was fair housing.  That was the big thing here, fair housing, desegregating the housing market and the pattern.
Speaker 2: Okay, so fair housing?
Speaker 1: Fair housing.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what year was it that Dr. King was here?
Speaker 1: I don't remember the year exactly, but--
Speaker 2: Was it before or after the houses burned?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was after, it was after, yeah.  I was probably eleven or twelve.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Eleven or twelve, so if you move up just a little bit, it was still mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: About 1966?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Dr. King was in Chicago [Illinois] in 1966 during the Marquette Park demonstrations.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would be during that time period because he used to come back and forth.  And, again, as a young person, I remember him from the rallies, but he probably was in town a lot more than even I remember, with Milwaukee and Chicago being so close, and he had friends here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He had friends.
Speaker 2: All right.  Well I'll have to go back and ask--so, was your family involved in the civil rights struggle?
Speaker 1: Not specifically, no more than most of the black families in town--being supportive, trying to help raise, raise funds, but not in a way that, that I remember.  I don't remember them carrying picket signs or anything like that.  I don't remember that.  They were working, they were working.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I do remember, I remember picket signs, I just don't remember them doing it.
Story_ID: 127467
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me go back to when you were a little kid growing up, and we always ask this quick question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up?
Speaker 1: Mhm.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think the sights growing up were African American, black entrepreneurs.  I mean, you could buy anything you wanted to buy from a black person, right in your own community.  I grew up on 12th and Center [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and around the corner from me was Teutonia and Center.  And, that really was a hot spot in town, Teutonia and Center, as well as Walnut Street, but for me, it was Teutonia and Center, and anything you needed, you could buy it on Teutonia and Center.  African Americans owned a dry cleaning store.  African Americans owned a little restaurant there.  African Americans owned clothing stores, they owned record stores.  There was--African Americans didn't own it, but there was still other investments in that community at that time, things such as a five and dime store, there was a Woolworth's.  Cole's, our senator now, Herb Kohl, one of his family's first stores was on Teutonia.
Speaker 1: Okay, on Teutonia...?
Speaker 2: Teutonia and Hadley.
Speaker 1: Was a German tribal designation, the Teutons, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Tribal, Teutons, yes, Teutonia Avenue.  There was a movie theater there, there was a bowling alley there, a rec center--you name it, beauty salons, barber shops, it was right there, you didn't have to go far.  I remember being able to walk anywhere without any issues, even from a little kid, by myself.  I used to walk from 12th and Center to 26th and Center to the library, almost everyday after school.  It was never a problem, no one bothered you.   You know, the smells were typical.  We had great barbecue places, stores, vendors.  It was fun growing up, it was fun growing up--I remember a lot of activity.  There was a boy's club at that time.  It was not the Boys and Girls Club, it was a boy's club, and my brothers would go to the boy's club, and I would--my brother would take me even though I couldn't go in or do anything.
Speaker 1: I can't believe that they didn't let you in over there.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Now, this would be a shock to some people today to just think...
Speaker 2: That particular branch didn't, they didn't.
Speaker 1: A boy's club for boys only?
Speaker 2: It was for boys only.  It only became Boys and Girls clubs in, I want to say in the '70s [1970s], might even have been late '70s [1970s], I just don't remember.  But, I remember the girls would be outside on the playground playing, but the boys could actually go in the club and partake of activities and that kind of thing.  But, it was just a fun time, I mean, it was a really fun time.  I remember people's music, Motown.  I remember Motown, blasting.  I remember 78s, I remember 33s, I remember 45s.  I remember you could walk up and down the street, and there was a radio--excuse me, record shop on Teutonia and Center, called the House of Sound, and they used to blast music, Motown music.  So, anytime you walked over there--I'd go over to the post office--there was a playground over there at Teutonia--Franklin Square it was called.  So, I'd go over there to play, but you'd walk past the House of Sound, so you'd hear all this great R&B.  Like I said, life was good.  The sights and sounds and smells were just what you'd want to remember, growing up as a kid.  We felt very safe, very safe.  And, anything you wanted, you could get, you could get right there in our community.
Speaker 1: So, you say you didn't have much occasion to go downtown?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  We would walk, we'd walk downtown.  And, a very great memory I have is, once a year at Christmastime, my dad [Eugene Prince] and I would go downtown together, just the two of us, and we would go and buy my mother's [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] Christmas gift.  And, I told him--I think it stems back to--it was just the two of us before I went off to school, so we were kind of used to operating together, because he was my babysitter.  But, we used to do that for years, we used to head downtown.  Sometimes we'd catch the, the--well I call it the trolley, but I guess that's what they called it then, the trolley.  And, my dad and I--then they went to a bus, and we'd go downtown and get my mom a birthday gift.  But, as kids we walked, we walked everywhere.  We didn't get on buses or trolleys or anything.  We didn't have the money for that, but you could walk everywhere and walk safely.
Story_ID: 127468
Speaker 1: Now, now what were you interested in when you were growing up?  What kind of things did you like to do the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, reading.  I was, oh, my goodness--reading, reading, reading.  I always wanted to be a physician.  I wanted to be a person--I knew I wanted to do something with healthcare.  Like I said, I loved people, I knew I needed a field where I'd have daily contact with people.  I wanted to do something like that.  I was never really quite sure, but knew that I needed a job where I could talk to people.  So, actually, in my teens I ended up being a candy striper at a local hospital.  And, that's really where I sort of fell in love with the whole thought of healthcare, and working in that field some kind of way.  I thought about physician because that's all I knew.  I knew I didn't want to be a nurse.  I wanted to do something in healthcare, but not daily hands on of patients, but something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127469
Speaker 1: Well let me take you back to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start grade school?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Oh, where.  Right at 12th, 12th Street School [later Urban Day School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it was the elementary school on the corner from my house.
Speaker 1: Okay, 12th Street School, and are there any particular teachers or programs or activities that you remember from that school?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, my memories from that school are a little vague because I was only there a couple of years.  My favorite teacher was Ms. Beckley [ph.].  She is to this date, the only African American teacher I had.  She was, I just loved her.  She taught reading.  And, I always thought that she looked and smelled like a teacher.  She would come to school everyday in a dress and heels, she would read to us, we would read to her, but she would also talk to us.  She was our oral historian.  She would tell us things, and since I didn't know a lot about--you know, we didn't go South for the summer, we went to Roswell.  But, she would tell us stories about where she grew up in Alabama.  She would talk to us a lot about segregation.  She was a wonderful lady, Ms. Beckley.  So, she's my first real memories of a teacher, and as I said, the only African American teacher that I ever had.  And, that wasn't unusual here, that wasn't unusual.  I actually was moved out of--that was my public school.  I was moved out of there and then my parents [Jeanetta Woodard Prince and Eugene Prince] put me into a Lutheran school for the rest of my time.   And, it wasn't just me, there was a small African American group that started a church here in the city and I think we were off of 6th and Wright, I think that's where they started, I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: St. Philip's, which is still going strong today and that's the church we go to today still.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's St. Philip's Lutheran [Church & School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Lutheran, yes.  African American church.
Speaker 1: Were your parents associated with a Lutheran church before they moved to Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: No, they were Baptists, both.
Speaker 1: So, there must be some sort of story here about how they got interested in going to a Lutheran church.
Speaker 2: You know, the only thing that I ever remember hearing from them growing up was that the Lutheran senate came to town and they were forming churches with schools, and there was a group of African Americans who wanted a smaller school environment and that's what they did.  They took the kids and put them in--started that church and put them in the school there.
Speaker 1: So the, joining the church was sort of an extension of wanting a better educational environment for the children?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes definitely.  Definitely.  And the church and the school is going strong today.
Story_ID: 127470
Speaker 1: All right so, now was the church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was a big part, I mean, it's part of who I am, so it's inside, so it's not something I that I can, can take away, but since I went to a parochial school, a faith-based school, then the church always was a part of my life.  We had church every day, sang in the choir, did all those--all those things, so it's part of my life.
Speaker 1: Is it kind of like--is it similar to the Catholic Church, I mean, a Catholic school experience, being a Lutheran school?
Speaker 2: I would think, I think those school experiences that are attached to any faith are probably all the same.  You go to church every day, but you still have all of the, you know your church services for the first half an hour, and then you go right back to the classroom and in school until that bell rings at 3:15 or 3:30, so you have the same things--the math, the science, I mean, nothing like that is different.
Speaker 1: I mean were the teachers clergy members, like in the Catholic church where you have nuns?
Speaker 2: No, in a Lutheran church--well, in a Lutheran church I never had a teacher that was a minister.  The Lutheran church is a little bit different, since we don't have priests, and we don't have nuns, we don't have any of that.  But, we have teachers, and like I said, after I left 12th Street School, all of my teachers were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mostly, because I would assume that because the teachers in those schools had to be Lutheran, they had to be Lutherans, and at time in this state for that particular senate, it was definitely white German.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was it called, St. Philip's Lutheran School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: St. Philip's Lutheran School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, one that I still talk to today, Ms. Fleegel.  She'll always be Ms. Fleegel to me, F-L-E-E-G-E-L, but her married name is Mrs. Cuppan, C-U-P-P-A-N.  She lives in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin now, and we e-mail each other.  We saw each other this year.  St. Philip's had an anniversary, the church did.  It was their--I don't remember-forty-fifth or something anniversary, and they invited some of the past teachers down.  So, I got to see her, and for those big hallmarks in my life, she's always around.  So, she was definitely my favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, what grade did she teach?
Speaker 2: Taught fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Fifth grade?
Speaker 2: For me it was fourth grade, it was fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: I was a very good student, rather boring, but everybody said I wasn't, but I always thought of myself as boring.  Math and science, you know, schoolwork always came easy.  I think a lot of that was because I was such a reader so young, so I always did well in school.  I was always active in school, you know, a class leader kind of person, always.  My sister [Deborah Carter] and I were very, very close, and my sister was not as good in school, but it didn't matter.  She took care of me and I took care of her, and we're very, very close to this day.  But, I was a good--I was a good student.  I always loved learning, and that is really just--I've taken that with me into adult life.  I always loved to read, I always loved to learn new things and to find out about new things, and I was really like that, very inquisitive as a--as a child, very inquisitive.
Story_ID: 127471
Speaker 1: Did you like the TV science shows then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I remember 'Watch Mr. Wizard.'  Did you watch that?
Speaker 2: [laughter] I don't remember.  I never watched 'Mr.  Wizard,' but I love to this day, any kind of show where there's a puzzle to solve.  So, I love 'Law and Order,' anything like that.  I love detective stories, I love sci fi [science fiction].  I don't know if that's a Roswell [New Mexico] connection or not, but any 'Star Trek,' 'Lost in Space,' those kinds of things that just--I think part of it is fantasizing about what's beyond.  I love those kinds of things.  But yeah--
Speaker 1: I know in the '50s [1950s] there was a lot of speculation about what the future was going to be.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: ...and what kind of new gadgets we were going to have and ...
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.  The first--when I was--I don't remember my age, but I'd say between ten and fourteen, I received my very first piece of mail.  That was a hallmark for me as a kid.  And, my teacher asked us, as an assignment, to write to a company, and we were practicing writing skills or something, but I think some of the companies had free samples that you could get if you wrote to them.  I remember that instead of writing to a company asking them for things, I wrote to the telephone company, AT&T--I don't remember if that's what they were called then.  But, I wrote because--no, it was Bell Laboratories, that's who I wrote to, because Telstar, the satellite, the very first satellite, had been launched.  And, I wrote to them saying that I would like some information about Telstar.  And, I remember it was the first piece of mail, because it wasn't a piece of mail, it was a huge box that they sent to me.  And, I came home from school, and my sister [Deborah Carter] and I tore this box open.  And it had pictures of the universe, it had maps that glowed in the dark of the different planets, it had a little small-scale model of the satellite, and it had coloring books on the satellite.  So, for me, it was just, it was fantastic.  Not only was this my first real piece of mail, so I felt like a grown-up, but it also showed me that being inquisitive, asking questions, it resulted in something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a reward.
Speaker 2: You get new knowledge from it, there's a reward to it.  Yeah, so I remember that very clearly growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were about--you were between eleven and fourteen you say?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Story_ID: 127472
Speaker 1: When did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school, excuse me, in '67 [1967], and again, I went to a Lutheran high school here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]--Wisconsin Lutheran High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, it was an interesting experience.  There were--the year that I went, there were probably nine African Americans in the high school.
Speaker 1: Out of how many?
Speaker 2: Oh, at that time, probably 200, I'd say, 200 or 300.  And, that was a difficult experience, it was very difficult.  It was the civil rights era, I remember particularly, because I was in high school when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, was assassinated.
Speaker 1: What was the general attitude about Dr. King at the school?
Speaker 2: There were--they looked at Dr. King--my white colleagues looked at Dr. King as, you know, a trouble maker.  This was not a supportive environment for African American students.  And, I remember specifically, we decided to hold a memorial service for Dr. King, and we were specifically told we could not.  And, it was a time of rebellion, so we did it anyway.  And, I will never forget that there were the nine or ten of us that had sort of congregated in the auditorium, and we had written our own ceremony.  And, I will never forget that--we looked up, and two of our white colleagues, a girl, Jenny, and a boy, James, came in and they said to us, "We know that you were told not to do this, but we both play the organ, and if you'd like us to play some music, we will."  So, they played the organ while we had the ceremony [laughter].  So, it was a lesson for all of us.  I think it was a good tribute for Dr. King, because it showed, you know, from his non-violent standpoint, to stand up for what you believe in, but because someone is white does not make them your enemy.  But, it was a very difficult time in school.  We had the typical hate mail.  I had ink poured in my lockers, I had the 'N' word written all down my lockers and painted on desks and typically in classes where you needed a partner.  I'm a big science person, so I took the chemistry and the physics classes, even though they tried to steer me into the home economics and the shop classes.  Actually, at that time, it was more home economics, because you didn't find girls in shop.  But, my mother and father were adamant that I would take typing, and I would take the science courses and the math courses, and they were out there all the time with those teachers so that we would not be steered into courses that they wanted us to take.  It was very difficult.  My ninth and tenth grades were very, very difficult, and the attitudes of not only the young people, which really they were demonstrating the attitudes of the homes they grew up in, but the teachers as well.  You really didn't find a lot of support at all.  In my chemistry classes I needed partners, and no one, of course, wanted to partner with a black girl.  But, we made it through, we made it through.  My brother [Eugene Prince, Jr.] was there with me.  My parents [Jeanetta Woodard Prince and Eugene Prince] were not going to send me alone, so my brother was a year ahead of me.  And, by the time I graduated, there were probably fifteen to twenty African Americans there.
Speaker 1: So, it wasn't significantly different?
Speaker 2: No, oh no, no.  Not at all.
Story_ID: 127473
Speaker 1: And did you---now, now, did you, with the attitude of the school [Wisconsin Lutheran High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] being what it was, I mean, did you participate in clubs and did you run for office?  Did you do any of those kind of leadership things?
Speaker 2: I didn't run for office, but I participated, I did leadership things in spite of.  I would--I showed up for a number of leadership activities.  I was in the medical club, I was in the schoolbook club, and I purposely...
Speaker 1: The yearbook?
Speaker 2: The yearbook, thank you, the yearbook club.  I went out for cheerleading.
Speaker 1: Did you make it?
Speaker 2: No.  I went out for cheerleading.  I did sports, I did track, and I did make that.  They let us on the track team.  I played girls basketball. They let us play basketball.  You know, my parents' [Jeanetta Woodard Prince] goal for me, and they would tell us this all the time, is whatever you do, you let us know, and we'll fight to help you do it, to make sure you get to do it.  By the time I was ready to graduate, things had gotten a little bit better, a little bit better, not a lot, but a little bit better.  So, I had--it was a difficult four years, but I still have good memories.  I had some teachers that tried very hard to make a change.  It was a very difficult time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there were really some real strong lines drawn in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 127474
Speaker 1: Well, when you were on the verge of graduation [from Wisconsin Lutheran High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], what were your prospects?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have very good counseling in high school.  I had great--good grades, but I didn't have good counseling.
Speaker 1: Were they still trying to tell you not to go to college?
Speaker 2: They wanted me to go to trade school.  They wanted me to go to Milwaukee Area Technical and Trade [sic Milwaukee Area Technical College, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And my--
Speaker 1: What was your standing in high school?
Speaker 2: I had a 3.7 GPA, grade point.  Very, very good.  Math and science, I had straight A's.  And, my dad [Eugene Prince] said, "Absolutely not, what do you want to do," he said, "What do you want to do, and that's where we'll figure out where to put you."  So, I didn't to know if I wanted to go to an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], but I wanted to--I was going to college.  So, I decided to stay here because my friends were here, and I went to UWM here, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And, they had the programs that I wanted.  They had the pre-medical program, as well as the medical technology program, so I thought, I can just go here and it won't cost us so much money.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1971?
Speaker 2: I came here in 1971, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Were there proportionately more black people here?
Speaker 2: There were actually more black people here in 1971 when I came on campus than we have today.  I can only be honest, it's my history (laughter).  You know that was the '70s [1970s].  That was the time when we first got an Afro Studies Department.  It was the time when the Feds provided dollars through what we call the TRIO Programs, and the Upward Bound, and those types of activities, where they were recruiting African Americans to come to college.  I didn't qualify for those programs, because my GPA was high.  So, I came in as a regular student.  But, it was definitely an interesting time on campus.  So, I stayed, because there were African Americans here on campus, and it was comfortable for me.  I could ride the bus home, I lived at home.  I could ride the bus back and forth.  I worked, lived at home, and I was able to help work and pay some of the costs of the tuition.  And, that was really important to me, not to graduate with a lot of debt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I had fun here.  We started the first sorority on campus.
Speaker 1: You started it?
Speaker 2: Yes, our line, our line did.
Speaker 1: Well, what...
Speaker 2: I'm a Delta, Delta Sigma Theta.  So, all of the things that I could do as a college student anywhere else, I could do it here, I could do it here.  It was actually a lot of fun.  We had sororities, we had fraternities on campus, we had people who looked like me.  I think my education was a good education.  That was my second opportunity then to have--at least have some African American instructors, because a number of my electives I took in what was then Afro, Afro Studies, which is now our Department of Africology.
Story_ID: 127475
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who--who were, who were some of your teachers [at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my one teacher at that time, his name was Rocky Taylor, and he is now Tejumola Ologboni, better known as Teju.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, he's a well-known storyteller.
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.
Speaker 1: In the region.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was fabulous as my instructor.  I took every class that he ever taught.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah he's well known for storytelling, very...
Speaker 2: Yes, I took every class he ever taught, and it was such a good balance for me, a balance of my chemistry and my physics and my math classes, then to really have some great electives, like my Afro Studies courses, so I enjoyed my time here.  I always find it interesting that, during that time I was president of the Black Student Union for two years, and we had a demonstration here in this building, right outside this door, because we didn't feel there were enough students--African American students on campus, but also that there weren't enough African American teachers.  If they weren't in Africology--well, Afro Studies at that time, we didn't have them.  And, so we picketed, and had a shut-in.  We decided we were going to sleep in at the bottom of the stairs until they decided to call the police on us, and then we left.  But, that was in '74 [1974], 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever feel threatened by the administration because of those kinds of activities?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure.  You know, it was typical of the era, of the time.  I never had a verbal threat from administration, but it was inherent.  Some of my friends felt pressured from their instructors.  I had good grades, so they really didn't have anything to hold over my head.  I do remember very clearly in 1973, I'm sorry, '72 [1972], I had an instructor for one of my English classes.  It was--I don't even remember which one it was, but part of the assignment was that the class had to do a play.  And, I was, there were two African Americans, me and another woman who were in that class together.  And, he would not let us cast for any other role except the maid, and he said, "Well, if you're in any other role, it really does sort of destroy the concept of the play" because the play was that the maid actually really ran this white southern family without them really knowing it.  I think if you fast forward the TV, it's one of those soap kind of things, but that was back in the early '70s [1970s].  And, I refused, I refused to sign up for the maid, and I refused--I would not play that role.  In fact, my friend and I went to the department chair and to the dean at that time, and they supported the faculty member, and said he could tell us what role to play, and we said no, so we chose not to do it, and he said, "I'll give you an alternative assignment for a grade", and we said no.  We said if we can't do the same assignment that the rest of the class does, we're not doing anything different, and we'd better not get a bad grade.  And, we didn't, but I was so disappointed.  I was so upset that the department chair and the dean couldn't clearly see that this was a case of discrimination.  If I had been white, I would have been able to cast a role.  If I had been white, the restriction might have been put on them that they wouldn't be able to play the maid, but to tell me that was the only role I could have played, he should have picked a different play.  There are lots of plays around.  So, I remember that very clearly, very clearly here at the campus that I now am an administrator on, so life does come full circle.
Speaker 1: So, nowadays here at UWM, do they use a non-traditional casting for the plays, or do they--is there still...?
Speaker 2: No, if there is--I have never heard of any complaints from students or anyone else.  You know, life has changed so much.  They don't put on a lot of plays anymore as part of class requirements.  We have a theater school here that is--there is no discrimination in the roles.  That, we don't allow.
Story_ID: 127476
Speaker 1: Now, what was your major here [at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Medical technology, which is laboratory medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, explain what that is.  Most of us don't know.
Speaker 2: The people that--when you're not feeling well, and you're in the hospital, and those people that you cringe when they come through the door that take your blood, or other samples that I won't name, those samples go somewhere, and they go to a clinical laboratory, whether it's in the hospital or if it's off-site, but it goes somewhere to be analyzed, and that's what I did for twenty-something years.  I ran a hospital laboratory, where we analyzed different samples that came from patients in hospitals.  Some of those samples would come from people who are in surgery.  We're the people that analyze and provide for your physician a report that says what's going on inside of you.  So, if you have a tumor, a piece of that tumor comes to us.  We special test it, and we're able to tell the physician what kind of a tumor it is, hence, what type of treatment might be helpful for that particular tumor.  I did that for eighteen years, and part of that, I also did a lot of lab research.  My specialty area is hematology, the study of blood disorders.  And, that's really where my undergraduate, my master's degree in clinical lab science, and my doctorate, really are focused, in that area of medical technology--advanced leukemias and lymphomas, so different blood disorders, and some of the newer high-tech ways that we test them now.  And, that really guided my life for, for many years, many years I did that.
Story_ID: 127477
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back for a minute and talk about graduation from UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  Now did you, I mean, are there any stories associated with graduating?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not re--nothing out of the ordinary, nothing out of the ordinary.  I graduated as the first African American out of the medical technology program.
Speaker 1: This was '75 [1975] right?
Speaker 2: Oh, '76 [1976], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did a specialty year of an internship in 1981, and that was the Columbia Hospital, at Columbia Hospital which is right across the street.  And, then I went for the master's degree, which was a new program, and I was the first African American to graduate from that master's program.
Speaker 1: Okay, where was that?
Speaker 2: That was here, all of my degrees are from here.  Yes, I didn't stray very far.  So, that was from here, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.  And, during that time, I thoroughly enjoyed my job, but it was time to move on.  And, I hadn't thought about what I was going to do, but I was recruited away by the University of Wisconsin Medical School, and that's where I went, and I was there for four and a half years.  And, I did a couple of things there.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is--I have to count--eighty... This is 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1989.
Story_ID: 127478
Speaker 1: Before we get there, are there any stories about, about your work as a, as a?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Stories, things like, part of my job besides analyzing, I was one of those people who would come up and draw blood as well--not just from adults, but from babies and different things.  And I had people refuse to have blood drawn by an African American.  It got to a--on a very regular basis.  I had that happen a lot.  I had people ask, you know, the questions, "If I need blood, make sure that it's not from an African American."  Oh yeah.  I remember very clearly gowning and gloving to go into surgery, they were doing a procedure on an individual, and we needed to get a piece of the biopsy, and we needed it--you have to special handle it as soon as it's removed from the body.  So, you would go into surgery with the physician and stand there and they would plate it for you.  And, I remember this gentleman, before--the anesthesiologist was at his head, and he was getting ready and, to apply the mask to him, and the gentleman looked up and saw me, who was actually standing a little bit on the other side.  I was being shielded by the doctor just from where my physician was.  And, the gentleman saw me, and he said very clearly, very clearly that he did not want me in the room.  And, I'll never forget, the physician said, "I don't discriminate against who is here; we have professionals in the room, and if you don't want her in the room, you don't want me here either."  And, he didn't say anything else, and then they put him to sleep.  But, that was, that was more the norm, and after a while, you learned how to handle it.
Speaker 1: So that was the norm?
Speaker 2: That was the norm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: That was the norm.  You learned how to handle it, and you know, over the years, Milwaukee transformed and changed in such a way where you started to have more African Americans move in, the whites moved out.  You know, people like to call it white flight, whatever it is.  The industry, the industrial engine started to change.  There started to be a black middle class in Milwaukee.  And that black middle class was then able to purchase homes--able to do a number of those things that, you know, they got to feel and realize some of their dreams.  So, the population changed, and life changed for a lot of us.  Instead of what used to be the norm, started to even out a lot more.  There wasn't the overt examples of racism.  It was still there; people just knew not to say the wrong things to you.  You couldn't legally get away with it.
Story_ID: 127479
Speaker 1: Now you were talking about going to University of Wisconsin Medical School [Madison, Wisconsin] in 1989, that's where you [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  They asked me to come over to do a couple of things.  One of the things was to help teach the hematology for the med students and the residents from there.  But, they also wanted to start a new program with the med school.  They realized that their numbers of African Americans and other students of color was very small that were entering med school, and they wanted to start a program to really help increase those numbers.  So, I sat down and talked with them and said, "It's a long process, so if you're willing to be in this for the long haul, you can make a difference.  If you're not, it's not going to make a difference."  And, they said they were, so I decided to go over there and give it a shot.  And, it was actually a wonderful experience, so I started a program.  We started at middle school--middle school, high school, college, and even students that were in medical school--but really providing a program of math and science enhancement for them, helping them understand what path they needed to be on in order to qualify for med school, but to start early with them.
Speaker 1: Is this the HPPI Program?
Speaker 2: Yes, the HPPI, Health Professionals Partnership Initiative.  And, this was one of ten programs around the country like this that was funded by Robert Wood Johnson [Foundation].  I think it was a wonderful, wonderful success.  I had students, you know, it was a long pipeline, so I had students that are just now in medical school who were my HPPI students, who are calling me, and I get to talk to them, and I have a couple in dental school.  So, that was a wonderful time to really take my love of health care, my love of medicine, my love of teaching, and sort of put it all together.  But, I still did a little bit of research, not a lot.  I didn't have a lot of time, but did a little bit of research with a researcher here, Dr. Kathryn Patrick [ph.].  So, we at that time were looking at a specific type of leukemia, and the cells--what sits on the cells of these specific leukemias, so I got to do the program piece and a little piece of research piece too, at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a fun time.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's interesting is your philosophy that you can't, you know, fix these things overnight.  I mean, the gap in this type of education has to be done over a long haul.
Speaker 2: Oh, I agree.  You know, life is, we don't get where we are overnight, so there's usually not a quick fix to anything, and once we realize that and accept it, then I think we can roll up our sleeves and start to figure out how do you change this.  And, working with young people around math and science, which are the gatekeeper subjects for almost anything that you want to do successfully--I tell everyone, math is a gatekeeper subject.  Science is for certain disciplines, but math is as well.  So, we work with students early, very early in life to help them not be afraid of subjects that seem difficult.  I think you'll see a difference.  I think you'll see a difference.  I don't think the numbers are where they still could be in African Americans and other students entering medical school, entering dental school, entering doctoral programs, and nursing and other health care areas, but you have to keep working at it, and that was the philosophy I took into this job.
Story_ID: 127480
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you completed your dissertation at the--for your Ph.D. at the University--
Speaker 2: I completed my--I decided to--
Speaker 1: --of Wisconsin Medical School too?
Speaker 2: Actually, no.  I was working at the University of Wisconsin Medical School [Madison, Wisconsin], excuse me, at the University of Wisconsin Medical School but at the same time, knew that I wanted to get a doctorate, and my goal for myself was that I've paid tuition in one century, I'm not paying tuition in another century.  So, I will get this doctorate before the year 2000.  And, I did that, I got it in December of 1999.  But, I decided to finish up the work on a doctorate.  I was still employed at the University of Wisconsin Medical School, but one of the things I didn't say, is that since 1977, I have been teaching as an ad hoc instructor here at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  So, it's been a huge part of my life, my attachment here to this particular institution.  So, I did all of my degrees here, and it was just a natural that I would end up in a doctoral program and finish my doctorate here as well.  And, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: My dissertation actually was on the work that I had done through the HPPI [Health Professionals Partnership Initiative] Program, and, I really wanted to look at teachers--what's the teacher's perceptions of young people, particularly African Americans, as to whether or not the teacher thinks you can do math or science.  Because if there is no--if the teacher isn't transmitting an aura to a child, to a young person, that you're capable of doing this, then that's just an obstacle, all is lost.  It's really interesting.  I looked at four--it was a case study really of four teachers, two African American, two white, different backgrounds.  One of the whites was an urban white, grew up in a city.  The other grew up rural Wisconsin, and the African Americans, one was urban and had grown up northern urban, and one, southern urban, particularly from their training standpoint.  It was quite interesting.  The African American teacher that was from an urban city, from the north, ranked about, on the same perception scale, as the white teacher from rural Wisconsin, meaning, I really don't think these kids can do math and science, but we'll do the best we can for them.  The African American teacher from the South, who was trained in the South--the South had more teacher's colleges, and a lot of the teachers were trained there, African Americans, and moved up to Milwaukee because they were recruited here by the school system in the '50s [1950s]--that teacher scored the highest as to the perception that African American students could learn, and her classroom and her style of teaching confirmed that.  So, it helped me report back to the teachers, the faculty at this particular school, about the importance of perceptions, and the importance of a teacher, and the attitude that a teacher has when you're interacting with a young person, an African American, over math and science, particularly African American males.  You have to give the perception that they can do it, to even help them have any interest in it.  It was quite an interesting undertaking.  It was received fairly well.  The white teachers at the school had difficulty with it, depending on where--it, it made them take an interesting look at themselves.  And, I think it did the same for black teachers there, which was really what I was hoping the outcome would, would be.
Story_ID: 127481
Speaker 1: Yeah, there have been similar stories and studies, I guess, about teachers' perception influencing the outcome of educational style...
Speaker 2: It definitely influences the outcome, and since I was so interested in the health background piece, I really wanted to look at those subjects that were the gatekeeper for that, so I looked at math and science classes.  I observed in the classrooms, I looked at how teachers, the teacher with the highest efficacy, meaning who thought kids could do this--their classrooms even looked different.  They had pictures of African Americans in the classroom, African American astronauts, chemists, you know, those kinds of--they had--oh, I'm blanking, I'm sorry--they had the architect for Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Banneker.
Speaker 2: Banneken, thank you.
Speaker 1: Banneker.
Speaker 2: Banneker, Benjamin Banneker.  They had pictures of him doing math and measuring, I mean, and the classroom was set up in a circle versus the standard chairs and a table.  So, the teacher--this dissertation was really around the importance that we should place on how a teacher performs, and how a teacher transmits a feeling of hope or despair to a student when it comes to math and science.  And, I enjoyed the time I spent on the dissertation, I really did.  It was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's 1999--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--well, yes--
Speaker 1: --when you received your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1999.
Story_ID: 127482
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you--2000, you were named Vice Chancellor here [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, I came here in 2000.  I was hired away from the med school [University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin], and decided I would come and spend some time at my alma mater here and, and come here to work, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did this job, I mean, was it a difficult choice to just like pull you away from science?
Speaker 2: It was a difficult choice.  It would be my first venture of really disconnecting from doing any research, from really teaching, but it was time.  I wanted to come back to where I went to school, to try to make a difference here, to try to get students recruited here that look like me, students that might have policy decision-making opportunities to help that environment grow and to thrive.  And, of course, you know, that love expands to all students, but really to students who have challenges getting in and staying in college.  It also gave me an opportunity to continue to teach a class.  I try to teach a class a semester, depending on my workload.  I'm not always able to do it, but I do have an associate professor's appointment in the College of Health Sciences, so I do still teach my advanced hematology when I get a chance.  I was really looking for that opportunity to sort of move up and actually really focus on changing policy.  I had done the program work, so it was time to let someone else actually do the work at sort of the grassroots level, and move into a place where I could change rules, I could set that precedent.  And, that's why I decided to come here.  It wasn't an easy decision, but I think it was the right decision to make.  So, I came here in 2000.  They created this position, and that's when they contacted me and asked me if I would be interested.  So, it's an inaugural position of its kind, and it really was to come here and be the conscience and the voice of community, as it applies to executive level decision-making on the campus.  Beside the typical administrative roles that come with that, you know, the strategic planning piece for campus and those administrative roles that you have to do to pay the bills, it was really about helping our faculty and our staff understand that there's a community outside of the academy, outside of these walls, and how do you bridge that gap.  How do you include community respectfully in research projects, in on-campus activity--
Story_ID: 127483
Speaker 1: --In advisory councils.
Speaker 2: --Now, that was the first thing you said, now, that's very important.
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely important, definitely important.
Speaker 2: Because inner-city, black communities are always...
Speaker 1: Targets.
Speaker 2: ...suspicious of academics coming in, to measure...
Speaker 1: To measure.  Yes.
Speaker 2: ...what they're doing, and to write about it, and you know, and, what are they going to do for us...
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: ...and they leave.  And, there's a lot of pain associated with all of that.
Speaker 1: That's really what I focus a lot on, is helping--I call it authentic and respectful partnerships, and helping our internal people make those bridges.  Sometimes, it takes internal training sessions.  This is how you speak to someone in the community.  If it is a senior African American woman, you do not call her by her first name.  Her name is Mrs. so and so.  If the person is Somalian [sic Somali], and they have agreed to be in a research study, you do not, if it's a medical research study, you do not examine them without a female, another female in the room.  Those kinds of cultural competencies that people internal to the academy don't come equipped with, and, vice versa, to help community understand what the opportunities are here.  I bring community on campus a lot.  It's our opportunity to make them understand and feel that this is their home.  It's a public university, it's a state university.  Their taxpayer dollars pay for this place, and how can they have access here.  So, I to try to get them here for a lot of their activities--there's a very big one coming up this Friday, as a matter of fact--but, trying to get people on campus, and in long-term partnerships.  One of the things that we're working on is increasing our contracting with minority vendors, making sure that some of the products and supplies that we need and use, that we're contracting with minority vendors around those.  You have to--if you want to take, you have to give.  There's this Native American saying that "You can't receive blessings with your fist closed", and that's so true, that's how I look at my role.  What can we do to be good citizens for the community, and what does community need from us, and, helping to make policies around those decisions.  They call me "the Vice Chancellor of Discomfort" because it's my job to basically look at everybody else's role on the senior exec team, and provide a little level of discomfort, to help them examine, through the eyes of community, what they're doing.  Is there more they can be doing to be a good community partner, is there a better way of doing it, is there a non-offensive way of doing it, and is there opportunity?  So, that, that keeps me very busy.  Between that--I engage in a lot of community activities.  I sit on way too many boards, but it all really is part of who I am.
Story_ID: 127484
Speaker 1: What are some of the boards that you sit on?
Speaker 2: I sit on a number of boards.  I sit on the--I'm a trustee for the Greater Milwaukee Community Foundation Board, and I've been on that board eight years.  It's a wonderful opportunity to make sure that community groups that tend not to be the large elephants in the room--and there's nothing wrong with the Girls and Boys Clubs, Big Brothers, Big Sisters, but there are smaller groups, particularly those where the executive directors are people of color, who do good work at the grassroots level and community.  They need funding.  They're not always first in line, and to them, a $75,000 to $100,000 grant makes all the difference.  So, that's one of the pieces of satisfaction that I get from being on that board.  I sit on the Milwaukee Public Library, I chair the Library Board.  That directly comes from my love of reading, and understanding that reading opens up the world for people.  It doesn't matter what profession you go into.  If you can read, you'll be good, and sadly, our young folks can't read anymore.  So, I chair that board.  I get a lot of satisfaction around helping increase or impact literacy.  So, I do that.  I serve on about seven or eight community boards.  I serve on a couple corporate boards, I serve on a couple national boards, some that still deal with health, some that deal with education, and some that deal with the foundation world, but all that really deals with my passion.  If I had to say what I enjoy the most professionally, it would be health, education, and, and foundation work.  That really is sort of my triangle of--as to who I am, and to what makes me tick, what gets me excited.
Story_ID: 127485
Speaker 1: So, you've been Vice Chancellor here since 2000?
Speaker 2: Since 2000, seven years.
Speaker 1: It's 2007, do you have any, what are your future plans?
Speaker 2: Well, I feel I have one job left in me, that's about all--I'll always continue to learn, but that's probably all of the paid work I plan to do in this lifetime.  But, I have, I have a good ten, twelve years that's left in the paid world of work, and I haven't decided yet.  I probably won't stay here.  I've been here seven years.  I think I've set the table the way I wanted to, I think I've done what I can.  I'm looking at possibly leading a foundation or I may--you may see me back on the health care side somewhere as an exec there.  But, I think the road is leading me somewhere.  I'm still trying to figure out which, which toll I'm going to pay for that last piece of my journey.  But, it will be something, it will be somewhere else.
Story_ID: 127486
Speaker 1: Okay, now you have the unique position of, we've interviewed other people in similar positions like [HM] Norman Francis at Xavier [University, New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who was a student there, and now he's the president, and he can look back over the whole span of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --some forty years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, you have a similar--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --You have a similar position.  How have things changed at UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for black people since you, you know, when you look back--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --at when you started?
Speaker 2: Now, I've been here as part of this campus as either a student, an instructor or an administrator since 1971, so that's thirty-six years.  And, it's an interesting time of review, to review this, because in the '70s [1970s], I actually think the faces were--there were more African American faces on campus, more involved faces.  They weren't just--we weren't just here, we were also involved in the workings of the university, mostly in a challenging mode, but still visible, still working towards a cause.  Over the years, I think our growth in African American students, it's on a roller coaster.  It declines, it goes up, it declines.  I think there are a number of reasons for that.  I think campus culture is only one reason.  I think are more opportunities for African American students to go elsewhere.  They tend to favor HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] over staying at home and attending a public university.  I think our--while our number of African American faculty have grown, they have not grown significantly over the years.  It's still been a very stagnant, stagnant line.  Our staff has grown, obviously, because life does move forward, but they haven't really grown in the ranks that we would hope that had.  So, I think this campus over the last thirty-six years, has risen to the task of attempting to recruit and retain African Americans, but have still fallen short of reaching goals and benchmarks.  We have a lot of room for opportunity, a lot of room for opportunity here.  Opportunity in recruiting and retaining African American students, faculty, staff and administrative positions, executive positions, really need to see more of us there.  My goal was to stay here and to help get other people in the pipeline, so that when I'm ready to, not just to pass, but probably to throw this baton, that there's someone back there who looks like me who can catch it.  And, I feel like that time is now.  There are a number of individuals I know who can step into this role, so when you see me exit, you will see--I'm going to make sure that I'm going to do what I can.  Rest assured I'm going to do what I can make sure that they enter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I think we're no different than a lot of the universities.  I'm not sure that the non-HBCUs have done a lot across the country in the last thirty-five years, as to what they could, around recruiting and retaining African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's a blessing and a curse.  We work towards improvement, but on the same hand, we have a long way to go.
Story_ID: 127487
Speaker 1: All right now, I just, you know, before we started, I read this, it's a wonderful article about you in the Milwaukee Community Journal.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: You were talking about how tight the community is here.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: The African American community.  I have a lot of hope.  I have concerns, but everybody has concerns.  My concern is that the African American family is splintered.  My hope around that, is that we as a community will start to band together more to take care of each other.  So, while the biological aspects of a family are still something that I'm very much in support of, I would ask us and hope that we would go back to the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] where we took care of any child that we saw, so there was never a child who said, "I don't have a mother, but I have granny, I have so and so", because there was someone on the block or someone who took their time to attach to a young person, so that they had an adult figure in their life.  That's my hope, that our families strengthen again, that we pay more attention to our families than we do to ourselves, that the African American family understands, and the community understands, that we can take care of ourselves, we can thrive, we don't need our hands held.  But, we've gotten away from that culture of independence.  When I was growing up, as I mentioned, on Teutonia and Center, if I had chosen not to, I never would have had to leave my community for anything.  I could have gone to school there, I could have gone to the movie theater there, I could have gone to the bowling alley, I could have gone to the Cup and Saucer Diner, I could have gone to Taylor's Dry Cleaning, the House of Sound Record Shop, there was a bakery there, there was a grocery store there, there was a barbecue place there, a library within five blocks.  I would never have had to leave my area.  We've gotten so far away from that, so we feel so dependent on other cultures to take care of us.  You come back in those communities now, there are very few African American entrepreneurs, very few that own anything.  My hope is that we would stop being a community of buyers and become a community of sellers.  We need to sell things, we need to own things.  Those are my hopes for this community.  I hope that our young men--I have strong hopes for African American males, that they will graduate from high school, that we'll reverse these crazy trends, they'll graduate from high school, they can live out their dreams, live out their lives, because that's part of our community, and, when we lose them, we lose a piece of us.  So, I have the hopes that not only--what I'd like to say is, it is what it is.  But, I hope that we realize that it is what it is, and we have the power within us to change it, to make it be what we want it to be.  Those are my strong hopes for my community.
Story_ID: 127488
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I've always been a person that does not live life in regret.  I've done that purposely.  I think everything I go through is for a reason in life.  It's to help prepare you for what's coming next.  So, I don't think in terms of what could I have done differently.  That's a difficult question to answer, because if I had done anything differently, my life would not have turned out the way it has, and it's been a good life.  It's been a good ride.  And, every milestone, either good or bad, either happy or sad, has helped craft something inside of me to make me who I am, so I don't have regrets.  I don't think I would have done anything differently.  I think I've been very fortunate.  I've done what I wanted to do in life.  Hopefully, there's still more ahead, but I've done what I wanted to do, so I don't live in regrets.
Story_ID: 127489
Speaker 1: In the same vein, if you look back at everything you've done at this point again--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, years ago, I had to write--it was a--a teacher gave us an assignment.  You had to write your tombstone, what would be on your tombstone.  And, which meant you couldn't have, you know, three long words--three long sentences.  It had to be able to fit on your tombstone.  I had a teacher who actually made us write our obituary, but this one was about writing your tombstone.  It was really helping you think, and I thought and thought and thought about this.  And I--I use this--I would use this as my legacy.  I would want this on my tombstone, two words, "She cared".  When all is said and done, no one will remember my name years from now, and they don't need to, because at that point and time in life, they need to be living their life for that point and time.  But, I hope that somewhere there will be a--I don't know, a star shining somewhere.  Because I tried to care, maybe someone has a better life.  Maybe their great, great, great-grandmother was one of my HPPI students.  Maybe their great, great, great, great-grandfather was a student that sat in my office that I talked about and tried to help either stay in school, or to get into school.  Who knows, maybe one of those generations will have a connection to one of the patients that I helped.  So, for me that's my legacy, that's the legacy I want.  I don't want it to be a loud roar.  I don't want the well-known name that will stick around for ages.  I just simply want to be able to have an impact on people now, and hopefully that will spread through the generations to come, and it can be a quiet impact, maybe helping someone read, maybe making sure that because I chair the library board, that we still have a library fifty years from now, whatever form it might be in, but that it's still open and free to the public.  So, those kinds of things, those day-to-day impacts that aren't going to make CNN, won't make world news.  I don't need that, I don't need that to happen for me.  I just want to make a difference where I can at this point in time, and hope that someone who's interacted with me, it will filter down to them.
Story_ID: 127490
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask about family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You don't have children right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But have you ever been married?
Speaker 2: I've never been married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As my boyfriend says, I'm moving too fast to be caught.  But I have, I--Mother's Day is a special day for me, because I get more cards and flowers on Mother's Day, I think, than some biological mothers do.  I have a number of nieces, nephews, and god-children, and adopted god-children, people that--are lives have crossed.  I have a lot of mentees, and Mother's Day is special, because I'm on the phone from sunup to sundown, lots of cards, lots of flowers.  So, life has been very satisfying for me, very satisfying.  So, I guess it ties into the legacy question.  I'm hopefully leaving a legacy of family in how I define family, which is so much more than biological.  It's really about caring, sharing cultures, sharing values, and sharing love.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you that you want to talk about on this interview before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I am who I am because of the parents that I had, the siblings who love me, the family that I grew up in, and I owe it all to the people who came before me.  And to me, a HistoryMaker is someone who understands the responsibility that they need to rise to the challenge around for those that are going to come after them.  So, I think you've asked me everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 127491
Speaker 1: The last question--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I hope it's not redundant, but it's similar to legacy--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we always ask it this way.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Ooh, I'd like to be remembered as someone who enjoyed life, someone who helped others, someone who always saw the glass as half full, and not as half empty; someone who would never stand in the way of anyone else's dreams, or anyone else's chance of making history; someone who was always supportive of the right thing.  But, I think first and foremost, someone who cared--someone who cared about the people that she was fortunate enough to share the world with.  That's how I'd love to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much for spending time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you, it's my pleasure.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 127492
VIDEOGRAPHER: Let's try this one, please.
Speaker 2: Should I be pointing or no?
Speaker 1: This can be from left to right.
Speaker 2: Don't point.  Okay.  This is a photo.  This is a photo.  That is my aunt and uncle who are seated, my favorite uncle, Hayzell Hickman [ph.], who passed away in 2000--March of 2007.  He was a Tuskegee Airman, and next to him is my aunt Minnie Prince Hickman [ph.], who is my dad's biological sister, and this was at a gathering at their home.  Standing from left to right are my siblings.  That's my sister, Deborah Prince Carter, and next to her is my--in between the two of us, my brother Eugene Pierre Prince who is living now in Arizona, and then on the far right at the top is yours truly, that's me.
Speaker 1: [inaudible]
Speaker 2: This is a picture of four individuals that, in 1982, we went through a one-year, very intensive internship program at Columbia Hospital, and this was an internship program for medical technology.  And, this picture shows my graduation ceremony at that time, and this is Columbia Hospital in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and it was located on the corner of Maryland Avenue and Hartford.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of the people?
Speaker 2: I don't remember them. [laughter].  This is a picture of my mother, Jeanetta Jane Prince.  Her maiden name was Woodard, so it's Jeanetta Jane Woodard, and this was my mother's twenty-first birthday picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the picture of a social club here in Milwaukee in the, I believe it was the '50s [1950s], and the woman in the top row, second from the right, is the woman I grew up calling Granny.  She is my paternal grandfather's second wife, and her name is Alma, A-L-M-A, Prince, and this is a photo of her and her girlfriends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and my uncle, her brother, my maternal uncle.  And, that is my mother, Jeanetta Prince, and that is her brother, Reuben Woodard.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: These are my five paternal aunts on my dad's side.  He had ten siblings, five boys and five girls, and these are the five girls.  To the far left is my aunt Mildred.  My aunt Mildred is deceased now, but she was a wonderful woman.  Next to her is my aunt Delores, who now lives in a senior building out east in Pennsylvania.  Next to her is my aunt Geneva Satterfield, who lives here in Milwaukee.  Next to her is my aunt Helen, who's a retired New York police officer who lives in New York.  Next to her is my aunt Minnie, Minnie Hickman who lives here in Milwaukee, and beneath her is my aunt Jean, who also lives in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture from two years ago at a family union.   From left to right, my uncle, Hayzell Hickman.  That's my aunt Delores, and next to her is my aunt Minnie.  Next to her, the good-looking gentleman, is my father, Eugene Prince.  Next to him is my mother, Jeanetta Prince.  Next to her, is my aunt Helen, and next to her is aunt Geneva.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: Now this is a current, a recent picture, from a couple of years--months ago in 2007, and I was honored at a local restaurant as the Woman of the Month, and these are four of my dear and closest friends.  From the top row that's June Perry.  From left to right, June Perry and Cecelia Gore, and seated next to me, from the far left is Vivian King, and next to me on the far right is Denai Davis.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me, many years ago, almost thirty years ago, and a little bit slimmer as well, and I was vacationing with friends up in northern Wisconsin at a little club, just relaxing.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of, from the far left, my cousin Gina Hickman.  This picture is about twelve years old.  In fact, Gina is getting married in January of 2008, and that's me on the far right in my red--sorority, Delta Sigma Theta tee shirt.  And, in between us is one of our favorite aunts, Aunt Mildred who is passed on now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this is a picture of, I would say, about twenty years ago as well, of a large family gathering that we had.  From the far left, my dad is the anchor on that side, and my mother is kind of peeking in next to him, and you can see me peeking over the shoulder of my uncle Hayzell.  But, those are my uncles, my aunts and my cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this is a recent photo of myself as the Vice Chancellor here at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and next to me is my boss, the Chancellor, Dr. Carlos Santiago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this is a gathering, but the person of interest is the beautiful woman in the middle, in the dead center, and she is one of my most beloved mentors.  That is Justine McCord, who is a retired executive from Aurora Health Care, and she resides here in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photo, the gentleman on the far left, another one of my respected and beloved mentors, Mr. Robert Harris, Jr., and in between the two of us, the woman dead center, is the former Chancellor of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Nancy Zimpher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I think this gentleman is well-known.  This is Glynn Turman, the artist, the actor, etc.  And, I was on vacation in New York at Sylvia's Restaurant in Harlem [New York], and had met him a number of times from a venture that he has here in Milwaukee, and was able to smile and have a picture with him.
Speaker 1: All right, what about this one?
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of my mother and father years ago.  I believe this picture is from the '50s [1950s], and this was at Robert's Supper Club on Park Avenue, which is now Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard in Chicago, Illinois.  And, this is the two of them, two young people out and about on the town.
Speaker 1: Okay, very good.
Speaker 2: And, this is a picture of my sister, my only sister, my best friend.  This is her high school graduation picture--Deborah Ann Prince Carter, and she graduated from James Madison High School here in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this is the high school graduation picture of my brother who now lives in Prescott, Arizona, and this is Eugene Pierre Prince, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this your mother here?
Speaker 2: No, that's a mentor, that's one of my mentors.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And, this is a very special picture.  This picture was taken three years ago, and this is a picture of my mentor at her 100th birthday party.  Her name is Mattie Bell Woods.  She was an icon here in town.  She passed away shortly after, but she was the oldest working woman in the state of Wisconsin when she died.  She was the social editor for sixty-seven years for a community newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this was an article that was done in Today's Wisconsin Women Magazine, and it talked about, it was an article that actually took a look at my role as a leader in education here in the state.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  Next?
Speaker 2: This was an article from 2006, Milwaukee Magazine, and the article was, the topic of the article was, the Ten Most Powerful Women in the City of Milwaukee.  I was included in that ten, and that's what this magazine article is about.
Speaker 1: All right. [inaudible]
Speaker 2: I don't know if you want that or not [laughter].
Speaker 1: That was funny.
Speaker 2: [laughter].  It's funny, I don't care.  You know, it doesn't matter to me.  Okay.
Speaker 1: [Inaudible]
Speaker 2: And, this is, yes, this is a picture of myself with two of my wonderful sorority sisters--Delta Sigma Theta Sorority--and we are just having a good time.
