Story_ID: 107055
Speaker 1: My name is Sandra Johnson and I'm the interviewer for this afternoon.  Carey Lane is the videographer and we have no observers today.  Please state and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Nan, N-A-N, Arrington, A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N, Peete, P-E-E-T-E.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 19, 1938, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Is March the 5th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: 3001 Veazey Terrace Northwest, Apt 1208, Washington DC.
Speaker 1: Your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I am an Episcopal Priest.
Story_ID: 107056
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish type questions, just bear with me.
Speaker 2: All right.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried oysters.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Idlewild, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: To God give the glory.
Story_ID: 107057
Speaker 1: We're going to expl--explore a little of your family background.  Please tell me about your mom, what's her name?  Where was she born?  Where did she grow up and what do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Phoebe Nan Clanton and then she married Arrington, she was born in Chicago, Illinois, December 8, 1904.  She was the youngest of eleven children of Olive Bird Clanton and Solomon Trumbull Clanton.  Her mother was a housewife and her father was a minister and a Hebrew and Greek tutor at the University of Chicago Divinity School [Chicago, Illinois], but this was at the turn of the century.  He was also an educator and had founded the colored school districts in the South, she was not born in Chicago [Illinois] she was raised in Chicago, she was really born in Helena, Arkansas, but moved as an infant to Chicago where she remained, went to Wendell Phillips High School--went to--graduated from Hyde Park High School, graduated from the University of Chicago, and was elementary school teacher in the public school system for forty-three years.  She married my dad, Maurice Daniel Arrington, who was a civil engineer who was the first African American to graduate in the school of engineering from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in 1926, even though he had started in 1917.  He served in World War I and went back and completed his education.  Because of those times, needless to say, he had a very difficult time finding employment, but eventually he became a civil engineer with this highway department in Michigan and my mother taught school in Chicago so for the--twenty-eight years of their married life, they commuted.
Speaker 1: Between?
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight years of their married life from 1934 when they got married to 1962, when he retired.  He worked in Michigan and she worked in Chicago, and came home on weekends, he came home on weekends.
Story_ID: 107058
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?  Did she share any stories with you of her growing up and if so, what were they?
Speaker 2: She was the, not only the family historian, but the family gatherer, she gathered the family together.  My grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] lived with us until--her mother lived with us until I was thirteen, and as a result, every Sunday, the family gathered.  All of her living brothers and sisters and our grand--her grandchildren, my grandmothers grandchildren would all come to our house, so all the Christmas dinners, all the Thanksgiving dinners, Easter dinners were all at the home I had growing up.  Mother was very outgoing, very loquacious, told lots of stories about her growing up, always felt that her growing up was much better than my growing up because she had much more fun.
Speaker 1: Can you share any of those stories with us?  Are you saying, too that the--all of the--her older brothers and sisters, all ten of them, all migrated from Arkansas too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to Chicago [Illinois].  Well, three of them died at infancy and one died in childbirth, so I knew eight--I knew eight of them, so two died in childbirth, two died in infancy and one died in childbirth.  She [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] was the youngest and her father [Solomon T. Clanton] died when she was eight and her oldest brother was already a lawyer, this we're talking about like 1912, he did not marry until my mother graduated from college.  He was a practicing attorney and they all took care of my mother, you know, she was the baby of the family and she was four years younger than the next youngest, but for example, the family had a home in Michigan in Idlewild, a summer home in Idlewild, Michigan and that my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] was one of the founders of that resort back in the 1917's and it was--.
Speaker 1: Now you're jumping ahead.  You're saying your--her--your mother's mother was one of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --The founders of the community there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Idlewild.
Speaker 1: African American community.
Speaker 2: African American summer resort community in Idlewild, Michigan and these were the stories mother would tell us about growing up in Idlewild and the fun they had, they knew everybody, they would go swimming, they'd go horseback riding, the--they'd go to the clubhouse and she said they had much more freedom and much more fun than I had, I felt we had a great time and there was always a lot of entertainers and performers who would come up there in the summer because they couldn't go to other places to vacation, so a lot of the celebrities would come up, and so she had a glorious time.  And I think one reason she really liked it, because that's where she met my dad [Maurice Daniel Arrington].  He was doing survey work on the highway and they met and four months later they got married, so for her it was a very romantic place.
Story_ID: 107059
Speaker 1: That's wonderful, did she [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] tell you any stories about Chicago [Illinois] and what things were like there growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, because we lived there all the time.  She talked about going to Hyde Park, being one of the few black students there and who her friends were and how she knew Ida B. Wells, and they'd come over to the family and my--she talked about being an activist but that was the word she used, but she was really involved in making life better, so my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton], they did a lot of community involvement, they were always involved in the church, needless to say, because her father had been a minister and family was very important so--.
Speaker 1: Now, what years are we talking about when she was at Hyde Park High School?
Speaker 2: She went to Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] like in the 1915, 1916, I think she graduated in 1918.
Speaker 1: And when she spoke of being an activist or whatever that meant, an advocate, what causes do you suppose she was involved with?  What issues?
Speaker 2: She was involved with children, with--that's why she went into teaching, she cared deeply about the children in the neighborhood, she cared deeply about people who were at that time on relief and who didn't have enough food, so she would provide food for people in our neighborhood, and clothes, you know, she'd give a lot of the clothes that we had out grown, not that we'd worn out, but just that we had out grown, to people who didn't have them.  Very much concerned about the well-being of others and I think that also came from my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] 'cause I can remember my grandmother telling me that we've been given much, therefore much is expected from us.  And my aunts, they'd all gone to college and, you know, so they knew all the leading people who were educators and so, even artist like Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], my aunt [Aunt Johnetta (ph.) Grand (ph.)] who was a musician, you know, talked about when he came to Chicago and, I think now, I paid no attention to it back then, now I rem--wish I remembered even more the stories and the people they talked about and when, you know, their encounters with W.E.B. Du Bois and the people who started the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and they were very active (laughter).  You know, I think about this, now I see where I get some of my involvement in activity, 'cause it was part of our family.
Story_ID: 107060
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, share with us the occupations of your aunts and uncles?  You say that most of them were professionals what--.
Speaker 2: Well, there were eight.  Uncle Ben, was a lawyer, Uncle Saul (ph.) was a lawyer, Uncle Bob and Uncle Dwight were waiters on the railroad, they worked on the Pennsylvania Railroad and then, one later went and worked at the post office.  Aunt Edna was in Spelman Colleges [Atlanta, Georgia] first graduating class as a college and she was--worked for the city as an administrative position, I don't quite know, she was already retired by the time I really knew her.  Aunt John, Johnetta (ph.) Grand (ph.) was a music teacher, she played the piano and she gave private lessons to us students and my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington], Aunt Juanita Cox (ph.) was a podiatrist, she was a doctor and her husband was a doctor.
Speaker 1: Oh my.  In the generation before your mom, you said your grandma [Olive Bird Clanton] lived with you, her mother lived with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, in that generation, were they also professionals?  Was this the--or was this the first generation of professionals?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's father [Solomon T. Clanton] was a professional, he had both a bachelor's degree and a seminary degree.  And he was one of the founders of the National Baptist Convention, was a teacher, educator and traveled around the south, had done, my mother told me when we went to Tuskegee [Alabama] that he had also done some speech writing for Booker T. [Taliaferro] Washington.  He's also mentioned in the book, The Fractured Fellowship, which is about the founding of the National Baptist Convention [USA, Inc.] and he's also in the book, Men of Mark which was published in 1887, I'm so really proud of him, so he was educated.  My grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] was a housewife, well having 11 children, she stayed home but it was also interesting because we always had help.  You know, I never remember my grandmother even lifting a finger to even make a cup of coffee, someone was always there to do that for her, mainly us, but they always had help.  And I don't remember what the education was of the other members of my mother's family.  My father's father [Robert Arrington], I don't know what he did, but his mother [Florence Arrington] was a school teacher and her family gave land in Fort Smith, Arkansas, they had a lot of land for an episcopal church that is still in existence and this was in the late 1880s, it is Saint Augustine's Episcopal Church in Fort Smith, Arkansas, and the churches address was right next door to where my father [Maurice Daniel Arrington] lived.
Story_ID: 107061
Speaker 1: So, tell us a little bit more about that.  How did that come to be and--.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think it's because, as I hear this story, that my grandmother [Florence Arrington] and her family liked the way the episcopal church treated, at that time colored people or negro people, there was a certain amount of respect that they showed toward them, so they [Florence and Robert Arrington] decided to join that church and gave land to build their own church.
Speaker 1: Gave their own land?
Speaker 2: Their own land.
Speaker 1: To build a church?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, to build a church.
Speaker 1: And, what's the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Saint Augustine's Church and my father [Maurice Daniel Arrington] was confirmed in 1912, in the Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: Is it still standing?
Speaker 2: It's still standing.
Speaker 1: Do you go there?
Speaker 2: I've not been there in, I guess almost fifty years.
Speaker 1: Oh.  And before Arkansas, where did your family live before that, or do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's father [Solomon T. Clanton] was born in Louisiana, so--.
Speaker 1: About when?
Speaker 2: In 1857.  My grandfather was born in 1857 and I don't know where my father's parents were before they were in Fort Smith, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: So they probably migrated from Louisiana up to Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Or, as I talk, I remember, maybe they came through the Trail of Tears and some came from Ohio.
Speaker 1: Do you know any stories from that era?
Speaker 2: Not many because my--his mother [Florence Arrington] died when I was about eight, but I remember him [Maurice Daniel Arrington] telling me about the Trail of Tears, and he used to tell us lots of stories about his growing up in Arkansas, what it was like and--.
Speaker 1: Oh, share some of those.
Speaker 2: How long he had to walk to go to school and, you know, what he did to work and his mother, even though she was a school teacher she always wore gloves, and she was very proper and, so he was very proper, my father was very proper, he never raised his voice, but we would get lectures about what it was like when he was in school, what a hard time he had a the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], they didn't want him to stay in the school of engineering, they did everything they could, the professors, to discourage him and they--.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Oh, they'd make him do extra work, or they would say his work wasn't good enough and he needed to go take extra courses in English or he would go to night school and take classes and they'd say, well, why don't you go into pre-med like the other students or to pre-law and not to the school of engineering, but he persevered and he talked to us a lot about the need for perseverance and the need to be better than everybody else, 'cause he felt the only way he could survive and thrive and graduate was to be better and out do the other students.  But he talked working for like a quarter a day and how he worked at the auto plant at the Ford Motor Company, on the assembly line 'cause those were the only jobs he could get and he also talked about what it was like being in the war, he was in France in World War I, and coming back home, with the lack of opportunities after having gone over there being in the war.
Story_ID: 107062
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories of any of your family members who might have even been in the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton], my mother's mother used to tell the story about her father knowing Abraham Lincoln, because they were down in Southern Illinois and how the soldiers would come through Decatur, Illinois and those who went off to war.
Speaker 1: So, they lived for a while in Decatur?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, my maternal grandmother, that's where she grew up until she got married.
Speaker 1: And Decatur was very close to Springfield [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And she had conversations that she told you about with President Lincoln [Abraham Lincoln]?
Speaker 2: She didn't, her father.
Speaker 1: Her father, because she would have maybe been too young.
Speaker 2: Too little.
Speaker 1: Isn't that interesting.  So, anymore stories from either of those two family members?
Speaker 2: I can't think of any right now.  But, this is bringing back incredible memories and stories.  When my aunt [Aunt Edna] graduated from Spelman [College] we had her diploma and the picture of her graduating class, there were seven young women in that class.  It was in maybe, 1907 or 1909.
Speaker 1: And this was the first class from Spelman?
Speaker 2: 'Cause it started out as like, after high school, maybe a junior college and then it became a four year college.
Speaker 1: And she studied to be a teacher, you said?
Speaker 2: Ye--no, she didn't--she wasn't a teacher, she--I don't know what her degree was in, but she worked for the government.  She had one of those few government jobs that they gave, you know, African Americans--
Speaker 1: And she--
Speaker 2: --in Illinois.
Speaker 1: --And she came back to work where?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 107063
Speaker 1: And, once again your mom [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] and dad [Maurice Daniel Arrington] met in I--or in or around Idlewild [Michigan], and he was a student at Michigan State or he was at--
Speaker 2: He had University of Michigan--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --Michigan, and now over in Ann Arbor.
Speaker 2: Yes, but he was--had already graduated and he was working as an engineer with the state highway department at that time.
Speaker 1: So probably he was around in different places in the state wherever--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --His job took him.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And he just happened to be--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: There.
Speaker 1: --Wasn't that a wonderful coincidence.
Speaker 2: Wasn't that wonderful.
Speaker 1: And once again, tell us your father's name and where he was born.
Speaker 2: His name is Maurice Daniel Arrington and he was born in Fort Smith, Arkansas, in 1896.
Speaker 1: And, what kind of a person--you've talked a little about him, he was a gentleman and instilled a lot of things in you and your sisters--your sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown].  Were there any other stories that he told you about his growing up, as a young person?  This is the turn of the century, so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is the turn of century, oh yes, and he--it was amazing because he was, before radio, he was before the car and all of those things and he talked about what it was like and--but he wasn't bitter, I mean, but those just the way that things were and you tried to make yourself better because that was the name of the game and, I never heard him say a bad word, he always told me that it showed that one had a lack of a vocabulary if you had to resort to that kind of language and so he would make us go through the dictionary and learn words every time we said bad words in order to express ourselves.
Story_ID: 107064
Speaker 1: Were these ancestors, the ones that you have talked about thus far, was there any slavery in your background or were they all at one time slaves or were they free?  Because we know that everyone that came to this--
Speaker 2: From my mother's side of the family, they all seemed to be free, I don't remember from my father's side.  His parents he did not talk about them as ever being slaves.
Speaker 1: Are there any songs?--
Speaker 2: And, I have pictures of them that were taken in the 1880s, and I don't get--they don't look like they were ever slaves (laughter).
Story_ID: 107065
Speaker 1: Are there any songs in your family that stand out?  I would imagine there would be with a background such as you've described, especially, with your involvement with the early church.
Speaker 2: No, not really, you know, we knew all the regular spirituals, but--
Speaker 1: Did you sing a lot when you got together?
Speaker 2: We talked a lot.  Our family was a family of talkers, we were very verbal.  We had a piano, but we didn't play the piano much, my aunt [Aunt Johnetta (ph.) Grand (ph.)] would come over and she would play the piano and we would sing, you know, the songs that were like on the hit parade or on the radio or something like that but, we engaged each other in political debates.  The family was also very political and very involved in Chicago [Illinois] politics.  My oldest uncle[Uncle Ben], the one who didn't get married until my mother had graduated college, was an Abraham Lincoln republican and stayed that way his entire life, where everybody was a democrat and was very active and some worked politically, I mean, ma--worked as a political person and for Congressman Doss and--and the democratic party so, I remember more conversations about politics (laughter) than about religion or anything else, politics and race were important in our lives and education.
Speaker 1: And what do you think that they were trying to accomplish through that avenue, through the political avenue?
Speaker 2: Hey, whatever you did to make the race better.  It wasn't for themselves, but it was always for the others because, you know, they felt that responsibility that life had to be better for other people and not just for ourselves.
Speaker 1: So, how did these conversations and this involvement with this exciting array of people rub off on you?  How--how do you translate that for yourself?
Speaker 2: When I was seventeen, when I graduated, the year after I graduated from high school, I had an opportunity to go to this program in New York called The Encampment for Citizenship and I knew nothing about it, but mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] thought it would be a wonderful experience for me to go and be a part of it.  I don't know how she knew about it, so I went and spent six weeks where this school up in Fieldston School [New York City, New York] which was a private school, turned it over to the New York Ethical Society and it probably was a very subversive group.  They were about 125 young people between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five, inter-racial, male and female, Native Americans, southern whites, urban African Americans, lived together for six weeks and learned about this country in a way that, I hadn't thought of it before, but it was very much a part of my sensibilities.  Interesting thing about that, one of the women who was on the staff, was someone who had grown up with my father in Fort Smith, Arkansas and knew my family.  Mamie (ph.) Williams, I didn't know her and then knew her later because she was very active in the sorority, but I had made a connection from my family so, you know, there'd always been that strain of involvement in activism, we did stuff with one of the founders of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union who was still living, Alice K. Pollitzer at that time, June Shagaloff [Alexander] was on the staff and she was with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, and this is in 1956, we spent a day with Eleanor Roosevelt at Val Kill, their summer home in New York and, you know, I wish I still had the picture that I took of her sitting on the bow of a boat and she was just engaging us in conversation and, you know reminding us of our responsibilities.  We did issues about human rights and civil rights and talked--went to Wall Street [New York City, New York], went to the world--the Stock Exchange and, you know, we did all of that and also, at seventeen I went to my first Broadway Play, 'cause every Wednesday afternoon we were off and I went to the theater every Wednesday night, but also because you're seventeen and eighteen, I went to Birdland and I liked jazz and Basin Street, all of these famous night clubs and heard all these great entertainers.  So, I say that because I think that was just part of the essence of who I was, had grown up to take advantage of that and of everything it had to offer to expand my world view.
Story_ID: 106781
Speaker 1: We promised that when we picked back up, we'd talk about your earliest memories of growing up, and I'd like to, to talk first about your grandma who lived with you.  I know she was very special in your life, wasn't she?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, absolutely, and she [Olive Bird Clanton] was--she used to drink Virginia Dare Wine, she always had a coffee, she drank coffee all the time but she would make taffy and we would pull taffy together and, you know, she would talk about growing up and eating candy and she'd make fondant candy and that was about all she did and she had a rocking chair.  At Christmas, we had a silver platter and she would give us at Christmas, either silver dollars or half dollars as Christmas presents to all of her grandchildren and her children.  My mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] would always say, whatever if granny said, "I think", then whoever she said it, that would happen, you know, but she was very--her hair when her husband [Solomon T. Clanton] died, the one story I did hear, they said the next day her hair turned stark white.  So when I knew her, she had long white hair and it turned white, she was like forty-five year old and very slender, very attractive woman, regal and but very fragile looking, not fragile at all.  Played solitaire, she played cards every day and--but she got very sick and my mother would carry her from the bed to the bathroom, from the bed, she'd bathe her, pick her up, take her in and out of the tub and feed her and I was in the room, I was thirteen when she died and I was in the room, the doctor had come, she'd had pneumonia and my aunt was there and my aunt would say, "Mama don't go", and granny would open her eyes and say, (unclear), and so finally they said, Juanita she--you need to let her go and she and I were in the room and then Aunt Nita [Aunt Juanita] went downstairs and I was there and I think it is a reason now that I'm not afraid of death, because it was the most peaceful moment.  I was probably with her for a couple of minutes, I don't know, just the two of us and we were upstairs and it was just peace, you know, I wasn't fearful and she was peaceful, she looked beautiful and she was almost ninety-one years old.
Speaker 1: Isn't that a wonderful st-memory?
Speaker 2: And that was 1953.
Story_ID: 106782
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful memory.  Can you share with us please some of your other memories of family life and holidays and special events, your daily life as a youngster growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember going to nursery school with people who are still friends, like Ellen Kersey [ph.] and Barbara Crest Lawrence, we all went to nursery school together.  I can remember going to the Baptist church across the street because it was easy for us to go to it being in a Christmas or, I don't know, some kind of play where I was a bluebird and my cousin was a sweet pea and my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] was something else, and we had these little costumes and, I remember my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] was my first grade teacher and I remember, I would come back from recess and late at lunch time and I'd come home and I'd get punished and none of the other kids, who were late, got punished, you know, I wasn't smart enough to realize, Mrs. Arrington, is Mrs. Arrington, from nine to three and then after that she's mother, and so, I learned quickly.  The good news, by her being my first grade teacher, I was left handed and she did not change me, 'cause at that time they were changing people and she left that school the next year and so my sister had a different first grade teacher, but it was just me and my sister.
Speaker 1: You mean, teachers were encouraging children who were left handed to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: to become right handed.
Speaker 1: --Did that work?  Just curious.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of them did.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: They haven't done that in a long time but, but it was fun.  I remember, I have a cousin--a first cousin, my--one of my mother's sisters had a daughter our age and she would always say she wanted to go play with the children, as if mother had a passel and it was just the two of us, so the three of us really spent a lot of time together.  And, I remember on Saturdays, when my dad [Maurice Daniel Arrington] would come home he was the one who would take us to piano lessons and he would take us to ballet lessons and he would take us to the park and do those things and give my mother a break so, you know, it was sort of fun time with dad and he would take us to the circus and--my mother was part of a mothers club and, it was--she was a early networker and all the women were early networkers and it was a small network of women and husbands and wives and families really who wanted to provide their children with a variety of opportunities.  So, we formed a club called the Les Petit Cheris (word?) and I still have in my files our bylaws that we made.  We were like twelve and thirteen years old, we had bylaws, we had officers and we--every month we met monthly, but our parents provided us with tennis lessons, they took us to symphonies, they took us to concerts, they took us to plays, we had dances, they really controlled our environment, as I think about now, but they provided a social network, so we could develop good interpersonal skills with just women, with boys, in a world to learn to go out to eat in a restaurant, which was very rare.  I have a picture, my aunt, from my sixteenth birthday party, I have the picture of us sitting around, it was a dinner, it was a luncheon and we all came dressed up to this luncheon when we were sixteen years old and learned manners and learned how to talk and how to engage one another, so I have wonderful memories of growing up.  I wondered, because my mother didn't get married 'til she was thirty and my dad was almost forty, that they had time to devout to us and so their world was to make it better for us and they devoted themselves to us fully.  We took vacations together we drove to Mexico one summer, the summer of 1953, the summer after my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] died we drove to Mexico, wonderful experience, got in drove through Texas, where could you stay?  We stayed--the Underground Railroad was alive and well--with a family who rented rooms, I thought they knew my parents in Springfield Missouri, or Joplin Missouri, who knew?  But they were a black family, and we stayed with them overnight and the next day we end up in Waco Texas, and saw the Ebony Motel, we knew we could stay there.  We ate lunch at a place in Texarkana, you know, it was a soul food restaurant and got to Mexico and there was no segregation, it was incredible, we ended up with a police escort to our hotel, because we didn't speak Spanish and they didn't speak English and stayed at a hotel were Diego Rivera had drawn the mural on the hotel cause he was one of the leading artist at the time and they only opened up on Sunday because they thought it was sacrilegious and so we ate at the hotel that Sunday so we could see this mural.  Coming back to--from Mexico, in Texas we had to sleep in our car because it was no place for us to stay and then the next day we drove into Fort Smith, Arkansas, which was the last time I was in my dad's hometown, drove up to the house at 2008 North Ninth and when we rang the doorbell this woman came out and just started crying and hugging my dad and her husband, who was my dad's first cousin, had been buried the day before and we did not know.  And it was just wonderful that we showed up, stayed there about a few days, and she had a little girl who was eight, and they came back with us to Idlewild [Michigan], and spent some time with us and we stayed connected.  Well, Florence has now died, but her daughter, Sydney now lives in Arizona, but--so growing up was a wonderful time even in difficult circumstances, we knew where we lived.  My love of baseball occurred when I was about eleven years old, I could walk to white sox park, I had a uncle who would take me to baseball games and he'd go sit in the bleachers and let me sit in the grandstand and then come walk me back home and, or put me on the bus, if it was a night game, as I got to be a little older, but--
Story_ID: 106783
Speaker 1: Please give me your siblings' names in birth order and including yourself.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, my sister is Edna, she was born November 27, 1939, her name is Edna Marissa Arrington Brown now.
Speaker 1: So, only about a year separates the two of you?
Speaker 2: Fifteen months.
Speaker 1: Two of you.
Speaker 2: I like to tell people after I was born, mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] moved and stayed with my dad [Maurice Daniel Arrington] in Detroit [Michigan] 'cause she couldn't work and three months later she got pregnant, then she moved back home.  (laugher)
Speaker 1: What street did you live on?  Can you describe your block and your neighbors and your community?
Speaker 2: I grew up at 3250 South Park, which is now Martin Luther King and that house just got torn down in about 1992, I lived there the next--there was a service station on the corner, there was our house, next to us was a tailor shop and next to them was another tailor shop.  There was a factory in the middle of the block, behind us were the--was a large family and behind our house was a family house, my grandmother [Olive Bird Clanton] owned the house, well gave it to my mother, the house we lived in, but behind it she owned a 3 flat building, and that house, that apartment building was never to be sold because it was always to be a place for her--the children, the family to live.  So,--
Speaker 1: This was in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, so it was on 3249 Calumet.  The--one sister lived on the first floor, another sister lived on the second floor and the two brothers, when they weren't married lived on the top floor, and they--
Speaker 1: These are your mother's siblings--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --My mother's siblings.  And so--
Speaker 1: So, the whole family was right, kind of right there?
Speaker 2: --Was right there, and then another sibling lived across the street on 32nd street, although, she [Aunt Juanita (ph.) Grand (ph.)] and her husband were doctors.  It was a wonderful neighborhood, I remember there was a little girl named Helen Woods, and she was very dark skinned, but she had the most beautiful grey eyes, who lived behind us and we played with them and some of the people there came and worked for us.  There was a little corner grocery store that we went to across the street, the Douglas School, where my mother ended up teaching the last, I guess about thirty years, was on Calumet, behind us.  I lived--we lived there until 1953, when we moved into Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois] and they built Lake Meadows, which was an apartment of the first urban redevelopment that I was aware of and they built these high rise apartments and our family were the first families to move in, the first day you could move in.  We rented one of the apartments, still kept the house, rented that house and then after I was married, and had children, we moved back into the apar--our house for about four years, and then later on, my parents finally gave up this apartment and moved back into the house, and my--they were still living there when my dad died and then my mother lived there for about another eight or nine years and then finally, they sold it, some--the funeral home moved into the neighborhood and they had bought the apartment building after the last sibling had died and then, they then bought mother's house.
Speaker 1: So the house is no longer there?
Speaker 2: It's no longer there.  It's a parking lot.
Story_ID: 106784
Speaker 1: Ok. Tell me the sights and sounds and smells that remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Coffee and bacon, Thanksgiving dinner, family, Thanksgiving dinner around families, because we always had those big meals at my mother's [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] house, and I can remember the first year, this was after I was married, had my own children, and my mother called and said we are not having Thanksgiving Dinner, we're going out to a restaurant cause no one wants to cook.  I said, "How can you do that?"  And she said, easy.  I said, "Well what am I gonna do?"  And she said, "Well, you can cook or you can go to your in-laws".  That was a shock, but part of that is so much of what we do is that, the internal the gut level, the, you know the rhythm of life that you sort of take for granted, you don't think about it, and then it shocks you and, you know, I say we don't like change, unless we're the one that insta--initiates it.
Speaker 1: So what happened, in that instance?
Speaker 2: I cooked, either I cooked or went over to my in-laws, my parents went out to a restaurant (laughter) and then a couple of years later, I moved to Los Angeles [California], and then we started our own traditional Thanksgiving and I cooked and would invite friends that I knew who didn't family over to dinner and created new family.
Story_ID: 106785
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of growing up?  We'd like to hear about your years and later in elementary school and high school.
Speaker 2: In sixth grade, we left public school, my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] and I went to University of Chicago Laboratory School [Chicago, Illinois] and that was a very new experience because it was the first time I was in a predominately white environment.  And I can remember Ms. Flickenger [ph.] our social studies teacher and she asked people in class did we know what Edelweiss was, and to this day, I am so glad I did not say it was a beer, but I have never forgotten it is the national flower of Switzerland.  (laughter) And I kept my mouth shut, but I learned so much there, another way of expanding my world.  I remember reading the communist manifesto in 10th grade and we were called communist and I remember Leon Dupree [ph.] who ran for the council and Oppenheimer and all the people involved with the atomic bomb, were all a part of that university, community and environment, and all their kids were in my class, you know, so again, here I was exposed to a whole new world that my parents saw--thought was very important and in a sense, family was important because to put two children in private school and two civil servants, my uncle [Uncle Ben] who was the oldest, helped pay our tuition, you know, because he thought it was important that we go there.  And so, my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] and my cousin and I, we all went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School] and--
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that particularly influenced you or?
Speaker 2: I remember Mr. Phelps, he was the math teacher and he was my homeroom teacher who I really liked.  Miss John was the math teacher and she gave me a tough time and I ended up being a math major in college when I started, but, I mean, I wanted to prove to her that I could do that work.
Speaker 1: Did she [Miss John] ever get to know?
Speaker 2: No, because when I went back she was sick and didn't come to our reunion.  I did not really like the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School], and when I went back for my 25th reunion, I guess, and I was telling my parents that I really didn't like it and she said, "Well, why didn't you say something?"  I said, "would it have made any difference?"  You know, I did--I couldn't have gone to Hyde Park [School in Chicago, Illinois], you know, (laughter) I didn't have a choice, so I went there, I'm glad I did, but I didn't have a good time there.
Speaker 1: You couldn't go to Hyde Park [School] because?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't an option.  It never occurred to me to even ask to go someplace else, this is where you went and this is what was expected, I mean, this was part of the family expectations that they had of you, that you would go there and so I went.  So when my daughter [Valerie Nan Morales] was in private school and she wanted to leave, I let her, I said, cause high school should be fun and she spent her last two years in a public high school, took the AP [advanced placement] classes, took an independent study on African American women, historical African American women, she had a wonderful experience her last two years of high school, but she had a great foundation from, you know, her prior six years in an all girls private school in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Were you saying--are you saying, that the experience wasn't fun at the time, but now you have grown to appreciate it, or you don't think it was even worth it?
Speaker 2: Well, I--I've go--it was worth it, but I think I could have gotten just as much someplace else.  You know, I'm glad for the experience, I'm glad for all of the experiences, but I don't think I got out as much of it as my sister, we really went 'cause my sister was the bright one in the family.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?  What type of child were you?  Were you well mannered, rambunctious, mischievous?
Speaker 2: I was well mannered, I was polite, I was also, when I got to high school and college, I very much was a social being, I was very much the partier.  I can remember in my yearbook it said town crier, and I still am, because I still wanna know everything that's going on and I know (laughter), you know, I was more social than studious.
Story_ID: 106786
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm living my dream.  I have had, my life has been incredible.  I--not that I dreamed about being an episcopal priest, but I dreamed about having a career, I never saw myself as being married with children so I've had the best of both worlds because I was married, I have children, I have grandchildren and I have a wonderful career, so I've had the best of life.
Speaker 1: And I imagine that your family was very active in church.  Can you describe your experiences there?
Speaker 2: Well, but you know, its ver--interesting, I was the one that said, I'm ready to go to my church.  The first piece of mail I ever remember seeing, that was addressed to me, I was eight or nine years old and it was from the rector of parish, Saint Thomas Episcopal Church [Chicago, Illinois], saying it--Sunday school was starting and it was time for me to go to Sunday school and I told my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington], I said, I want to go to my church, and she said well, Saint Thomas [Saint Thomas Episcopal Church] is, you know, further away, but it wasn't that far, and I said, but I want to go and I said I'm gonna call up my godfather, who was my uncle and he came and took me and my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] and my cousin, and all of my family are active in the church.  My parents got active, my aunts, my uncles, my cousins and all of my extended family, so I think I've been doing evangelism for a long time.  You start with your family and then you spread out, so--,
Speaker 1: And what age were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was eight or nine.
Speaker 1: My, my--
Speaker 2: That was, I think it was 1947.
Speaker 1: --Who were your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: My friends in junior high school are some of my same friends.  Cynthia Ware-Reed[ph.], we've been friends, Julia Mosby-Carr [ph.] we're still friends, Barbara Lawrence--Barbara Crest-Lawrence [ph.], Sandra Ford-Johnson [ph.], Yvonne Campbell [ph.], Gail Moxley,--
Speaker 1: These were friends from school or from your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, from the Mother's Club.  The--Cynthia, I met in seventh grade, but she was also a part of the Mother's Club, and there are friends from church, from either Saint Thomas [Saint Thomas Episcopal Church] or Saint Edmunds [Saint Edmund's Episcopal Church].
Speaker 1: And, tell us more about your extra-curricular activities, high school years, junior high, high school years.
Speaker 2: I was not very athletic so the only sport I ever played was field hockey.  I don't remember doing much extra-curricular activities at school, I did more with the Mother's Club and with the social friends that I had outside of school.  The other thing about that time of, not integration, the white kids at the lab school, at least in my class, didn't associate socially with the black kids, at least I didn't associate socially with the white kids in my class so, you know, they'd have parties and bar mitzvahs and stuff and they'd come and talk about them and I'd never been invited.  Our seventh grade was the demarcation, when you didn't spend the night with the friends and you didn't socialize.  And we--
Speaker 1: Was that painful?
Speaker 2: --Got to invite, for my prom, I remember I got to invite a date, and our dances, we got to invite dates, because there were no black boys in the class, and so we could bring them from the outside.  And I can remember Rena Versuple [ph.] was in our class, she said, "I was so jealous because we were stuck with these kids and you all got to bring whoever you wanted" (laughter), I never thought of it like that, but it wasn't so much painful, but it was one of the realities, you know, I didn't like those guys anyway so, (laughter) you know, they weren't the greatest.  Hav--one of them is Leon Kass, who is now President Bush's [President George W. Bush] bioethics chair of his Bioethics commis-commission, when they were talking about, you know, issues around cloning and stem cell research.  Leon was in my class and we were very good friends, and Richard Heller who's head of the Department of Radiology at the University of Tennessee Medical School [Memphis, Tennessee].  We were very good friends at the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School], 'cause we were baseball fans and we hung out and we joked around together and so I'm looking forward to seeing them again so--
Story_ID: 106787
Speaker 1: How'd you get to be such an avid baseball fan?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I stayed a sports fan because it was a way to meet guys.  I shouldn't have probably said that but--(laughter)--but it was a way for me, I think now, it's a way for me--I enjoy sports, I'm not very athletic and it was a way for me to be with people without having demands made on you.
Speaker 1: Were you at that time doing any thinking about what you wanted to be in the future?  What--what career you wanted to pursue, specifically?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] had a friend who was an accountant so I wanted to be a CPA [certified public accountant], my dad [Maurice Daniel Arrington] would bring home--he did was a bridge design, he ended up designing bridges and designed them and was on the design team that designed the Mackinac Bridge in Michigan, that takes you fr--to the upper peninsula.  So, then I wanted to be an architect, I wanted to be a statistician, I never wanted to be a teacher, I never wanted to do--be the traditional women's jobs and careers so, I always wanted to be something different, never thinking about the Episcopal Priesthood because that wasn't a reality and at least I was not much of a visionary to think about that but, I wanted to work with numbers, I mean, I thought I was good at math and I liked it so.
Speaker 1: But you were going to go to college as I'm hearing you say,--
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: --Your parents had laid that out for you and that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no--I never worked, I never had a job, high school or college.  I didn't start working 'til after I got married, so the given[ph.] was from high school you would go to college and the question just was, where?  And that shows you the mediocre student, because even though my father was an alum of University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], I did not get in.
Speaker 1: And where did you wind up going to college?
Speaker 2: Well, I started at Chicago Teachers College and went there and went to Roosevelt University in Chicago for a while and then I got married and had children and then I worked and then we moved to Los Angeles [California] and I--
Speaker 1: You mean you got married before you graduated?
Speaker 2: I got married before I graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Now what'd your family say about that?
Speaker 2: They were not happy, they were not--they didn't think this man could support me and they weren't gonna support me, though they were always very generous, but, you know, once you have grandchildren, all that changes.  But I ended up taking exam working for the state and I was the last person who got hired for this position that didn't have a college degree because they put a college degree requirement on it.  And so, I worked as a statistician and a research analyst for the state of Illinois for seven, eight years and did very well and--until we moved to Los Angeles [California].
Story_ID: 107105
Speaker 1: We were rich--recapitulating on the--your life after you had attended college for a couple of years, you were saying--
Speaker 2: Well, I did go for four years without a degree, got married and had two children [Richard Lyce Peete and Valerie Nan Morales] and ended up working for the State of Illinois in a professional position, that right after I was hired, they required a degree to have that job, stayed there, then after my husband finished his degree in 1970, he had an opportunity to go to Los Angeles [California], and so, the family, we moved the children, they were like eight or nine at that time.
Speaker 1: What was his field?
Speaker 2: His degree was in administration, but he was a writer, he was working for an advertising agency to head up the copy department, and he was in charge of all the advertising for Union Oil at that time in Los Angeles [California].  And, so we went out there and for a year I was a housewife and stayed home and then went--worked for an investment company at the time and then went to work for the Security Pacific Bank which I think now is probably Bank of America, but at that time it was the second largest bank in California, in the trust department, as an analyst and while I was there I realized that I needed--I had this unfinished business, so I went back--
Speaker 1: Which was your school degree.
Speaker 2: My degree, my degree.  So I went back to Occidental--went to Occidental College [Los Angeles, California], which is a liberal arts college in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and in a year and a half, a year and two quarters, I went and got a degree in economics and decided that wasn't enough because I wanted to work for an accounting firm as a consultant, as a management consultant, I went and got a Masters in Management from the University of Redlands [Redlands, California] and went to work, got a job working with Coopers and Lybrand, which it was at that time, one of the big (unclear) accounting firms as a management consultant.  And I was the only African American woman in the professional department as a consultant, they had a couple of--no partners at all and I was not a partner, but one African American male who was a partner in the accounting side and I was in the consulting side.  So, my parents ended up being very proud, they came to my graduation from Occidental College [California] and there were two other women who are returning students and the three of us had good time together.  The--one was economics major as well and the other got her degree in biology and her father had been a professor at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] so, you know, (laughter) all of our parents were really kind of proud of us, that we had accomplished this.
Story_ID: 107106
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any way, I don't say in any way, but at this time what year are we talking about now?
Speaker 2: Well, that was in '74 [1974], when I got my degree.
Speaker 1: But back in the '60s [1960s], let's say, were you involved in any way with the civil rights movement?
Speaker 2: Not as much as I wanted to be, but in the '50s [1950s], when I was in college, the first time in the late '50s [1950s], I was very active in the sorority, and I can remember picketing theaters and doing stuff with Pan African causes.
Speaker 1: Tell us what that was like, and what, what exactly you were involved with.
Speaker 2: It's not real clear now, but I remember going to meetings in schools and this was after the Board of Education decision that we really needed to make some changes in the system and in society and, I would go to these meetings and sit and listen and they were, at that time, there were a lot of men who were doing all the talking and not many of the women, even though I did like what they had to say.  And I did--I wanted to go to the march on Washington, but my family wouldn't let me, they said you, have these small children and, you know, you're working and it's gonna--they were afraid, it was gonna be dangerous and--but I was so thrilled that when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois], I went and marched with him, I would take my lunch hour off and he was downtown.  I was there during the Democratic Convention in 1968, when they had all the protest and I would go off and participate in the protest and then, when the Chicago Seven were on trial, I would go down and stand out front of the courthouse, working for the state mind you, going down and protest the actions of the system.  I've never looked at the files, but I'm sure, I've been on tape 'cause I know they taped everybody.
Story_ID: 107107
Speaker 1: What was your memory of the biggest accom--biggest accomplishment of that time?
Speaker 2: Beside the March on Washington [D.C.], you know, Chicago [Illinois] was such a segregated place, to this day, I still don't like people talking, Chicago's wonderful.  I don't think it's so wonderful, (laughter) I have really bad feelings about it.
Speaker 1: In the sense of?
Speaker 2: The racism, because you were so circumscribed to where we could go and what we could do and when you traversed those boundaries, like when I would go to White Sox Park, you couldn't cross Shields Avenue, you know, that was in [Mayor Richard J.] Daley's Territory, I forgot what that neighborhood is called, Bridgeport [Illinois]--but anyway, that you couldn't go places.  I remember going to the doctor on the northwest side, going up Milwaukee Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], and people calling us names and, you know, so I just don't have good feelings, I love Chicago, I love the city, it has my absolutely favorite store in the world, the downtown Marshall Fields, but I'm trying to think, I remember the awareness, one, it was about the March on Washington, was to see so many African American people coming together for a cause, you know, and it didn't--the predictions of violence and--did not materialize, you know, that was profound and I think that's why it is still such a seminal moment in our history because we saw we had power, you know, I wish we could globalize it in that same way now.
Speaker 1: Do you feel that there is still a need for that kind of advocacy?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  But, it is so difficult now a days with the advent of so much cable, so much instant communication.  People don't trust leaders.  We wanna build people up and the first thing we do is try to find the chink[ph.] in their armor to find out what's wrong and so, people go through your background to find out your weakest link so, they don't want the message.  So in order to discredit the message, they try to discredit the messenger, and so therefore, people don't want to--good people don't want to run for office, they don't want to be public figures, they want to retreat and we can't afford it, I mean, we are losing a whole generation of young African American men and women because people don't want to speak up.  And people who do speak up, there is no voice, there's no venue for them, they aren't heard.  People will say, well why aren't churches speaking up, you can go--but churches are speaking up and people are speaking up, but if it doesn't get outside of that small venue it gets lost, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: What can we do to overcome that?
Speaker 2: Well, being a person of faith, one of the things I think is important is don't discount those small venues, you know, I said, Jesus, you know, healed a person here, treated someone there, you know, he had a lot of crowds occasionally, but they weren't with him at the end and they didn't stick with him so, being faithful and really doing what you can in your community and being a voice for transformation in your community, whatever that community is service small, if it's a church, if it's around schools, it's around healthcare.  There was an article in the paper about a woman at a school in DuPont Circle [Washington, D.C.], how she has turned that school around single handedly, you know, she's gone out to the community to the neighborhood, she's gotten people who have some influence to put their kids in the public school and not put them in a private school, and it's been a predominately Latino school and it's being transformed and the Anglo and African American parents were bringing their kids and are now offering English classes to the parents, they're working with the kids, you know, they're gonna make this school really something special, but because of this principal in this one school and why aren't all the principals doing that in all the schools--
Speaker 1: That's a very powerful--
Speaker 2: --Not just in D.C. [Washington] but around the country.
Speaker 1: That's a very powerful message that you just conveyed.
Story_ID: 107108
Speaker 1: I'd like to back up to the point in which you were doing wonderful things with your family in--in California.  And, we see that you've made quite a transition from that time to now, so can you carry us through that next phase, what happened?
Speaker 2: When I, when we moved to California, 1970, I had to find a church and I had never had to look for a church in Chicago, because the church St. Thomas [Saint Thomas's Episcopal Church], was the church that I was baptized in and that was the church I went.  It didn't matter where I lived, I always went back to my neighborhood--I went back to the church I grew up in.  So I moved to Los Angeles [California], and I had to go find a church.  Well, I went to my neighborhood parish, but it was small and it wasn't meeting my spiritual needs and then I remembered reading about Nat King Cole going to Saint James Wilshire [Saint James' Episcopal Church] [Los Angeles, California] and how they wouldn't let him sing in the choir, so I said, well let me go to Saint James Wilshire.  So, I went down there and the people were the frozen chosen and that was uncomfortable and then I read an article about this parish that had closed its front doors as a protest to the war in Vietnam, and what the rector had preached in his sermon and the things, they also then did an article about this congregation that had started a well-child center and did feeding ministry and then had a draft counseling center.  So, that next Sunday, I packed up my kids [Robert Lynce Peete and Valerie Nan Morales] and we went there to church and I stayed there and it was a wonderful community because not only did it care about itself, but it cared about the neighborhood.  And I--
Speaker 1: Was this a long journey from your residence?
Speaker 2: No, but it wa--I passed a couple of other episcopal churches to get there, it was maybe 15 or 20 minute ride and I found a congregation of people of faith who cared not just about themselves, which they did, but cared about the community.  One of the parishioners did a needs assessment of the community and found that there were a lot of people who needed childcare, their kids needed school exams and so we started this clinic, they started it, it was already going when I got there for the people in the community and they were free school exams.  It got to be such a thing that, while I was there and I was director over it for a while, the state paid us to do school exams.  And by the time I was there, the population was 90 percent Hispanic and it was a safe place 'cause no one asked about green cards or no green cards, we accepted them, we had doctors everything was volunteer including myself.
Speaker 1: It was a school health exam?
Speaker 2: Yes, school health exams, it was a well-child clinic.  If people needed, if kids needed x-rays or needed other work, the doctors would refer them to a hospital, a neighboring hospital that would give them the treatment.  Everybody was a volunteer.
Speaker 1: So you were a, still a lay person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still a lay person, I was in school working at Coopers and Lybrand and one Sunday, in church in July of, I think, 1978, I was in church saying Nan, you need to go to seminary, no that wasn't it, it was Nan, you should be up there preaching.  And I was startled, I said no, (laughter), me?  Preach?  I don't think so.  You know, I'm not holy and then this voice said, well why not?  And I said, well but, you know, I'm doing--I went back to school to get my masters so I can do this job that I'm doing, but it wasn't fulfilling.  The job really wasn't fulfilling and so I shared it with the rector, I shared it with my husband, even though we weren't together and he said this is the first time that you have, with your eyes, told me what you really want to do and why don't you start seminary right now?  I guess it was in maybe '79 [1979], July of '79 [1979], and I started seminary in July of 1980, September of 1980.  I went and talked to the--my rector, the priest in the parish and after our conversation he said well, I'm gonna call the bishop and I went and met with the bishop and here I am.  I mean, I was very active before that as a lay person and very supportive of the ordination of women working toward it because for all those people who wanted to do that, with me, I was an active lay person, I was moving up the corporate ladder, you know, I had my Masters in business and I was gonna do these wonderful things.
Speaker 1: Well, at the point where you decided to go to seminary, was it possible at that point to become a priest?
Speaker 2: Yes.  By that time women could be priest.
Speaker 1: In the Episcopal Church?
Speaker 2: In the Episcopal Church and--
Speaker 1: They were still struggling in other denominations, is that correct?
Speaker 2: In other denominations and in other places in this church.  Not every place welcomed ch--church, you know, women as priest, when I told my parents they were in Chicago [Illinois] and my father's first words, you'll never get a job.  Because in Chicago, the bishop didn't believe women should be priest or could be priest and he wouldn't ordain them and I said, well I guess I won't come back to Chicago.  But my parents initially were skeptical, but then they were very excited, and very proud and said, you know, whatever we can do to help, we will.
Story_ID: 107109
Speaker 1: So how did you manage your life when you went to, to seminary?
Speaker 2: You know what?  My children [Robert Lyce Peete and Valerie Nan Morales] were in college and it wasn't fair for me to quit my job, while I needed for them to finish college.  So, I still worked for Coopers and Lybrand for two more years and went part-time, I went on weekends--
Speaker 1: to seminary?
Speaker 2: --To seminary and the first night--
Speaker 1: Seminary was where?
Speaker 2: This was at the Claremont School of Theology, the Episcopal Church at Bloy House which was connected with the Claremont School of Theology out in Claremont, California.  But the first night of class I had this dream, and I dreamed I was carrying my car on my shoulders going through this forest down Wilshire Boulevard [Los Angeles, California] and got to Wilshire and Western and when I looked down, there was this cliff and at the bottom of the cliff was my family and the next thing I knew, I was down at the bottom and I have always used that as a metaphor for me saying, this is gonna be a difficult journey, but you're gonna get to the other side and you'll make it.  So, I went two years every other week to class, Friday night class started, Friday evening, all day Saturday, did my homework, you know, during the week, and go back and then I went to seminary full-time for two years to General Theological Seminary in New York City [New York], which is the oldest Episcopal Seminary in the country and did two years full-time and graduated in 1984.  And, then in 1990, at Seabury Western Seminary, in Evanston, Illinois, they gave me an honorary degree as a result of me being the first woman to speak at the Lambeth Conference of Bishops.
Story_ID: 107110
Speaker 1: And we'd like to hear about that experience.  Would you share that with us?  And when did that take place?
Speaker 2: Well, I was ordained--
Speaker 1: And what was your purpose there?
Speaker 2: --I was ordained in 1984, let me set the context, I was ordained in 1984, a deacon and a priest in February of 1985, and in November of 1985, I became rector of a parish in Indianapolis [Indiana], left California, went to Indianapolis [Indiana], to serve at All Saints Church [Episcopal Church of All Saints].  Every ten years, since the 1880s the Bishops of the Anglican Communion, the worldwide Anglican Communion meet at the invitation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, they meet at Lambeth Palace, but they used to meet at Lambeth Palace, there're too many bishops now, so they now meet at the University of Canton, Canterbury [England].
Speaker 1: England?
Speaker 2: England, and in 1988, the bishops met, but prior to that beginning in 1985, the presiding bishop of the United States and the bishops in Canada and places that heard ordained women, encouraged the Archbishop of Canterbury [Robert Alexander Kennedy Runcie] [Baron Runcie] to include women priest as part of the staff, as consultants and the Archbishop of Canterbury said he would think about it, he would think about it.  And in early 1980, in 1987, the Archbishop was given a list of women clergy from the United States, from Canada, from New Zealand, from Brazil, those were the places that ordained women and from that list, he was gonna select, he--no one knew how many, but, he said he would invite women priest.  In November of 1987, I got a letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury, inviting me to be--to the Lambeth Conference [Lambeth Conference of Bishops], to come and be a consultant to the conference.  In February of 1988, I got a letter inviting me to speak on the ordination of women.  Now by this time, I'm shaking in my boots, you know, they're gonna be hundreds of bishops from around the world, from the Continent of Africa, from Asia, from Canada, not counting the United States and England and going over to Canterbury and I agreed.  Now I will tell you a story, the letter said that I would have ten minutes to speak and the bishops would have fifteen minutes to speak, so I wrote him back and accepted, I said however, I think the disparity in the time is problematic because, you don't want people saying that I got less time,--I wrote it more articulately than this--than the bishops, so I got a letter back saying point well taken and everyone will have the same amount of time.  What was I going to say?
Speaker 1: And were you the only woman that was speaking?
Speaker 2: I was the only woman speaking, there was one other woman invited to be a consultant, a woman priest from New Zealand, but no other woman priest from the United States, and I was the one invited to speak.  So, my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] went with me, so from February to July, I am worried about, what am I going to say?
Speaker 1: And what was the topic again?
Speaker 2: The Ordination of Women, because in England, women couldn't be priest, at that time, I don't think any place in the Continent of Africa could women be priest, in the east, in Asia, there weren't women priest anywhere, except New Zealand, down in Australia, you know, none in Singapore and the other places in the east, none in Japan, there's an Anglican Church in Japan and I had to speak.  The other speakers were gonna be Graham Leonard, who is the Bishop of London, who is the leading opponent against the ordination of women, the Archbishop of Australia was a speaker, the President of the Church in Jerusalem, in the Middle East (unclear) was speaking and they did ask the Archbishop of Canada, who also supported the ordination of women, to speak and me, and there was a special plenary session of all the bishops, they had a whole separate room, there was such an overflow crowd that they opened up another room to have closed circuit television.  And, on Monday, that Monday we all had lunch with the Archbishop of Canterbury, I had not written my speech and neither had the Bishop of London, everybody else had their speeches written and the woman said, we need it by Wednesday because they have to get it typed and printed and ready to be distributed and it was embargoed and so I had taken notes, I'd written articles, I mean, I had all kinds of notes I'd been working on that I had amassed, I had talked to my sister, I'd talked to friends, what should I say and I wanted to say something that would be personal that would have universal implications and ramifications and I had no idea how--what I was gonna say.  And, if I didn't believe in the Holy Spirit before that, but I did, 'cause I believe it every time I preach, I knew the Holy Spirit was at work.  And, when I gave my speech to a woman who had been the editor of the news, the Diocese paper in Los Angeles [California], I said would you read this for me to make sure it was find, I had no ending, so I gave it to her on Tuesday, and she gave it back she said it is terrific, you know, you need to do an ending.  And so, I got an ending and gave it, then the day of the address--
Story_ID: 107111
Speaker 1: Just a moment, but how did you get this ending?  Is this where you say, the power of prayer came to--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness yes.  I mean I had to--
Speaker 1: --Talk about that.
Speaker 2: --I rewrote, I wrote it out again and then the ending came to me, I don't know why, because it was on the feast of Mary Magdalene and Mary Magdalene in scriptures is the one that says, I have seen the Lord, she is the person that Jesus appears to in the garden after the resurrection and he tells her to go tell the disciples and she says, I have seen the Lord and that was the day that this was gonna be on so, I ended it with that and then the last line is from Hebrews, it's by the order of Melchizedek, I am a priest forever.  And, it came, how you know, that was, to me the work of the Spirit, the whole thing was the work of the Spirit.  The day of the presentation was a Friday, I was a nervous wreck, I couldn't eat, so I went to lunch and Bishop Walker who was the Bishop of Washington at that time, was a wonderful man, I was at the din--I came up to the dining room and said where's Nan, where's Nan?  And I'm right there and he said, I feel like the father of the bride, I am so excited, because I had given the presiding bishop a copy of my speech and he'd shared it with a couple of the other bishops and they all just thought it was wonderful and so I went to my room to get dressed, no one, the campus is deserted, my sister [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] comes, how my sister got into my room, (laughter) because it was secured and I said let me read this to you 'cause I don't want you to cry and so I read it to her and she thought it was fine and that's what I, that was my main critic, I wanted her to see if worked for her and she went, because the visitors had a visitors gallery where they sat.  So I walk across the campus, no one is around, so I said well maybe they've cancelled it, and when I get up to where the auditorium where it's going to be held, I start hearing clicks, clicks, clicks, It felt like the paparazzi, there must have been a hundred cameras there taking my picture as I walked up and they, I went in and I said well I wanna go see Barbara Harris and they said, we'll bring her inside and I went in, a friend of mine gave me a yellow rose, she said this was on the altar at Canterbury Cathedral [England] that we prayed for you at noon today, so I took that with me and I went in this auditorium and it was jam packed with people, there were bishops, there were bishops wives, there were press, there were consultants of all the staff.
Story_ID: 106795
Speaker 1: And we'd like to hear about the conclusion of the conference, it's called the, tell us again what it's called.
Speaker 2: The Lambeth Conference [Lambeth Conference of Bishops] that meets every ten years at the invitation of the Archbishop of Canterbury of all the bishops of the Anglican Communion from the Continent of Africa, New Zealand, United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil, Singapore, Japan, around the world, they gather every ten years and in 1988, for the first time they had two women priest as part of the official Lambeth party.  And I was one of the two and in addition I was invited, asked to speak to the whole of the Lambeth Conference on a plenary session on the ordination of women, I was the only woman and it was an awesome experience, I mean, I can't believe that it went off so well.  So, we get into the auditorium where it's being held and all of our panelist we gathered together with the Archbishop of Canterbury and go up on stage and we're each supposed to speak for fifteen minutes, the first two speakers speak for about fifteen minutes, then the third speaker, the Bishop from Jerusalem speaks about thirty-five or forty minutes and the Archbishop of Canterbury turns to me and says, "Nan, don't worry, just take all the time you need", which was very reassuring and I got up to speak and I said, Nan, speak slowly, to myself, you know, you know what you're gonna say, it's, they all have it because it's now been--the embargo has been lifted and I give the address and when I end, the first person on his feet in applause is the Archbishop of Cape Town [South Africa], Desmond Tutu, and I mean these bishops applauded, they laughed, at lines that I spoke, I mean it was just very amazing, the things I didn't think were funny, they laughed at, the things I thought I'd get a chuckle out of, they didn't, but it worked.  I think it made a difference, because there were several bishops who came up to me and said, if I don't take my picture with you, my wife is gonna be mad or my sis--secretary is gonna be mad, you know, and, you know, I'm so proud of you and you know, you did well and it was one of those moments in history, that will probably be a moment in history.  You know, it's almost like an out of body experience now that, you know, I did that and it is--I'm very proud and humbled that I was able to do that, I was given the opportunity and I was able to rise to the occasion and I think, as I think about it, all that I had been prepared for, had been leading me up for that moment.  You know, the opportunities my parents [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington and Maurice Daniel Arrington] had prepared me for, helping me to see a world that was greater than me, also making me sensitive to the needs of other people, that we're a part of this int--interconnected community and prepared me, you know, I had gotten the foundation where I could do it and do it with confidence and with the power of that Spirit.  So it was a special time, cemented my friendship with Desmond Tutu, 'cause I met him several years before on several occasions and in 1995, I was invited to speak at the Afro-Anglican Conference, where in 1985, and in 1995, African--Anglicans of African descent gathered in a conference.  The first year was in Barbados in 1985, and in 1995, it was in Cape Town and I was invited to be one of the three keynote speakers and I was the first speaker at that conference and my mother went with me and it was really important for her 'cause she'd always wanted to go to South Africa, 'cause she and my dad had traveled all over the world, but they would never go to South Afri--because South Africa, because of Apartheid and in May of 1994, she woke me up and said, look Nelson Mandela is being sworn in as President and she had tears in her eyes, and said now I can go to South Africa.  So when this conference came up and I was invited to speak, she said, "I am going."  And then we stayed--we--I went and spoke, and then we stayed as Desmond Tutu's houseguest for two weeks after the conference with him and his wife Leah [Nomalizo Leah Shenxane] and it was a highlight of my mother's life and she died ten months later and she had that wonderful experience of, you know, seeing me speak at that conference, you know, as well as seeing the video of the Lambeth Conference, so.
Story_ID: 106796
Speaker 1: That was wonderful.  At this point, where was your ministry?
Speaker 2: When I went to Lambeth [Lambeth Conference of Bishops], in 1988, I was the rector of a parish of All Saints Parish in Indianapolis [Indiana] and then in January of '89 [1989], I went to work as Canon to the Ordinary, which is the--to the Bishop of Atlanta [Georgia], for the Diocese of Atlanta and Canon to the Ordinary is maybe the Chief Executive Officer.  I had oversight over the ordination process and the deployment of clergy coming in, congregations that are looking for clergy, I had oversight over them, I oversaw the process of people who wanted to be priest, and I stayed there 'til September of 1994, when I went to work at Trinity Church on Wall Street [New York, New York], which is one of the oldest churches in the country and it's right at the heart of Wall Street and I was there for five years, and I was the Associate for Pastoral Care, and their Outreach in Justice Ministries.
Speaker 1: And, take us back for a minute, what was the outcome of your--of the speech that you delivered at Lambeth?
Speaker 2: The outcome was, I think it gave bishops a perspective and value of women and the possibilities of women to be priest.  As a result, of my speech and their awareness, there are women priest in South Africa, there are women priest in Kenya, there are women priest in--
Speaker 1: Where they had never had them before.
Speaker 2: --They're In Uganda, there're women priest in Australia, in parts of the Anglican Communion, where they had never had them before.  There're women priest in England and, you know, part of it was a natural, I think, evolution, but I think I was also a catalyst in helping to bring about that change.
Speaker 1: And who was, who would, as you look back, who was maybe your biggest, or some of your biggest adversaries who now have changed in their policies, in what areas of the world?
Speaker 2: Well, they now have the Bishop of London, who left the Anglican Church, they now--because they now have priest, woman priest in London and in England, you know, so a lot of the bishops in England in our Diocese in our country, there were now, I think there're only about three Dioceses that don't have ordained women, you know, but by th--and then they were a lot more that didn't have ordained women.
Speaker 1: And where are they, where are those Diocese?
Speaker 2: One is in Fort Worth, Texas, San Joaquin, which is in California, and in Quincy, the Diocese of Quincy, which is in Illinois, are the three Dioceses, I think left, that don't ordain women.
Story_ID: 106797
Speaker 1: Very interesting.  And, can you describe for us, since now you are affiliated with the Dioceses of Washington, can you frame for us the system within which you work?  In other words, the Anglican Church and the system because you have so many exciting experiences around the world in the various different assignments that you've had within the church, maybe you can describe those too?
Speaker 2: The--I guess the Anglican Church could be described as a confederation of churches.  Each province is autonomous, the United States is a province and it's autonomous and within the United States are Dioceses, there are 118 Dioceses and the Province of Canada is autonomous, the Province in England is autonomous, now the Archbishop of Canterbury is the, not the spiritual leader, because you would say the Pope would be the spiritual leader, but he--because the Archbishop of Canterbury was the first bishop of the Anglican Church, sort of has that historical authority and power, but not power over any other communion, except the power over the Anglican Church in England and really just over, he's the Bishop of Canterbury.  But there is some understanding, mutual understandings, in how we understand theology, how we do Liturgy, how we understand baptism and those kinds of things and we come together because we're all part of the Anglican Communion.  Each are autonomous, that's why it's a confederation instead of a federation, so while we can have--and the Anglican Communion has agreed that we will have impaired communion as long as some Dioceses don't support the ordination of women and some do, but overall that we can still be in relationship with one another, just like the issue now, around issues of ordaining gay and lesbian people as priest and bishops, they've agreed to be an impaired communion but we've been impaired communion since 1974, since the United States started ordaining women, but we've learned to live together.
Speaker 1: Because, some you're saying, that because some Dioceses don't yet do that?
Speaker 2: Right.  Some provinces don't ordain women and some Dioceses don't ordain women here in this country [United States], but we're still part of the Episcopal Church, you know, and because we have to understand it's more than any one perspective.
Speaker 1: So within the context of your--of the Anglican/Episcopal, are they the same?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 106798
Speaker 1: Church, talk to us a little bit about your experiences, 'cause you've done these fantastic things around the world in conjunction with your assignments?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause I've been to Peru, I've represented the bishop when I was in Cincinnati at a conference in Peru, you know, I'd never been to Peru, I mean, I went to the ordination of Penelope Jamieson [Penelope Ann Bansall "Penny" Jamieson], who is the first woman bishop in New Zealand, there's that mutual respect and understanding, that if you're an Anglican, you're an Anglican, around the country and around the world and we each have something to give and contribute to the other, you know, because if you have that mutual respect for the other then you can work together.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: Well probably right now, being a grandmother is one of the most wonderful things, 'cause if I'd had grandchildren first, then you wouldn't have to have children but, (laughter) but I do--my children [Robert Lyce Peete and Valeria Nan Morales] are wonderful and I think, how I've lived my life is manifested in how my children care about other people.  That they have that same commitment to issues around justice and respect and care about what happens to their brothers and sisters, so I think we're still carrying on our family legacy.
Speaker 1: For those going into the priesthood, what suggestions do you have for them?  Particularly, other young women who would follow in your role--in your footsteps, you're quite a role model.
Speaker 2: I can't imagine doing anything else.  My life has been incredibly rich and I've been greatly blessed, but I would encourage anyone for whatever you do, you have to have a passion, if you have passion for what you do and you believe in what you do, and you want to do it, nothing is too hard, nothing is too difficult, you can overcome it, because the rewards will be so much greater, you know, and don't be afraid to take the risk.  As a priest, the only thing I have to offer is myself and my integrity, yes, I may have some book knowledge but what I really offer is the integrated self of who I am and you have to be transparent, you know, you have to be willing to open and vulnerable and willing to share who you are with other people and that's not always easy, but it's so worth it.
Story_ID: 106799
Speaker 1: Tell us your exact title now and what you do at this point?
Speaker 2: I am, my title is Canon for Deployment and Ordination, that is I work with congregations that are looking for clergy, I help them setup a process in which they can understand who they are as a faith community so that when they look at clergy, 'cause we all have different gifts, they will try to get the best clergy who would fit their particular situation.  I look--work with clergy who are looking to move, to see where their gifts and skills can best be used, that's one part, then the other part is overseeing the ordination process, working with the commission of ministry and those persons who sense a call to the ordained ministry for, in our denomination the call is not only the persons call, but the communities call, so it's a call to the community that is validated by a call from the community.  And we're hoping that we get a lot more emphasis on the call from the community that the community will lift up people, especially living in the wash--the Diocese of Washington, were we have a large, we have one of the largest Latino communities and the African American communities and a lot of young people coming in and people from various countries, from Asia moving in that we need to lift up people who have the gifts and skills to minister to this great diverse communities.  So, we're as overseeing the ordination process, really looking out to tap people on the shoulder and say, I think you would--have the gifts and skills to be a priest and to serve in this Dioceses.
Speaker 1: All right, do you feel that people are coming forth to do that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: In the--at the level of your expectation?
Speaker 2: Well, I've only been here two years but we've had a large number this first year, more than they've had in a very long time and so, we're having another discernment process that's gonna start next year, so we'll see who comes forth.
Story_ID: 106800
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I hope we can regain some of that commitment that I grew up with.  That we care about our brothers and sisters, that we care about our children, because there're all of our children, that they have a safe place to live and a safe place to go to school and a safe street to walk down, because we are only as safe and as only as healthy as the weakest.  I mean, healthcare we a real problem in our community and, you know, I care about those people who are sick because that affects my well-being as well as theirs and I care about the education of those folk 'cause those folks are gonna be the ones taking care of me when my old age, I mean, if for nothing else, for our own self-interest.  We need to take an interest in the well-being of our children.
Speaker 1: And I've also heard you speak occasionally on the subject of violence within our community.
Speaker 2: Don't even get me started.  You know, what is it that our young people have such sense of hopelessness that they would resort to violence.  I read in the paper where this young man, you know, was--took a gun in self-defense.  Why would you even take a gun to school?  How would you have a gun in your house?  A gun is to be used, I mean, you know, it's horrific.  The trial of Jason Williams, the basketball player, where is his thinking, that he's just gonna go out and have all these guns in his house and then, you know, shoot someone and then claim accident, but it's--but we live in a violent culture.
Story_ID: 106801
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What do I want to do that I haven't done?  See parts of the world that I haven't seen yet, try to solve some of the problems that I haven't done as good a job in doing--
Speaker 1: What might they be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I haven't gotten involved in the school system here like I'd like to, to do some tutoring, maybe be a mentor, my problem is my time, you know, and trying to balance in that.  That's why if I retired, then I'd have all this time to do these things.
Speaker 1: As you look back on your life, what stands out the most, the experience maybe that you've just described or something else?
Speaker 2: The experience at Lambeth [Lambeth Conference of Bishops] would be one, but I would say the birth of my children [Robert Lyce Peete and Valerie Nan Morales].  As one who never thought of themselves as a parent growing up, I had never changed a diaper, I had never babysat, I mean, that, those events had profound impact on my life.  I think going to that Encampment for Citizenship when I was seventeen years old was another--had a great impact on my life.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, and what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That she lived life to the fullest, had a good time and cared about everybody 'cause she loved people and she loved God.
Speaker 1: And what message or lesson do you have for your children, your grandchildren and for the world?
Speaker 2: To always do the best you can do, don't settle for mediocrity or second best.  You may come in second but that's 'cause--doesn't mean you--if you did because you did your best, that's fine, but just always do your best and always love the other as much as you love yourself and maybe even more.
Story_ID: 106802
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Because we are history.  It's important to know who you are, you know, that phrase, if you don't know where you've been, you don't know any road will take you there, but also you need to know the story, to put your life in perspective, you know, I'm here in this point and time because of everything that's gone on before and my grandchildren are gonna be who they are because of the experience I have brought into their lives and the experience of other people into their lives.  History is not dates, its people and its relationships.
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  One that, she did her best, that she wasn't afraid, that she worked hard and she played hard, it's hard to play now that--(laughter).
Speaker 1: We'd like to thank you for being so gracious with your time and thanks for the life that you've led.  We need to talk now about your photographs that you've collected for us and I'll need you to move over here from where, where I'm sitting so that we can get setup to show your photographs.  Is there anything else, though that you would like to add as we close this phase of our interview?
Speaker 2: No, but I want to thank you because you've given me so much to remember, so many things I hadn't thought about in such a long time and too re-remember the importance of my family, how important that has been on my life, that you sort of take for granted, so thank you for making me remember that.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 106803
Speaker 1: That is Elizabeth Trent, my paternal great-grandmother, the picture was taken in about 1887.
Speaker 2: And she was about how old?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I--from the looks at it, probably around sixty maybe.
Speaker 2: You need to put it on its side.
Speaker 1: Tell us who this is?
Speaker 2: That is Olive Bird [Clanton], my grandmother, my mother's mother and Uncle Ben, my mother's oldest brother and that was taken in about 1883, or four.
Speaker 1: And how old do you think she is?
Speaker 2: She was twenty-three at the time, and he was an infant.
Speaker 1: That is Robert Arrington, that is my father's father, my paternal grandfather and that was taken around 1885, and I guess he's around 50.
Speaker 2: That is his mother and I know her as Grandmother Arrington and that was taken in 1885, and I guess she was around 50 as well, maybe older.
Speaker 1: And this is my father's mother, Florence Arrington, Florence Trent Arrington and she is in her 20's that was taken at the same time in the late 1880s.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with Bishop Allen(ph.) when I was working in the Dioceses of Atlanta [Georgia] that was taken in 1992, in Griffin, Georgia.
Speaker 1: This is a beautiful picture of my mother taken in her 90th year.
Speaker 2: Tell us her name.
Speaker 1: Her name is Phoebe [Nan Clanton] Arrington.
Speaker 2: And where was this picture taken?
Speaker 1: The picture was taken I think, in Virginia when we were down celebrating her ninetieth birthday.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my Ordination to the Diaconate in June of 1984, outside of Saint James Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles and that is Bishop Bruce Sak (ph.) in the middle and the four of us in red were all ordained together. That is a picture of me [Nan Arrington Peete] as an infant, I think I am 8 months old, in the crib, that same crib that I had for my son, when he was born.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my grandmother, my mother's mother when she was queen of Mardi Gras and that was taken probably in the mid 1880's, her name is Olive Bird Clanton.
Speaker 2: That is Uncle Bob, he is the next brother to my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington], he was born in 1900, so I think that was taken in about 1905.
Speaker 1: That is my father's-
Speaker 2: Put it on the other way.
Speaker 1: --That is my fa-
Speaker 2: Put the, yeah,
Speaker 1: What is his name, what is his name?  What is his name?  (Whispering)  Do you have the other picture? E. O. Trent (ph.)
Speaker 2: That is my father's uncle, his brother Robert E.O. Trent.
Speaker 1: Taken?
Speaker 2: Taken in 1889.
Speaker 1: Did I do this one already?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) is better.
Speaker 2: That is, that is Olive Bird [Clanton] and her sister Phebe(ph.) my grandmother, my mother's mother and her sister and that was taken in the late 1800's probably in Decatur, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Another picture of my, of grandmother and her sister, Olive [Bird] Clanton and Phoebe Clanton.
Speaker 2: Wait, wait.
Speaker 1: What's her name, what is the name?
Speaker 2: Maurice's, your father's aunt.
Speaker 1: That is my father's aunt, probably taken in the same time, about 1880's, I don't know her name, Maybelline (ph.)
Speaker 2: Who is this, your dad?
Speaker 1: Push it back at the bottom, (unclear) leaning against the flat surface.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my dad when he is three years old, Maurice Daniel Arrington, taken in 1899.
Speaker 1: That is one of my high school pictures, probably taken somewhere in about 1950 or 51.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me and my sister, I'm the taller, that's Edna [Edna Marissa Arrington Brown] and Nan [Nan Arrington Peete], taken maybe in 1947, I would think.
Speaker 1: It says 1944.
Speaker 2: Oh, 1944.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Put it down in the--this is a picture of my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] in the red, I am on the left in the striped shirt and my sister is behind my mother in the blue top, with at that time, my mother's grandchildren and three of her great-grandchildren.  So she has my daughter's [Valerie Nan Morales] in the picture in the front, with her son Christopher, Douglas a grandson in the back with Lauren(ph.) and my son [Robert Lyce Peete] in the back with daughter Lauren--Laura on his shoulders.
Speaker 1: Taken where?
Speaker 2: Taken in Idlewild, Michigan, and that was taken in about 1991.  Oh, later than that, it was later, it was later than that.
Speaker 1: This one says 19--November 1987.
Speaker 2: This is a four generation picture, taken in 1987 my mother [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington] is on the left, my daughter [Valerie Nan Morales] is in the middle, I'm on the right and I'm holding Christopher, my grandson when he was about a week old.
Speaker 1: Where was this taken?
Speaker 2: That was taken in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother with her first great-grandchild, Christopher Daniels, Phoebe [Nan Clanton] Arrington and Christopher Daniels in Los Angeles [California], in 1987.
Speaker 2: And, this is the parish where I served as rector, All Saints Episcopal Church in Indianapolis [Indiana] and this was on Sunday, December the 8th, 1985, when I was installed as rector.  It also happened to be my mother's birthday.
Speaker 1: You need something bigger.
Speaker 2: No, this works.
Speaker 1: It works?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: One of the social events in Chicago was the Debutante Ball taken during Christmas that was sponsored by the--a men's group called The Royal Coterie of Snakes, and this was a picture with me when I made my debut and my parents Phoebe [Nan Clanton Arrington] and Maurice [Daniel] Arrington in December, 1956.
Speaker 2: Put it on its side.
Speaker 1: And, this is-
Speaker 2: Push it down a little further.
Speaker 1: --This is a picture of me [Nan Arrington Peete] taken in 1996.
Story_ID: 106804
Speaker 1: Oh, that's great.  This is a picture of my dad, Maurice Daniel Arrington, at work in his office with the highway department, taken just before he retired probably in about 1960. This is a picture of my parents with their five grandchildren, taken in Silver Spring, Maryland in 1980.  Douglas Brown, Robin Brown, Phoebe [Nan Clanton] Arrington, Elizabeth Brown, Valerie Peete [Valerie Nan Morales], Richard Peete, and Maurice [Daniel] Arrington in order from left to right.  It was taken during Thanksgiving.
Speaker 2: A picture of my parents [Phoebe Nan Clanton Arrington and Maurice Daniel Arrington] on their wedding day when they got married Christmas Eve, 1934.
Speaker 1: Put it on its side.
Speaker 2: One of the opportunities I had in Indianapolis [Indiana] was to speak to the Black Catholics Concerned of the Archdiocese of Indianapolis [Indiana], they invited me to speak on Christian Feminism.
Speaker 1: In January, 1989, the Chicago Tribune [Chicago, Illinois] printed an article, an interview about me and my ministry as an Episcopal Priest and my time as a result of having been at the Lambeth Conference [of Bishops 1988] and in the Sunday paper that was--that's a reprint of that article.
Speaker 2: (whispering) You don't remember all the things you say, you know?
Speaker 1: You mean like this?
Speaker 2: (whispering) No, underneath the picture.  (unclear) what date is the picture?  Ok.
Speaker 1: In February, 1989, the first woman who was elected bishop was the Reverend Barbara Harris, she's in the middle sitting in the--of this picture and this was at a lunch that I hosted for all the black women clergy who could come and those with most of us at that time, there were only about 20 and we all went to that luncheon and it was a great occasion.  From that picture there's now one other woman who is also a bishop and that's the Reverend Gail Harris, she's in the back you can't see her to well, but she is now a bishop, yeah, thank you.
Speaker 2: Now we're going into the super big frames.
Speaker 1: That is Phoebe [Nan Clanton] Arrington, my mother when she attended the Afro-Anglican Conference in Cape Town [South Africa].  At 90 she was the oldest person in attendance and she is listening to me as I give my presentation.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of me at that conference in Cape Town [South Africa] in 1995, I was one of the four keynote speakers and the first one to speak on the identity, What Does It Mean to Be an Afro-Anglican?
Speaker 1: All right you're gonna have to (unclear).
Speaker 2: Before you put it on, let me make sure I set it straight.
Speaker 1: I served a parish while I was in seminary in Los Angeles [California], Saint Albans in, on the campus of UCLA [University of California Los Angeles] or across the street from the campus of UCLA and as a going away present in 1982, they took that picture and gave it to me when I was preaching there.
Speaker 2: Ok, I just gotta move it over a little.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: Now are you gonna do each of these?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Separately?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: So, let's go clockwise, starting at 12 O'clock.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Well, he has the other one, he has--he has 9 O'clock.
Speaker 1: Oh, ok, go head.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of me with, then Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runnsey (ph.) at a reception just after the presentation on the Ordination of Women where I spoke at the Lambeth Conference [of Bishops 1988].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with Archbishop Desmond Tutu on the campus of the Lambeth Conference [of Bishops] during that time in 1988.
Speaker 2: Another picture of the Archbishop Desmond Tutu and me at Lambeth [Lambeth Conference of Bishops], at a time when we were dressed and vested for, preparing for a service.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Sandra I need you to turn the--turn the frame clockwise, can you just pull up--yeah, there you go.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at the Lambeth Conference [of Bishops 1988] while I was delivering my address to the Bishops of the Anglican Communion, July 22, 1988.
