Story_ID: 106728
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hicks [sic, Hickey] is the videographer, and we're going to start off by having you slate the interviewer by stating your name--I don't know if you have a middle name.  Yeah, you have a middle name, and so just spell it for us and give your year and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Charles Edward Phillips, oh, let me spell it for you, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, E-D-W-A-R-D, P-H-I-L-L-I-P-S, born on June 10, 1959.
Speaker 1: I don't think I knew that.  My birthday is June 10.
Speaker 2: Is it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's so strange.
Speaker 1: So weird.  I'm 1954, wow!  Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow!
Speaker 1: I've never met anyone--then the other thing I want to ask, did you say your place of birth?  I was so tuned into the birthdate.
Speaker 2: No, place of birth is Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date and our location.
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 11, right?  Yep--2014, and we're in New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm a CEO of a software company [Infor], so technology.
Story_ID: 106729
Speaker 1: I'd like to--we ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is paella.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say late spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Madrid [Spain].
Speaker 1: Favorite phase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: Semper Fi.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Semper Fi is Latin for always faithful.  From a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] saying.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 106730
Speaker 1: Okay, so I want to have you to start out, and if you would tell us about your father and what you know about his side of family and his growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: His name first.
Speaker 2: My father's name is Charles Phillips, Sr.  I'm Charles Phillips, Jr.  Um, he was born in Clinton, Oklahoma.  His father was from Texas and his mother was an Oklahoma native, and most of his family lived in various parts of Oklahoma.  His grandmother was a Seminole Indian, so we have a lot of relative in Seminole City, Oklahoma [sic, Seminole, Oklahoma], so most of his side of the family is in Oklahoma.  He was one nine kids.  He was the oldest, so lots of siblings, lots of cousins.
Story_ID: 106731
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] was the oldest of nine kids.  They grew up in pretty, I would say, meagre conditions.  He grew up picking cotton and bailing hay, and it was a very rural environment.  His father pretty much, you know, worked for other people on their farmland and did a lot of fishing, kind of sharecropper-type of arrangement, and back then most of the black schools, they would let the kids go to school for about four months out of the year, and then they would let them out of school to pick cotton, so very limited schooling.  The books were hand-me-down books from years ago from the white schools, and so from that environment, he decided, that you know, he had to find someway to get out there.  Economically, the family was struggling.  They had to find a way to feed the family.  So when he turned sixteen, he went down to the local Air Force recruiter and told him he was eighteen, so he could get out there and make some money and enlisted.  And he had not finished high school or anything, so he joined the military, and for the first ten years, sent home half of his pay to kind of help the family out until he could find ways out.  So he ended all five of his brothers did the same thing.  Most of them were Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and so, we have big family of military people, but that was the known way out of those circumstances back then.  You joined the military.  There weren't many alternatives and everybody you knew went in the military.  And that's what I saw growing up is everybody I knew was in the military.  So he went on to finish high school by going to night school when he could while he was in the military.  He started some college and got whatever college courses he could.  Wherever he was stationed, he would find a way to go college.  He put in his twenty years and when he was thirty-six, there were four kids, I have three brothers, he decided to finish his college degree at Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, in Hampton, Virginia], and he went on his home while we stayed at home, he finished his degree and finished law school, and has been practicing law in Atlanta [Georgia] for the last forty years, and joined the City Council and College Park, (unclear) outside of Atlanta, ran for office, has been re-elected about ten times now.   But all self-made.  He had been working, sending money home, going to law school at night, just the worst possible--every time I saw him, I saw him studying.  I never saw him doing anything else, either working or studying, but it paid off.  He put all four boys through college.  He bought his house, bought his cars.  Doesn't owe anybody anything, and is now still practicing law.  So he-- you know, that work ethic is what we all saw.
Speaker 2: How what-- old is he [Charles Phillips, Sr.], Charles?
Speaker 1: He is now 76, 76/77 actually.  I think 77, yeah.  So he pretty much did it the hard way, but he always remembered what happened to his family, and his grandfather.  His grandfather in Texas, during the Reconstruction, at one point owned over 200 acres of land in Texas, but since it was just given to him and he was not-- didn't know how to read or write, he didn't know what it was worth or what to do with it, he was approached by a white man and offered a mule, a jug of whiskey and a rifle for it all, and he took it because he could value that because he didn't know what the land was worth.  Of course, they discovered oil under it decades later, but I think-- believe when he was doing the transaction, probably it was know, but, nonetheless, he wasn't in the position to know that, so my father never forgot, kinda, when you buy your land, keep it; don't sell things.  So he always bought property and taught us to buy property.  He invested wisely.  He has always managed his money wisely because he grew up watching that, and struggling, and that everyone he knew, money, they never could keep their money, so he became kind of the patriarch of the family in a way people learned how to manage things.  He helped people be accountable. He was very structured and military mind.  But at a young age, he felt like that and at a very young age.  And he is the one that figured out that we gotta get out of here, and we're going to have to go to make money some sort of way.  And his brothers followed in his example, and--
Story_ID: 106732
Speaker 1: So fast forward, when I was ready to go to college after moving around, you know, all over in the military with him [Charles Phillips, Sr.], of course, I ended up going to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado], he wanted one son to become an officer 'cause all of his family was enlisted.  He wanted someone to go to the military academy, so I began applying.  It's a long process to get into the academy.  You have to get either a senator or the vice president or the president to nominate you.  And, at that time, I got the Vice President, Nelson Rockefeller, they get five nominations a year, the vice president.  I was able to get one of those.  So that is how I ended up going to the military, but, a lot of that, was based on prior history because I had been around the military so much.  But we moved every two or three years.  I lived in Madrid [Spain]; I lived in North Carolina; I lived in Arkansas, Oklahoma--always the new kid on the block and just me and my four brothers moving in--usually the only African-America moving into the school district, or there were very few.  But you get to learn to get along with people pretty quickly, how to read people pretty quickly 'cause you have to.
Story_ID: 106733
Speaker 1: Now, how would describe your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] also, I mean as a person?  I know you describe him as a hard worker, and you've described him as very structured--naturally structured.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he is a leader, and kind of A-type personality.  He was always wanting to lead and a very clear and logical thinker as well.  He would break problems down to constituencies and have a direct conversation with you.  He always treated us as if we were probably all older than we were in terms of how he talked to us.  'Cause there was no baby talk.  It was "You're going to be responsible.  You want an allowance, you have to work, you have to earn it," and instilled that work ethic in us, but also emphasized education because he was frustrated that he had opportunities earlier to go to a proper elementary school, and high school, and then college, he felt he could have done much more.  He did very well, but he could have done much better, and so he was determined that we were going to do it the right way, and so it was all about grades, and also about being responsible around the house and working.  So we've all worked from a very young age.  I've worked throughout high school and even before high school, always had jobs in the summer, and but-- so we picked up a lot from him.  The other thing he was into was--because he didn't have television growing up, he listened to radio.  He was into music a lot, especially blues music, and he played in bands as a drummer when he could.  And then we were living abroad in the military, you couldn't really watch television because it was in another language, so we never really paid attention to television growing up.  And most places we lived, we didn't have a television, so it was always music for us, and he would get records shipped from the States; and that's what we would do with free time in the evenings and the weekends is music.  And so that is a gift he gave all of us because I must have 50,000 songs now. And that's--I prefer that over watching TV to this day because that's the way I grew up.  So on Sunday mornings or afternoons, the TV wasn't on.  It was kind of name-that-tune blues music, you know, and the whole family would do that, so.  So that was his outlet, was music, and it became all of ours, I guess, through him.
Story_ID: 106734
Speaker 1: Now--what about your mother?  So what is her name and what do you know about her growing up and year of birth, and things like that?
Speaker 2: So my mother is Jessie Phillips.  She was born in Hot Springs, Arkansas. She moved with her stepmother and father to Little Rock [Arkansas], and my father got stationed in Little Rock in one of his many places he got moved around in the military, and that's where they met when he was stationed at Little Rock Air Force base, and I was born in Little Rock as a result, but I only lived there a short period of time before we moved somewhere else.  But she grew up similar fashion in the hills of Arkansas, a lot of broken families.  Which, sometimes she lived with her stepmother, sometimes with her father, and sometimes with multiple, you know, just a bad family situation, and so she survived the best she could and got passed from family to family, but just had a sunny personality.  It was never a problem to her.  She didn't know she was poor.  She didn't think like that.  In Arkansas, almost everybody you knew was poor, so it didn't--it wouldn't have--it was all about friends.  And one of the things--one of the reasons that she was such, she's articulate and a very good speaker is because you didn't have any other way to entertain people.  No one had wealth.  There was no TV.  There was nothing.  It was all about entertaining each other, and talking and telling stories.  And so I learned a lot from her and just kind of oratory skills and presentation just because that's all it was, was story-telling with sitting around the living room with people talking.  And so, you know, that's my mother's story.  She was one of, I think, six, but they're all in-- broken up, and two of them lived together, then just mixed up, so no consistency over a time period.  And they all went to different directions.
Speaker 1: So you're saying your mother met your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] when he was stationed in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the age difference between the two of them?
Speaker 2: My mother is two years older, yeah.
Story_ID: 106735
Speaker 1: So your siblings--are you the oldest of four boys?
Speaker 2: No.  So I have--
Speaker 1: Okay, you mentioned four boys though.
Speaker 2: It's four total.  I have an older brother, Kennie, and then two younger brothers.  Who are all very far apart.
Speaker 1: You are?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--in terms of age, so there is an eighteen-year span between the oldest and the youngest. So that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so who-- go oldest to youngest.
Speaker 2: Kennie [Phillips] is the oldest, I was number two and he is seven years older than I am; and then my next brother under me, Tony [Phillips], is five years younger than me, and then, Carlos [Phillips], is five years younger than him.
Speaker 1: You're almost like only children (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's-- which is what my mother [Jessie Phillips] said that each person felt like an only child because there was a period of time when they were the main focus and then the older brothers became more like fathers because of so much distance in terms of age, and I would babysit for the youngest one, who was ten years younger than me a lot, so he's a lot like me and went into computers like I did.  And then my older brother, who is more arts oriented, the one he spent the most time with, turned out to do similar things as well, so it just created an interesting dynamic but also helped us deal with moving around a lot because there was always someone who could deal with any aged person in our house because of our span.  So it's not like we're all the same age and trying to figure out life together.  We were-- people had different experiences in different places because we were moving around.
Speaker 1: So you're saying your oldest brother is more artistic?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he became a minister, preacher, and singer and all that stuff, and the one that he spent the most time with, now works for the City of Atlanta, but he is also in a singing group as well.  So they always did things like that, work with people, a lot of youth groups.  And they love doing and spending time, reaching out to the community, and singing, doing-- putting on events, working with the church, and whereas, I went to business law, computers, and all that and my younger brother did the same thing.
Speaker 1: But you, you know, when you were talking about your father's [Charles Phillips, Sr.] track, it was almost like you were following in that track, almost like it was--like you were the jun--you're Junior, and you fall--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean that was just sort of amazing, almost in lockstep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I just, for whatever reasons, picked up more his personality and attributes, whereas my mother is more the artsy and bubbly, and the other two picked up that more, so we--it's a diverse set, and each brother is very different, you know.
Speaker 1: So what--so, wait a minute, but there are four boys, though?
Speaker 2: Yes, four boys, yeah.
Speaker 1: There's four boys-okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 106736
Speaker 1: So that, and--so I want to ask you what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, it was such a family focus because our neighbors were always changing and we were always moving, it's all about what we were doing as a family.  And a lot of that was the time we spent listening and enjoying music, the moving process, you know, we had to negotiate a new place, and learn, and get comfortable; what do we expect to happen?  What are we going to see when we get there because we never knew.  We get home, and we're told we're moving to a place we never heard.  Then, okay, we got to band together and make it happen, and this is going to be an adventure.  It's a positive thing, and accept change.  So that ability to accept change, I think, probably helped me my whole life because I had no choice.  I had to accept change that I couldn't control; and then I remember a lot of just-- when we did see our extended on my father's brothers, uncles, just the--you know, we had such a large family because he [Charles Phillips, Sr.] was one of nine, getting everybody together, and it was all about the music again as well, so we just had a fun childhood and a little different than other people.  I spent a lot of my time in middle school years in Madrid [Spain], which is why I like paella so much.
Speaker 1: At what ages were you in Madrid?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I was like from seven to thirteen.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you were there a long--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Seven to twelve.
Speaker 1: But that's a long stretch.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a long stretch, yeah.  And that was the longest place we ever lived actually.  So it was a-- formative years and to be around a different culture because we traveled all around Europe on vacation, and learned different parts of Europe.  It made, you know, the world a smaller place.  You know, you kind of felt comfortable anywhere because we were always pioneering--going somewhere.  At that time, they usually hadn't seen African Americans before because we'd go down to Barcelona [Spain] or Toledo [Spain], or Valencia [Spain], on the edges of the coast, and people would walk up to us, and touch our hair and want to talk to us.  And we had this giant Oldsmobile that took up half the street because they had small cars and small streets.  We would have these four boys and six of us big (unclear) get out, and we were just a spectacle.  People were curious and were like "What are you guys?"  So we learned to deal with that, and be--kind of turn into mini ambassadors for the U.S., although we didn't know we were that and that's what happened because people wanted to know where we were from and why, you know, and what's your background, and they hadn't seen it before, but you get used to it.  It was a fun process as well.
Speaker 1: So you're saying every two years, you're moving except for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, that was a longest stretch when we lived in Europe.
Speaker 1: Where were you living before that?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Let's see we were stationed in Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  We went to Little Rock Air Force [Little Rock, Arkansas] Base for a little while; we went to Atlanta [Georgia] for a while; we were at North Carolina.  I can't remember all the places, but it was hopping around.
Story_ID: 106737
Speaker 1: Now what reminds you-- What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?  You know, when you sort of think about--?
Speaker 2: --Well, the Spanish food, which I still love today, just has distinct smells to it, so the paella, the tortillas, you know, making them on the pan on the stove.  That's what we would have for breakfast instead of eggs and things, so I learned the Spanish smells, the tapas and all that.  My mother [Jessie Phillips] still liked the southern food because that is how she grew up.  So, I didn't like those, some of those smells, so like anything off the pig, she would make something out of.
Speaker 1: Including chitlings?
Speaker 2: All that offal, which I couldn't take that, but--my dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] didn't like it either, so she could do that a couple of times a year when we were gone.  But it's--you know, we just had a lot of family time.  We did a lot of church time.  So my mother is very religious, southern, kind of Church of Christ.  We--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Church of Christ or Church of God in Christ?
Speaker 2: Just Church of Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we would go to church every Wednesday night, every Sunday morning, and every Sunday night.  We'd have gospel meetings on top of that.  So we went to church a lot.  And so a lot of what I remember, in terms of seeing, you know, making friends outside of school, and some of them I kept in touch with.  Sometimes the only African Americans I would see would be at a church because I'd be at schools in places, where I wouldn't see anybody.  At church, I could see some.  Those I would remember because the preachers have big impacts in your life, and that community was important to my mother, and so we learned how to make friends there as well.
Speaker 1: And, what-- So sounds is music.  Smells.  What about smells?  Were there any smells in the sensory?
Speaker 2: Mostly the food that I remember now, yeah.  And then we played sports a lot.  So, I remember, I would love the smell of new sports equipment, a new baseball, a new glove, just the leather, the sports, the things that you did with basketball.  So we were sports crazy, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know, I-- so life is really--you grew up on the base, or you are growing off-base?
Speaker 2: Most of those times--I think we only lived on base once--if I remember right.  We usually took our housing in town.  A lot of times, going to places where they had limited base housing, so you had to live out in town.  My father preferred to live out in town most of the time anyway. So I think I can only remember once that we actually lived physically on the base, and that was in Little Rock Air Force Base, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, when I-- I had interviewed [HM] Michael Powell, (unclear) you know, [HM Colin Powell's] son and he was talking about the smell of fresh paint.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know when you would go into--you know, but that's on base, though.  I'm wondering, you know, that's a little different.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a little different.  So most of mine wasn't on base like that-
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: --but just more family stuff for me.
Speaker 1: More family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: More family--so what were some of the family things?  I-- You know, you talk about music; you talk about sports; you talk about family time, but are there chores that everyone has to do because you also said your family was very structured?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we--we'd-- there was no sleeping in on Saturday.  We'd get up.  We'd wash the car, cut the grass.  We had our set of chores and he would direct what needed to be done, and-- but also taught us to do it the right way because you would end up washing again if it wasn't right, and so that attention to detail is something I got from him because he was meticulous.  He was going to go out to inspect the car, and you knew what he was looking for, so you might as well doing it right the first time because you knew you would do it over.  So we learned that; and that's just the way it was.  But my mother I remember was completely opposite things.  She would put us all in the car a couple times a week during Christmas and we'd drive around looking at Christmas lights, and for some reason, that seemed like an exciting, so fun thing at the time.  We'd go for hours just driving looking at people's Christmas decorations, and all four boys in the car doing that, believe it or not, but it was fun.  So she was a mother's mother.  She was never a stranger.  We were always bring friends home.  People would stop over, especially on Sundays, random people would come over to have dinner because she was like that.  You always knew you could stop by and join for dinner; and she loved having company, and was that, you know, kind of southern hospitality, even though we were not living in the South, wherever we were, that's what she still, still had, you know.  And it's still like that to this day--loves having people over.
Story_ID: 106738
Speaker 1: So, Charles, what are you like as a young person then, you know, in those formative years?  Are you--you, you strike me as a person with a quiet personality.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But are you-- You described your, you brother--you know, two brothers are artistic, but what are you?  What are you like?  And are you (unclear), are you a more cerebral-type of child or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was always into the academics, and I guess, spent a lot of time thinking, and more thoughtful about things, and more likely to listen than to speak. But be thinking about it in twenty different ways but not saying it.  But I like analyzing things and thinking through things.  I used to read Sherlock Holmes books front to cover over and over again because I liked the way he solved problems, these analytical bent to take little pieces of evidence and construct it into a conclusion.  And that is the way I thought, and so I like the logic of it and the ability to break a pattern down, and the ability to break a pattern down and see the patterns, kind of a pattern recognition.  You know a lot of that reading was around things like that, and that's why I liked mysteries, but I liked detective things, things that involved some sort of analysis of clues.  And I think that later on, that sort of led me to certain career choices that analytical bent, but it came from reading so much and just thinking like that.  My brother, older brother [Kennie Phillips] used to, for the summers, have a reading among all the brothers and he would post a chart, a little hand-written thing, tape on the refrigerator, and we'd have to each day, come in, how many pages we had read, what chapter we were on, and then-- when you got to finish the book, we'd have to explain the book to him, and what was exciting about it.  He'd ask you a bunch of questions about it.
Speaker 1: Is this your brother?
Speaker 2: My brother.
Speaker 1: So your brother was doing that.
Speaker 2: He had the insight to do that for us so a lot of my love for reading, and all the things I learned from that came from my older brother who we all looked up to.  He thought that was cool, so we thought that was cool; and more than any teacher, he was a motivator because we looked up to him.  So we all read like crazy.  And, but that--may have been reading different things, but it took me down the path of probably reading more than the average person would at that age; but I learned a lot, and it changed the way you think.  The more you read, you get wiser and you see other different patterns of thinking.  And the world is big place if you start to read, you know.  So we started to read from philosophy to all sorts of things but it was all because he made it fun, you know, and a little bit competitive.
Story_ID: 106739
Speaker 1: Are there other memories that you can share, sort of growing up, in the, you know--and maybe, let's--in the Madrid [Spain] period of time, because that, that would have been, you know, I mean you're really becoming of age there, so are you--, where are you, are you going to an American school there?  Are you going--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have an American school for the people who are going there and for the Ambassador's kids, so they have little schools, at least they used to.  They no longer do because the base has been closed down now, but, at that time, they were American schools.
Speaker 1: So, really you're-- at the time that you're growing up, there is a lot of civil unrest in the United States, but you're abroad, so are--I know you said that your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.], music was being sent over, and you have a big car, but what is--what are you aware of--are you sort of out what is happening in the states, your family?
Speaker 2: We knew what was happening, but I think you do miss the immediacy and the impact of it, getting it delayed and second hand, so a lot of that period, you do miss some of the headline-grabbing news.  As you get older, you go back and look at,  realize what happened, and certainly as we came to the States, the gravity of it, but there are parts of it that I was either too young or I wasn't in the States that, you know, you missed.  But, on the other hand, my dad was a very political person who, you know, I think, partly because of the way he grew up, had a certain anger there that if had certain opportunities, so it was something important to him, so we would get a lot of that through him at the dinner table, outraged about whatever it was.  So I got a version of it, but it was that version of stuff.  But I didn't see it firsthand.  On the other hand, having him explain it to me and why, and he has a very logical mind, and I agreed with a lot of it.  So that formed a lot of our political views, but it was his, it was through him as opposed to seeing it on TV.
Story_ID: 105004
Speaker 1: What, what rank does your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] have, you know, what rank is he--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) He retired a Senior master sergeant [in the U.S. Air Force], which is, for the enlisted, the second highest you can go, so he did pretty well, but he was enlisted though, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so is he--do you ever hear discussions about him being frustrated at all, or, you know, is he of the generation that the service really opened up, you know, a lot of opportunities?
Speaker 2: He is grateful for the opportunity to serve his country and it gave him tremendous opportunities.  So, there-- He told me a story that four years into the service, you have to decide whether you want to re-up, or reenlist, and continue; and he came home in his uniform, had some time off for a week.  And one of the guys he went to high school with tried to talk him out of reenlisting and said, "Come back here to Clinton, Oklahoma," which really it's only 5,000 people, "and we'll open up a liquor store."  And he said, "I thought about it, and I almost did it," and then said, "You know what, there's just gotta be better something.  I haven't seen in four years, but there's--but I've seen enough to say, there's other ways of thinking and I want to learn more, and I decided against.  I went and re-uped and went back and left."  So he goes back, 10 or 15 years later, the guy actually did open a liquor store and, of course, is destitute, barely surviving, like a shack about to fall over, and selling liquor.  He said, "You see, that would have been me if I had made that decision and said, "No, I just don't want to make that decision, no I don't want to do that, even though he was one of my best friends, I would have been stuck there for the rest of my life, you know."  And so he views that, the fact that he got out through the military as a huge--so do I.  I was so glad did.  It changed his life.  Nonetheless, the fact that that was his only choice is a function of many other things that he obviously not happy about.  So it was just this dual feeling.  On the one hand, I 'm grateful for this opportunity, and I want to serve my country because they gave me this opportunity; on the other hand, I should have had more opportunity like everybody else did and didn't like the way he was being treated, so--
Speaker 1: So this-- some of this you're hearing around the dinner table and at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this conflict and anger, and yet the appreciation of being part of the country, and yet "My country should have treated me better," all those things, you know.  All those things were discussed and, you know, I'd tried to understand in a way because we grew up in an environment that I had never seen before and I tried to place myself there and see if I would be as angry, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're hearing a lot about, you know, this person, you know, I didn't get treated right, you know.  And then the Marines are--they were still --the Marines were a hard place--you know, we had--well the Montford Point Marines [Montford Point Marine Association].  I think Navy was worse.  Navy was worse as a branch of service.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 105005
Speaker 1: So you're--so at the American school [in Madrid, Spain], I mean what is the name of the school, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but at the school, what is the racial composition, and you said there are some ambassador kids, they're all?
Speaker 2: I think maybe five percent African American, not even that.  So there were not that many, at that time, stationed over there at that time.  But that was most places I went where we got stationed, maybe 5% or 10% of African Americans, and then you just--that was the ratio.
Speaker 1: But you're al--you're, at this point, you're still a very good student no matter where you go?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the studying--I mean at high school, I was the president of the student body.  I had a 4.0 average in high school and head of (unclear) club, national (unclear), you name it, all that stuff.  But-- so the leadership stuff came natural to me I think from my father [Charles Phillips, Sr.], and academics was something I focused on.  And that was always something I enjoyed.  I enjoyed the reading.  I enjoyed math.  I-- great relationship with my teachers, so being a student and athlete was important to me.  I didn't just want to be an athlete.  And I knew from an early age that if good things are going to happen for me, it was going to be because of my academics, so that had to come first.  Sports was just for fun, what I was good at, so I always took it seriously.
Speaker 1: And who are you-- so everything--you know I'm thinking about because you're moving different places.   When you leave, when you leave Spain, where do you go?  Where do you leave, Madrid, where do you go?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: We went to-- back to Little Rock [Arkansas] for about four or five months and then he got moved to Atlanta [Georgia] then.  And that's where I went to high school, was Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the name of the high school in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: It was called Lakeshore [High School in Atlanta, Georgia], which is now has been merged into another school.  It is called Westlake [High School] now, but, at that time, it was called, Lakeshore.
Speaker 1: And-- so when you come back--how old are you when you come back to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: So by the time we got to Atlanta, I think I was in ninth grade then, so around there, I was fourteen or so.  Yeah, so I started high school in Atlanta; and new kid on the block as usual, but, you know, by senior year, I knew enough people to go in and do Student Body President, you know, so.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --You said Student Body President by senior year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was Student Body President in senior year.
Speaker 1: You moved there in your soph--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in sophomore I think, along in there, and then two years later, but I was captain of the basketball team and all that stuff, but I just dived into it.  And it was one of those schools, at least where I was, it was in one of the suburbs.  It wasn't the heart of Atlanta, where it was, at that that time, probably 90% white in the South, right?  So the fact that I came from the outside, wasn't--didn't really grow up with anybody there; I didn't really have any allegiance to any of the cliques or anything, so I just made friends with everybody and, 'cause that is what I always did everywhere I went, so the fact that it was in Georgia, didn't phase me 'cause I didn't know any better.  I just thought, "Okay, it's just another school," so I started making friends with southern white boys and people who normally wouldn't normally talk to a black person.  But I didn't' know that 'cause I used to--when you're mostly in these, kinda foreign military places, it's less of the racial thing because everybody is kind of away from home.  But then when I went to the Atlanta school, it was more local people there in that school, and they hadn't had that experience, and so it took me a while to realize it wasn't the same.  But, on the other hand, it was who I was, so I said, "All right.  That's the way they are.  I'll make friends with them anyway.  I'm here, and I'm sure there's always good in somebody.  I'm not just going to assume just because that's what everybody is telling me that--you know, I'll just ignore that."
Speaker 1: Now, sports--you said that sports--because we're talking right now about the early to mid '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I graduate in '77 [1977] from high school, yeah.
Story_ID: 105006
Speaker 1: But the transition into Atlanta [Georgia] wasn't difficult at all because I mean you're coming from totally different culture into--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that was a-- probably the most difficult transition that I had just because it was just deep South, and I had just never been around that before.  And I didn't realize the importance of race, the tension, because I had been away from all that, and I hadn't been around the whole thing.  And it's going to the cafeteria, I had never seen blacks sitting here, and whites sitting there voluntarily, and they never sat together.  It was just strange to me.  It was kind of odd.  So I didn't do it.  I sat wherever I wanted to sit, but I didn't know you weren't supposed to do that until people started telling me that.  But on the other hand, I didn't change it.  I was "Whatever," and so that's why I made friends with everyone because I was the one guy who didn't care about that, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, athletically, now.  So what sports are you playing at this point, are you--?
Speaker 2: So it's basketball, yeah, all basketball.
Speaker 1: So what position did you play.
Speaker 2: I started off as guard but then I started growing.  So I ended up playing forward, sometimes center, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who are you admiring as a sport's hero or legend at that time or are you aware-- Maybe you're not even--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: By, yeah, by high school, I was, you know, aware of the sports legends that's for sure.  'Cause, and plus I read a lot, so you could always read about sport people.  It was probably Will Chamberlins, and people like that, the major stars.  I read a lot about [William] Bill Russell and admired him, but I never saw him play.  But Oscar Robertson, I loved "Pistol Pete" Maravich, just his skill set with the basketball.  So it was people like that, names that young people may not have heard of, but they were important at the time and very important.  They changed the game.  So, and I learned a lot about teamwork by watching those great teams and people who would lead those teams.  That's what sports is also good for, you get a chance to be a leader.
Story_ID: 105007
Speaker 1: That--so you have, at that point, your brother is seven.  And there must be a new boy--well, I don't know, I couldn't remember the age differences.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so let's see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the older brother [Kennie Phillips] is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the older brother is in college by then, and then my two younger brothers are, you know, in elementary school.  And so they, you know, did just fine in their schools, and eventually they went to the same high school I went to [Lakeshore High School in Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Oh so you have that transition there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you see when I left home, that's when my dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] retired.
Speaker 1: So that's why Atlanta [Georgia] became home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he retired; yeah, because once he retired out of the military [U.S. Air Force], he just stayed there.  And so, for me, it was a temporary thing, but, for them, it became home because they were younger when they got there, so they just, they went to elementary there and high school there.  They got out and went to college there, and stayed there.  So they know Atlanta differently than I know because they got there at a young age and stayed.  Whereas, at that age, I was moving around, but for them, it was more stability.
Story_ID: 105008
Speaker 1: And so when it's time to go to school--you know, I  mean, are you coming out thinking you want to go into the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado]?  So how does that, that happen because--and I also want to talk about your interest--when the interest in computers started to sort of happen too.
Speaker 2: It all happened in high school.  So I started thinking about the academy in eleventh grade.  You have to start early because it's a very elaborate application process.  It starts almost a year earlier because you have to get tests, and take physical tests, get medical tests, and all these sort of stuff, and you have to apply for the nomination, so it's a very long application process.  And my dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] started talking to me about it, and I kind of already knew that he wanted me to go to an Academy.  I just-- it meant a lot to him given how he felt about the military, and how he had wanted to become an officer, to have a son become an officer and go through Academy, which is the most prestigious way to become an officer, meant a lot to him.  And I grew around a lot of people in the military and respected it, and, you know, had that same feeling.  I knew he wanted me to go, but it was something I enjoyed, and wanted to do as well, and so we jointly worked on the application process, and-- but I also applied to other schools.  And I had a dozen other scholarships to other places I could have gone.
Speaker 1: So where did you apply?
Speaker 2: Let's see I got into Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia]; one of the Ivy Leagues, I think it was Cornell [University in Ithaca, New York], but I didn't know what Ivy League was, the value of what that meant at the time.  It was just the school of the North, to me at that time.  No one-- I hadn't been around people who had, went to business; I hadn't really been around people who went to Ivy, I hadn't really been around any of that, so I had no way of really weighing some of these school.  So I must have had a dozen scholarships, but the Academy was what I knew, what the value of that was and what that meant.  And the other ones were mix or match.  And so, and the Academy had one of the few computer science programs at the time, at that time.  They had one of the first twenty-five schools that had a computer science major was the Air Force Academy because of all the space programs, and you know, the research--very technical content.
Story_ID: 105009
Speaker 1: Okay, but, how--where does your interest in computers come from?  You're not-- You haven't explained that.  Is that a teacher or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'cause I mean, that's when they had--were they still with the, the cards?  No, that's a little earlier.
Speaker 2: Both, (unclear).  We're still--we're using the cards in the mainframe, but this was the beginning of the early PC [personal computer] industry when I was in the high school.  So, at that time, I was always curious about mechanical--how things worked, so I was always fiddling with things because my dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] would work on cars and I got exposed to it through him just kind of fixing things because that was part of his disciplining, he would fix things.  And so I like, I was always curious as to how things worked.  And so this was when I was a junior, they had these stores called, Heathkit stores, which no longer exist, but they were kind of like RadioShacks.
Speaker 1: What was the name?
Speaker 2: Heathkit.
Speaker 1: H-e-a-t-h--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: H-e-a-t-h kit.  It used to be all over the country.  The way Heathkit got started, I mean, it lasted for 50 or 60 years, kind of like RadioShack.  They bought a lot of excess parts from World War II, just all these mechanical things, and hobbyist would come in and build things.  And that's what they were selling.  It was for people who had engineering-type skill sets who liked to build things, but it was a retail store.  And they had little clubs and things.  So because I liked tinkering, I walked into the store and there were people there who were building PCs, and I was fascinated by that, and was watching, trying to figure out what they were doing.  And the store owner came over to me and said, "Do you know what they're doing?"  I go, "I'm trying to figure that out."  He said, "Are you interested in computers?"  "I never touched one or seen one."  He said, "You can actually build one. I can help you build one."  And I was fascinated by that.  He took me under his wing for no reason.  These were all, at that time, everyone in the store was white, the store owner was white, actually Jewish, and just took an interest in me because I was curious and asking questions.  And he said, "Look, we have a club that meets every--" you know, Wednesday night, or whatever it was, "we get together and talk about what we think about this--what we think is the future of the computer industry, these small computers," and at that time, you could not buy one off the shelf, but you could buy these parts and build one--and we had a little software we rented and we put together--you actually would build a PC.  So he taught me how to build a PC, so I started building PCs.  And, at that time, this was pre-Windows.  They had something called, CP/M [Control Program for Microcomputers], which is even pre-MS-DOS [Microsoft Disk Operating System] and had a little operating system, and this little thing that you could run on it, but it was kind of a hobbyist industry.  It was just fun putting these PCs together.  So I was doing that early before there was a PC industry, and I fell in love with that and started programming, and figuring out because you had to write most of your software.  There wasn't much software around.  And--
Speaker 1: So when you were writing the programming, what language?  Was it the DOS or was it, you know, there was FORTRAN [Formula Translating System]?
Speaker 2: This was, this was-- Well DOS was an operating system, but the operating system was called the CP/M.
Speaker 1: CP/M.
Speaker 2: This is fore runner to DOS.  Actually became a version of that, became DOS later.  And then they had BASIC [Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code] and then they had something called, dBase, which was a data base programing language.  There was Fox Con [sic, FoxPro], there was different, little programming languages.  And I started teaching myself how to program and enjoying that, just the logic of it because I like the structure, and figuring out that-- wanting to figure out how something works, and the analysis.  It was almost like the Sherlock Holmes books.  This was a puzzle to me.  The only difference here was I could interact with it and get immediate feedback; either I solved the problem or I didn't.  I liked the immediate feedback, and it was logical.  I liked things that were logical.  I could figure out a structure to it.  If I could master a structure, I can get the same result and master this every time.  And that became a theme.  I liked things with rules that I can control and figure out because then I wdidn't have to figure out if someone liked me or not, or political, if I had the right relationship, I know I could do this one thing and make it work, and I can prove that I could make it work.  That was the appeal to me, so it became an obsession of mine.  I loved computers.
Story_ID: 105010
Speaker 1: And so that is one of the reasons I went to the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado] because they were known for that, and it was the military as well, so it kind of solved the both things that I wanted to do.  That is why I was looking at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia] as well for computers.  And one thing led to another because that has been a theme throughout my career is doing something technical with rules and that is why I went to law school as well, and same thing, structure, you could figure out rules, and finance, same things, it's rules.  So things that I could master and demonstrate empirically, I enjoyed, and things that I had to rely on someone liking me, I didn't like that.  So I liked being measured, but, anyway, there computers were my first love, and it grew.  I met other people who had similar interests, and found out there were clubs all over the place that were doing the same thing and then you could start sending e-mails and bulletin boards.  I got on that and started conversing with other people in other cities.  And learn little tips and tricks they would teach you and stuff, and you know, so you just started getting into it, you know.  So that became an early love.  But the value of that is if you build a computer, you actually know how the computer works, all the components, and understand all the logic of the system, as opposed to just using one.  And so that understanding of it gives you certain prospective how to do everything with a computer, whether it's programming one, taking apart, you know, diagnosing what's is wrong with one; and all because I started in the early days building them with the guy in the Heathkit store.  So that's how I got into computers.  It was kind of serendipity, I would say.  You had to have some aptitude to learn it, and appreciate some math and logic, all the things that--all that was kind of there already, but I probably wouldn't have known to do that if someone hadn't pulled me aside and go, "You know, you--I think you can do this.  You seem like you're curious.  Let me show you something."
Story_ID: 105011
Speaker 1: Now how was, how was the--can you talk about the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado] and what the curriculum was like?  The Academy is based in Colorado Springs, right?
Speaker 2: Yes [sic, it is located outside of the city limits of Colorado Springs, Colorado].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you talked a little bit about the application process.  I mean was it hard to get recommendation from--you said up, it was--who gave you--who gave you the reference?  It was--
Speaker 2: Nelson Rockefeller.
Speaker 1: Nelson Rockefeller, so how did you get that because the only person I know who was working--well Nelson Rockefeller, I think Dick Parson's [HM Richard Parsons] about (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so we had no political connections, you know, given our background, but I just filled out the application process, and wrote him a letter, and told him why I wanted to go to the Academy, and here is what I've done; here is the basketball team, the National Honor Society, just listed everything out.  Just appealed to, "Hey, I have no reason other than these things I've done, I don't know anybody, I can't--but most people who go to the Academy I'm sure are in a similar position, but I'd like to really go, and what do I have to do to get in?"  And to my shock and surprise he wrote me a letter back and, you know, accepted it, he liked what he heard.  He sent people out to interview me.  And that was the start of a long process, but I passed all the interviews, whatever they wanted.  Then got the nomination.  But--
Speaker 1: Do you remember that day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, like it was yesterday 'cause I was betting everything on getting into the Academy because the other schools, I didn't really appreciate because I grew up appreciating the military and the Academy so much that anything other than that, would have been a step down, no matter what--at least that was my frame of reference.  So I got into the school of my choice and I got in through vice president of the United States, (unclear) so it was joyous day.  My dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] was very proud.
Story_ID: 105012
Speaker 1: But then, you actually have to do it.  So, it's a different environment going into the military academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado].  So a little bit of culture shock when you get there because first time away from home.  They grab you off the bus and start yelling at you right away, and shave your head within an hour, and throw a uniform on you, and you're marching around in the next two hours, and just chaos.  You know, you just-- you're whole life changes.  You have no free time.  People tell you what to do, and they just start.  And so that's the first day.  My dad [Charles Phillips, Sr.] dropped me off.  While he was dropping me, somebody grabs me and boom, and he just said--and they have a--they told the parents that you can have--"Say good bye to your son; you'll see him at 8 p.m. tonight at the field house."  So we all go there.  By that time, we all have our heads shaved, where in uniform at the end of the day.  You get to say good bye.  You can't call home; you can't go home for another five months, so this is it, just say good bye; and dad just said, "Lots of people come through here and they graduate.  None of them are any better than you.  You're gonna be just fine.  Don't do anything you'll regret later.  And good luck."  Shook my hand and walked off, but that's my dad's way.  That was his way; that's about as sentimental as he was going to get.
Speaker 2: The most you were going to get.
Speaker 1: That's all you were going to get.
Speaker 2: And you're probably thinking--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: "Where am I?  What happened?"  Now that my head is bald; people yelling at me; I'm in uniform; and you're scared to death; all these upper classmen; and I know nobody; and I'm in the 7000 feet, up in the mountain.  The Academy is up in this mountain range, so the air is hard to breath.  You think you're in shape and so you're feeling a little lightheaded, and that's it.  Take you to your dorm room.
Speaker 2: It's beautiful there though, right, at Colorado Springs (unclear)?
Speaker 1: It is, but you're in basic training for the first three months and then you're a freshman at an academy.  You're what is called a "Doolie," which is Greek for "slave."  You're basically walking; you're at attention all the time; square corners.  You have to sit attention when you eat; stare at the eagle on your plate.  You have to finish all your bites in three chews.  It's a very regimented thing.  And that's your first year doing that.  So we lost about usually about 40% to 50% of the class because not everybody can take that, so they recruit more people, at least at that time, the dropout rate was horrendous because of the pressure of running and yelling.  It's an intense thing.  It's like pledging for a full year.  And you still have to get your academic work done.  So you know, most colleges is 120 credits.  It's 190 at the academy.  You go to school every day.  There's no choice.  You're in class at 7:30, you stay in class until 4:30.  A full load.  There is no having one day free.  There is no scheduling, so everyday, you're in class.  Engineering, you have to pay attention.  So seventy-seven percent of the classes are engineering-related, thermodynamics, aerodynamics, electrical engineering, computer science.  And so it's an engineering school for the Air Force, so it's tough subject, you know, Physics, Chemistry, but I took all that.  I went to a decent high school [Lakeshore High School in Atlanta, Georgia], but it wasn't a high school to prepare you for that.  I got straight As, but it was a high school in Georgia; and I get there, and everybody is the top of their class from everywhere; and a lot of them had already had a year-and-a-half of engineering, physics, all that stuff, so I had to catch up pretty fast and focus while doing all this other stuff, but it, so it was highly competitive, but it was the best training you're ever going to have because you're either going to step up and say, "I can do this, and dive deep into the engineering studies and I'm going to nail it," or you leave.
Speaker 2: That's, so I-- You know, I remember reading about the--which I didn't know about the academy was the focus.  It's all engineering.
Speaker 1: All engineering. So.  They don't really-- The thinking was they don't really need the other majors because it's a very focused mission, right?  It's missiles; it's airplanes; it's space programs, it's--so they value engineering a lot.
Story_ID: 105013
Speaker 1: So let me ask, how many--how large is the, how large is the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado]?  And the program is, how long is the program?
Speaker 2: So it's a four year degree, and Bachelor of Science, computer science, I got there.  They're about 4,000 cadets there at a given time.  This was all regulated by law.  So by law, the entering class they can have to be up to 1,500, but then you usually lose half of those, so we graduated 750 because if they don't continue under military pressure, then it's the academics, especially the African American cadets just because it's so engineering and math intensive, and a lot of them, like myself, didn't have that type of intensity in their high school.  If you come from one of these private schools or somewhere else, they prepared you.  They knew you were going to do that.  So, while I liked the subject matter, which was of such intensity of so many engineering courses at once, you know--you're taking Thermo- [Thermodynamics], Aero- [Aerodynamics] at the same time and taking Chemistry.  I mean, it's not one, it's multiple, but it gets you up to speed pretty quickly and you learn how to think like that, you know.
Speaker 1: So are you, then is it, so over those four years, what do you do, what do you do summers--you know--during the--when you're in the Academy like that, what are you doing?
Speaker 2: So you only get three weeks off of personal time for the summer.  The other, the rest of the summer, you're doing structured programs.  We did survival training.  I did airborne training; jumping out of airplanes; I did, spent three weeks refueling tankers, being a boom operator in the back of a tanker.  So it's things that are prepare you for your career; and the survival training is one of the best known school in the world called, Survival, Evasion, Resistance, [and] Escape, SERE, so people go to this school at a mountain range where they drop you off and you have to survive for ten days without food and water and that kind of stuff.  They teach you how to survive, how to kill food and all that stuff.  So those were things you did in the summer to practice your, your craft, and--but you had the three weeks to yourself; other than that, you were doing one of those things.
Story_ID: 105014
Speaker 1: So how, how many, is the-- what is the student body like?  I mean, how many African Americans at this point are in the, you know, Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado]?  And I know you've grown up, you know, you're-- have grown up in a primarily non-minority environment, but how many minorities are there?
Speaker 2: Not very many.
Speaker 1: When you say not many--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I think if I can remem-- maybe out of the 4,000, there may have been a couple hundred max.  So you could, we all knew each other, you could count them in one hand.  It just, either people weren't as interested for whatever reason or maybe it just became-- it took time for people to recognize it as an option, but it was mostly white males.  So, it was only--I guess when we got, it was the second class that began to accept women.  It was men before that, so all the upper classmen were men.  And my class was only the second class that started with a few women.  Even then, it was just a few when they first started.  And it turns out one of the few that started with me, became a friend of mine, Michelle Johnson.  She is now superintendent of the Air Force Academy, General [sic, Lieutenant General] Michelle Johnson, one of the first women admitted there.  But all the upper classmen when I got there, were all men.  So it's basically a white male population.
Speaker 1: Right.  And I mean, so how did the advent of women because this is under, I think President [Gerald] Ford is in office at this point, but this is under--how was that though because they're coming in, how many are in your class?
Speaker 2: I think we may have had, I'm guessing, maybe forty of them.
Speaker 1: That's hard.  That's a lot of--
Speaker 2: That's why I have total respect for what they did because, frankly, most cadets didn't want them there.  It was--people were skeptical.  You know, we had this tradition, it was a boys club.  Even some of my classmates didn't want them there, but watching Michelle Johnson who became All-American in three sports, a Rhodes Scholar, she was designing parts on the space shuttle; I mean she-- you name it, she was just a super, unusual person.  She performed so well, that everybody said, "Wow!"  So her performance kind of silenced people.  Now, she is General Johnson running the academy, and, so-- which is an early lesson in life because, for me, you know, you see that and say "Okay, obviously they're qualified, and obviously you can't judge a book by its cover, and much respect."  And it kind of went away.
Speaker 1: I mean that--okay, so how large is the number now?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: It's still the same number, I think it's 4,000 cadets.
Speaker 1: Okay, have things changed with their curriculum?  Have you stayed in touch?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still on the board of the academy endowment, and I go out there, usually once or twice a year. Now I know the superintendent.  But it's changed; they have a push on too for more diversity, and I've actually funded some inner-city kids for going to the academy to learn about it from high school because you have to start early just so they know it exists.  So we try to do programs like that.  So it's improving.  The curriculum is a little bit more diverse but not tremendously, it's still engineering, which is what it should be, so you gotta know that.  Don't go there if you don't want to do engineering.  'Cause they have a--they're training officers for a specific mission, so they have to stay true to that.  But it's one of the best educations you're going to get if you're interested in engineering.
Story_ID: 106740
Speaker 1: So how are the--this is a sidebar, but how are the inner-city kids doing, I mean, because it would take a specific person to really--I mean, if you're--you came from a disciplined environment?
Speaker 2: That's the challenge of getting someone who has the kind of inclination for that type of study for engineering and math, and also can deal with the culture shock of the whole military thing, and can deal with the fact that they're probably going to be a minority in that environment for sure.  And they may be coming from an environment where they're not, but that's why it's been so difficult changing, you know, the mix over time.
Speaker 1: Or even people being successful--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --being successful because once they begin, they gotta stay there.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it's the attrition, I mean attrition rate, 'cause it's not for everyone.  Now, but, you know, lots of people have talked about it.
Story_ID: 106741
Speaker 1: So how is your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] feeling though?
Speaker 2: He was just tremendously proud 'cause--to, you know, he liked telling people that his son was at the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado], like everybody goes to an academy, whether it's West Point [United States Military Academy at West Point, New York] or Naval [United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland] their parents are always super proud of that.  And it's a lot of pressure on the cadets because, you know, when you get accepted to an academy, it's a senator or a vice president that are putting pressure.  It's a big thing in the town.  It's in the newspaper, and you don't want to not make it.  And so those-- there were kids who would leave the academy and not tell their parents for two years because they didn't want to go home and tell people they didn't make it.  So it's a tremendous amount of pressure.  Any other school if you left, you could transfer.  This one, you got kicked out.  So it was-- on the other hand, it was motivation.
Speaker 1: Was there a high suicide rate, Charles?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't.  It wasn't like that.  People, at least in that time period, that's not how they handled it, but they would not go home out of embarrassment, you know.
Story_ID: 106742
Speaker 1: What are you thinking you want to do because I had read someplace also that you really had dreams of being a pilot.  Even though, you know, we've talked a lot about computers and--talk about the worsening of your eyesight and what was, what was the cause of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't go to the Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado] primarily to be a pilot because it was for the computer science and the military background, but, at that time, most people graduated and then went on to pilot school.  It's changed a little bit now.  So it was certainly an option that, more likely than not, most people, that's what you're going to do.  And I enjoyed flying.  I flew while I was there, I soloed.  You're required to start flying while you're at the academy.  At that same time, because I'm staying up until 3 and 4 in the morning programming and staring at some very bad green screens, and was obsessed doing that and loved doing that, that I think had an impact on my eyes.  By the time I got to be a senior, I wasn't 20/20 anymore.  So I tried the corrective lenses and all that, but they, by that time, they didn't have the same technology; they didn't have LASIK surgery, and it was just, technology was just not there.  As my eyes became, what they call pilot-waiverable, which is a different class; there is pilot-qualified and pilot-waiverable, which means your eyes may go back and maybe sometime during pilot training, we may have to stop if your eyes continue to deteriorate.  So I decided when I was a senior, that since it was a good chance my eyes would may or may not make it, and I wasn't sure; and I had tons of family in the Marine Corps [United States Marine Corps] because of my background.  And I loved that whole culture, kind of the gun ho thing.  I was going to take my commission in the Marines, which you can do by law up to a certain percentage of any Academy can take their commission in another service.  So I applied--you have to go through the whole process to get approved by the Secretary of the Air Force, the whole nine yards.  And so that's how I ended up taking my commission to the Marines and making that decision, which I'm glad I did.  I really enjoyed the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: So are most people going to the Marine Corps, or were you going to the Marine Corps because of your family's history in the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: My family's history.
Speaker 1: Are most people going into the Air Force?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 99% were going there, so it's an exception to go to some other service, and you have to get approval for that.  So I was an exception, but given my family history, and my desire to lead because you have--Marines have very few officers, so you get a lot of people working for you.  You're a leader pretty quickly there; and they have a certain culture around leadership, and develop leaders in a different way; and that appealed to me.  So I said, "I want to experience that," and I like the history of the Marine Corps, you know, going back to 1777 and all that, and just the whole culture of that, and the comradery.  It is a different thing.  So that decision was, looked crazy at the time; and my father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] thought, you know, "The Marines are tough, and they have more racial problems.  I don't think you should do that."
Speaker 1: Because he had all this experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so that's interesting.
Speaker 2: He said "Stay in the Air Force because of the academics and the mental nature of the pilots and engineering, it's more progressive."  He said, "In the Marines, I don't know," but he said, "I just think you're safer."  But I said, "My heart is with the Marines.  I want to go do that."  That's what I did.  And he accepted that, and it turned out to be a great call because I could get promoted early 'cause I was bringing in the engineering and the computer stuff at a time when the Marines were just getting in computers helped as well 'cause that was a unique thing that I had all this computer experience.  Most Marines didn't know what a computer was.  So I could help them start to automate and move forward but it was a fun experience and some of the relationships you make there, and the culture sticks with you your whole life.
Speaker 1: You were there for five years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you-- Were you at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in Jacksonville, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Camp Lejeune was the first place I was stationed--well actually prior to that, you go Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico], which is in [Quantico] Virginia for six months when you first join the Marines, all officers do, and that's where they mold you into a Marine officer no matter where you came from because the Marines don't have their own dedicated academy.  They take people from different places but they make you into a Marine-- an infantry officer first while you're at Quantico and then you go get stationed somewhere, so after that, I went to Camp Lejeune.
Speaker 1: And how are you finding it because now you-
Story_ID: 106743
Speaker 1: Did you-- you got married though, right, around this time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. So I met my wife, Karen [Phillips], while I was in high school [Lakeshore High School in Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: In Atlanta.
Speaker 2: In Atlanta, she was not from Atlanta either.  Her mother worked for Parsons Brinckerhoff in New York [New York City, New York] which is an engineering firm that was hired to build a subway system in Atlanta, so they had to move down for that project and they just happen to move in at the same time I was moving in, and we were the two new kids.  We were both African American.  We were the only ones not from the South, didn't know anybody, spoke differently, so we hit it off.  So we dated all throughout high school, and then I went off to Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado], couldn't really continue but we kept in touch.  Then as soon as I, we both graduated, we got married while I was at Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in Jacksonville, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 106744
Speaker 1: So you're living as an enlisted service--I mean, is it enlisted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: As an officer [of the United States Marine Corps].
Speaker 1: Enlisted officer, sorry, and you're working, but you're working primarily in their, in the computer area, and you're saying this is an interesting time.  You have a value because they're sort of outdated and--
Speaker 2: Right, so it's changing--
Speaker 1: So what are some of the things you, sort of, are working for them?
Speaker 2: So was assigned to an artillery battalion, and so they were just now starting to use computers to manage the material, the people, to know where things are, this expensive equipment, artillery guns, lots, tons of assets associated with our artillery battalion, to know where it is, when it needs to be replaced, who has what, and then make sure that as this unit is moving, things are arriving to keep people fed--what they call "beans, bullets and band-aids" arrive at the right because it's always moving.  So the best way to do that is with automation, so they started to automate.  I was part of that wave of implementing that for battalion.
Speaker 1: So is this similar to other parts of the service, these things are going on?
Speaker 2: They were going on, probably the Marines were a little bit behind because their-- they initially aren't the lead edge on technology, at least they weren't at that time, but they're the leading edge on fighting.  And so part of it was cultural that, you know, "what do I need computers for?  I just-- send me to where I need to go," type of thing.  So it had to be a shift to adopt to kind of a new way of doing things and that this can help you fight.  So it was an interesting transition, and, now, it's integral, uoi know, kind of the modern warrior, the modern Marine has a lot of technology attached to them.
Speaker 1: And what would you say was significant about your period there also before-and then--okay, what was significant?  And then what makes you decide to go to Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia] for your M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: The significance of the Marines is learning how to lead people because you have people of all walks of life, so you're an officer, and you've enlisted people who are reporting to you.  And a lot of them are come from different types of home environment, some from broken homes, some who haven't been--like my father who had not been anywhere, you know.  So they were relying on you.  You're teaching them a lot.  Some of them couldn't balance a checkbook; some of them had problems at home, so you became kind of their semi-father figure, and you rely on them and they rely on you.  I rely on them to get the mission done, and you have to motivate them.  And what the Marines teaches you is how to motivate people when you can't pay them more money because you can't use money.  You have to find a way to connect with that person, and have them respect you in a way--not fear you--but respect enough to want to do what you say, and do it without question because you can't have people question you in wartime.  So we--you learn at a young age to get professional leadership training, and no other place does that well.  In most businesses, you get promoted to be a leader because you were good at something, individual contributor, you had a special skill set, you did a good job at it and now you're the manager, but, okay, how do you manage people?  You've had no training for management.  The military teaches you had to lead and manage people, and then you go get your technical skills set, you know.  So that is the value of that experience and it's still with me today, and how to read people; how to get them to respond to you; how to communicate; how to say something in a way.  You could have a problem and discuss it.  You could either make a mistake and break the person's spirit because you're trying to correct them, and say in the wrong way, and be mean about it, or you can find a way to say it in a constructive way that makes them want to do better and not disappoint you.  And choosing between those and knowing how to be thoughtful about that is part of being a leader.  So if the leader just wants to lead people by intimidating people, that does not last very long because they get fed up and leave with that, but you've done a good job if people wake up not wanting to disappoint you, not because they fear you.  And that experience you can't-- is hard to replicate and explain, you know?
Story_ID: 106745
Speaker 1: So what makes you want to go because your father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] went--you said, Hampton [University in Hampton, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: So when he got out of the military [U.S. Air Force], he wanted to finish--to get his college degree.  He went to Hampton and so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --So what year did he go?
Speaker 2: He went in--1970 something--where did it go?  I think it was around '75 [1975] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so like, almost eleven years later, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Decide to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I mean, whatever, ten, whatever--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --decide to--because he really loved Hampton, out of respect for him, I went to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy in El Paso County, Colorado] partly out of respect for him and I did that as well, but I felt like having that experience because I hadn't been around many black people, and I didn't have, obviously, any experience in a black college at all, so it was a way to get at least a little time--graduate school is different because I'm not living on campus, so I'm not, so you're not doing the things like an undergraduate, but, at least, I got to spend a little time around it because I felt I missing that cultural dimension because I just hadn't been around black people most of my life, so it was a way to try to get some of that in, and briefly, but it was important to me.
Speaker 1: So how did you start your M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] program because I didn't think Hampton had an M.B.A. program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a new program at the time.  It probably had been around about ten years before that or something like that, but it was focused--they let  you have concentrations, and I know I wanted to concentrate on finance, so you could kind of shape your M.B.A.  That's what I liked about it.  I could say, "I'm going into finance.  I'm likely going to Wall Street, so I want to concentrate--take half the classes, just go in deep into finance."  So that what was useful about it and then just being on the campus, and the historical aspect of it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because--so your wife [Karen Phillips] decides that she's not really happy with military life around this time, right?
Speaker 2: Well, she was tremendous in terms of supporting me, but we were stationed in Camp Lejeune [Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in Jacksonville, North Carolina] with 38,000 Marines and four pawn shops was about all that was there, so it wasn't much of a life for her, and I recognized it.  It's okay, this is going to be rough.  She could do it, and she would do it if I asked her to, but, on the other hand, it's a lot to ask because Marine bases aren't like--Air Force bases are a nice place, they're all nice.  The fresh paint, yeah, that's going to be at the Air Force base.  That's not going to be at Marine base because Marines like to do the most with the least.  They say those things aren't the important thing.  It's all about fighting the mission; that's where they put the time, and the money, and attention, but that's what makes them the Marines.  So you're not going to have these wonderful facilities at least at that time.  They've gotten a little bit better, but it's nothing like an Air Force base, so given that existence, and what I learned just reading and thinking about what I want to do next; "Okay, do I want to stay?  Do I want to get out?" Because I was coming onto five years, I knew enough to know I'd been around the military pretty much my whole life that maybe I should see what else is out there.  Pretty much everyone I knew told me not to get out because I'd already made captain at a young age and I was on a fast track there.  You can finish your career there.  You have pay the rest of your life.  It's a pretty predictable career, safe.  But that's the one word I didn't like to hear, "safe," because I like to take calculated risk.  I'm a risk taker, and it was just too safe.  And had there been more going on, there were no wars going on at the time, I probably would have stayed in, but the fact that we were just doing exercises and practicing for a war contributed to it.  I said, "I just can't keep doing this.  If there was going to be some action, that's one thing, but now I'm curious what else can I do for excitement," and so I said, "I'll stay in the Reserves," which I did, "and I can get out, if I don't like it, I can come back in."  If there's nothing out there for me, at least I'll know that I won't be wondering and I'll go find out.  So I explained to my dad because he didn't want me to get out unless--that I have a fall back plan, I can go back in.
Story_ID: 106746
Speaker 1: So this is your late twenties too, though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're still young.  How do you end up with the Bank of New York Mellon [Corporation]?  I mean, is that your first--
Speaker 2: That was my first job.  I didn't know anybody in New York [New York City, New York].  Then, my mother-in-law was living in New York.  My wife's [Karen Phillips] family is from the New York area.  She said you just need to start applying and see what you can do.  So all I did was start writing a bunch of different financial institutions like "I just got out of the Marines, I'd like to come live in New York, I don't have any financial experience but I'm a quick learner.  I've learned engineering" and, to my view, it's harder than finance.  I think I sent out 200 letters.  I got like 190 rejections 'cause people didn't value the military experience at that time and the whole engineering, it just-- especially in New York without any military bases here, they hadn't been around it.  It has changed some now, we respect it now.  But back then--remember this is--remember this is '80s [1980] when--.  People would tell me "You seem like you're so smart, so why would you go to the military if you're that smart?"  I said, "Well, you can be smart--it's not oxymoron, people do things for other than money sometimes because they have a commitment," so I had to explain that.  And so, it was looking pretty bleak actually and then the Bank of New York, I wrote the guy and said, "Will you meet with me?"  He said, "Yes, let me know the next time you're in town."  I came to town and had trouble pinning him down, but I finally badgered him into a meeting.  I realized as soon as I walked into his office, I waited all day to see him.  He had a name plaque on his desk with an eagle, globe, and anchor-- had his last name with an eagle, globe, and anchor next to it, which was the Marine Corp emblem, so I knew his dad was a Marine and that's why he met with me.  Once I saw that, I was, "Okay, I know why I'm here.  I know I'm going to get this job now," so we start talking and within twenty minutes, we're laughing and talking about everything.  He said, "All right, I'll give you a shot."  And I said, "That's all I'm asking for a shot, and let me get started, and if I fail, fire me in six months.  You'll never hear from me again.  I'll work for whatever you think it is.  I didn't know what it was worth.  You tell me.  I'll work for anything.  I just want a shot."  And he gave it to me.  And--
Speaker 1: And you were hired to do what, Charles?
Speaker 2: So he hired me into--they had a mini training program, so I went around to different departments and that lasted about six months.  I worked in the credit department, analyzing financial statements, and then he assigned me in the research department for analyzing stocks because I like analyzing things.  So I said, "I can do that.  I'll figure that out."  So I got there.  And they weren't sure what to do with me.  So I said, "The thing I know about is computers, why don't you let me follow computer stocks and I can tell you a lot about that?"  But I didn't know about the stock market.  I go, "I don't, but I know the products work and I know why people buy them.  I know if they're good or not."  That, what seemed to be important because everybody else was an accountant or had some finance thing they were really good at.  I said, "Yeah, I'll get to learning the stock market," but none of them could tell you what the products--if the products--that's what I know.  And that was the unique thing I had, so they said, "Okay, do that."  And the computer industry stock market was just starting.  That's when Microsoft [Corporation] was just becoming public.  Oracle [Corporation] had just became public, so it was a little side industry, especially the area I specialized in, which was the enterprise area, the more complex software.  There were very few people even paying--they were scared of those stocks because they didn't understand them, and they were small companies.  No one paid attention to them, so I said, "I'm just going to do that, and I will explain the reason these companies exist, how it's gonna change, I think it's going to be a big industry.  Computers are going to be more prevalent.  I already knew all that from the last seven years working with the stuff that it was growing in importance, but I didn't how long it would take.  But I knew it was going to be big at some point.  And a lot of the ways they used to do things on the old, giant computers with the cards and all that stuff--all these new computers because I've been building them, are going to be more powerful and more efficient way to do it, and this is going to get big.  And here are the software companies that are going to help automate that, and I'll just do that, and explain to people why that's going to happen, and the shift from mainframes to PCs [personal computers] and all that."  And they said, "We don't understand a thing you're saying, but it sounds like you know what you're talking about, so go ahead and do that."  So I started basically visiting those companies, writing reports about them, and explaining to investors why they should invest, and then eventually made it to the investment banking firm and started doing the mergers and acquisitions, and seeing how the industry worked.  I knew everybody in the industry because that is all I was doing (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now you were at what investment bank firm?
Speaker 2: So I ended up at Kidder, Peabody [& Co.]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Kidder, Peabody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and then to Morgan Stanley.
Story_ID: 106747
Speaker 1: Okay. You know what-- okay, so first of all, this time period, I want to go back because this is--is it the [President Ronald] Reagan years at this point?  It's the end of the Reagan--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --which time of the year?
Speaker 1: When you come to New York.
Speaker 2: New York, yeah, that was Reagan time period.
Speaker 1: And the interest rates are really high too at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The other thing--where are the M.B.A.s in your history because this is a time when investment banking is sort of hot, you know, and African Americans are, you know, coming into investment banking, you know, and this is a place to come in New York [New York City, New York]?  You're entering on the computer side, but you're doing the analysis.  Are there any MBAs doing that?  Like when you went to Kidder, Peabody [& Co.], what area were you in versus someone who has an M.B.A. or coming out in economics or finance?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody else, that is what they were, they were MBA coming out of Wharton [Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Harvard [Business School in Cambridge, Massachusetts] or whatever, but they didn't know anything about computers, so I wasn't intimidated by that--what was surprising to me, I said, "you're trying to decide what companies are going to be successful, it would be good to know what the companies do in order to be able to predict that, and know what the products are bought to be able to analyze which company is going to win and which company is going to lose, and you can't do that if you don't understand what the products do."  That was basic assump--and still my today, and so I knew I knew that, and all these other guys were accountants or finance people who didn't understand the technology world, so how you're going to analyze it, other than saying, looking at the stock price?  Yeah, you can build a model, but you can't predict what's going to happen if you can't make some assumptions about winners or losers and technology trends.  So I felt like--I was confident that I had an advantage not starting in the finance market and starting in the industry, and understanding the technology first, and then getting to the finance world later.  So I, That's the way I pitched it to get the job, and that's turned out to be true.
Story_ID: 106748
Speaker 1: So you started in [Bank of] New York Mellon [Corporation], and then I have you going to SoundView [Technology Group], is that true, you know, and so--?
Speaker 2: It's a small brokerage firm.
Speaker 1: So this was--SoundView was a brokerage firm, but did it focus on technology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, only on technology because they saw what I was doing and they go, "That guy know his technology.  We're a brokerage firm focused on technology, let's go hire him."  So they came and recruited me, and I went there.  And then Kidder, Peabody [& Co.] did the same thing; they recruited me; and Morgan [Stanley] did the same thing.  That's how I moved up because I just went to bigger and bigger and bigger firms because they would see me; I'd get some buzz going; and go see some investors.  And investors would call him and tell him, "You need to go hire this guy.  He's the first guy to explain to me how this works.  He understands this industry," and so somebody would call me, that's just word of mouth from the investors.  And so I never--other than that first time, that's the only time I applied for a job, the first job I got, here in New York.  Then every since then, it's was just word of mouth.
Speaker 1: So Charles, who are you getting to know at this point?  And-- I mean who are the other analysts or people doing this kind of work and the tech--first of all, the tech space?
Speaker 2: It was just evolving--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --it's just new.
Speaker 2: There weren't many people doing it, and I was basically trying to create a job for myself, saying "this is going to be big--" (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Hold on.
Story_ID: 106749
Speaker 1: Any overlap with them at all?  Or you're in-- You're existing really in the tech space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's the way I viewed myself.  I was the technology guy to working for an investment bank.  They were investment bankers, who could do any industry.  I was the technology guy who was trying to find a way to make that valuable to an investment bank, and that's pretty much what I pitched to them.  "Look, this is gonna be big.  You need somebody who understands this because I can explain it to investors and why they should invest in this."  So we didn't overlap.  I met them later once I got to Morgan Stanley.  They were already at Morgan Stanley, but they were on investment, just doing pure investment banking.  I was doing the technology stuff, explaining to that to the investment bankers, to investors, and helping decide which companies should be merged because I understood the industry.  At that time, there was a very influential magazine called, Institutional Investor, which is still around and they would pick one analyst in each category as the "all-star analyst" that year, so because I was spending so much time with investors explaining this technology thing, they started nominating me for that, so I won that like ten years in a row [1994 to 2003] as the II analyst, the all-star analyst, for technology, for software [Enterprise Software Industry Analyst], and so that made me more people knew me, and the more investors called me.  So I-- I spent most of the time either visiting technology companies, staying on top of technology or with the investors explaining to them.  So I didn't really mix with anybody else because I didn't really need to.
Story_ID: 106750
Speaker 1: So Charles, who are the big tech companies at the time, you know, as we're talking about late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s] period?  So what, what, what are you, what are you sort of looking and when does really Wall Street sort of catch up with tech in a way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '80s [1980s], they were still mostly mid-size companies.  They weren't very big relative to other industries then.  There was Oracle [Corporation], Computer Associates [now CA Technologies], Legent [Corporation], Goal Systems, it's a bunch of them.  Some of them aren't around and some of them are.  And I decided to focus on that area with the expectation that it would be bigger later, and it obviously did.  It boomed.  But because they weren't big and it was complex, it was not interesting to most people, but I had--that's what I knew and it was interesting to me, and sometimes if people don't know enough about a subject or it's complex, that makes the market inefficient, that gives you the opportunity to make money in the stock because no one is paying any attention and it's too hard to learn, and they'd say, "Forget it."  If you can learn it, explain it to investors, that's your edge, and you actually can find things that are undervalued when you understand the technology.  And so that I was spending time doing and just making sure I understood the technology world and where it was going, and then coming up with ideas, and explaining it to investors.  "You know, this is going to be big; this one is not; this company is going to lose."
Speaker 1: So what is your, what is your salary like at this point.  I know it's such a base question, but are you being paid well?  And does--like around that time, I was in the cable industry, is the cable industry.  Cable is not viewed as technology at this point, so not even cable-top boxes, you know, things like that, are any of those like Anixter [International], but you're not in that--you're in the software.
Speaker 2: I'm in the esoteric software that most people don't even know existed, so this is all institutional investor game; the people who really look for esoteric things to invest in that the masses don't pay attention to. It was this off in the corner thing.  And we're all making millions at that point.  It was, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --You're making a lot of money at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was making a lot of money because it was a unique skill set and it just went up, went up, went up, went up, went up.
Speaker 1: Even though you're actually creating--you're really, I mean in many ways, you're almost creating--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was an entrepreneur.  I had to create a job and explain why it was going to be important, but because it became important and people were making so much money, they had valued the advice and the firm was making a lot of money because they were getting the trading volume; and the IPOs [initial product offerings] and the M&A [mergers and acquisitions] activity because the companies start to respect you because you're writing about their industry.  You're the only one that cares about it; you become the expert in it, so they want you to do the IPO; they want you to be the one to write about them.  So it became self-reinforcing because I'm talking about this industry and these companies.  This company needs somebody to explain what they do, so they want them to work with me, so I became the company's advisor and I'd explain to investors what they do; and I was the guy that for that little industry, that became big later, I just created that role.
Story_ID: 106751
Speaker 1: And in there, I mean, I had read about people like, you know, Mary Meeker and Frank, is it Quattrone?
Speaker 2: Quattrone, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So each of you and this is around the time that you actually have your business card that's 1-800-MR-CHUCK, are we talking about the right period?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I was at Kidder, Peabody [& Co.], and by that time I was well-known for that software area, so Frank Quattrone called me and Mary Meeker wanted me to join Morgan Stanley as part of their technology team because they didn't have a strong guy at software.  Mary Meeker was doing internet.  Frank Quattrone was kind of the technology bank, on the banking side of it, and there was a missing piece because, at this point in time, the piece I'm doing is starting to get important because now Oracle [Corporation] is public, other companies see it, big market caps and we need to have someone do software, a complete technology team, and so they recruited me.  I liked Mary a lot and Frank, and we worked well together, me and Mary, we're still good friends to this day, so the two of us became the kind of the lead analyst in technology.  She did internet and I did software, and like for ten years in a row, we were both II [Institutional Investor] and so where their company was half internet and half software, one of the other, they had to come to Morgan Stanley because the two guys, two people rather, that were the leading voices for technology were both there and worked as a team.
Speaker 2: Now can I ask-- Why was this centered at Morgan Stanley as opposed to, what credits--I'm trying to think what credits?
Speaker 1: Well, it comes down to the people, so Frank was based on Silicon Valley only did technology, Stanford [Stanford University in Stanford, California] grad, so he had been around it, but he was on the banking side, and me and Mary had only done what we were doing.  She had only done the PC [personal computer]/internet stocks and I had only done the software.  We had been doing the same thing.  What I just described, she had been doing on her side of it, so we had our thing.  So you put those two together, you have now the leading technology team by far.  You can't recreate what I, instantly learn, what I spent many years learning those technology and focusing on that one thing.  It just happened to become important, and then when it became important, I knew it and I was there, so they put me together with Mary Meeker, and now we have a pretty strong team, you know.
Speaker 2: Were there others sort of trying to catch up, sort of, at your heels at that point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Like who?
Speaker 1: Everybody in the industry were trying to mimic what we did, but they didn't have that history and the connections and the knowledge.  We had learned it and then the more you know, the more you get to know because people want to come tell you what you're doing, the next company, hot company wants to meet you and explain what they're doing, so you can explain to investors because you have their ear.  So it's hard to catch up with that when you have that kind of scenario.  So that was a fun time period when the internet was booming and everything was just happening.  Netscape [Communications] was becoming public; it was tons of IPOs [initial product offerings], markets booming and people were trying to figure out what is all this new technology; what's the internet; what does all this mean, so we would write these giant reports explaining this is what the internet does; this is how it's going to affect business, so we would explain this to the world, and companies would use it to formulate their strategies, so it was a good position to be in to be able to say, "Here's how technology industry will work; here's how we will evolve; here's why it's working; here's the impact on many of your industries," and then have the companies come back and want to talk about that with us.
Story_ID: 106752
Speaker 1: So you actually get promoted to, I think in 19--I mean this is, it's so quick.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's so quick.  I mean you start in 1986, and in 1995, you're managing and director of the technology group [at Morgan Stanley]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't seem quick at the time.  It seemed like a long time to me, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's that youth maybe at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but it was a fun time period.  A lot happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about--oh, maybe that was more Mary Meeker who did "The Internet Report" at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we had two, there was "The Internet Report" and then there were the B-to-B [Business-to-business] internet reports that she and I wrote together.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And I still get calls on that report from people finding it--I just got one the other day.  Someone--some kid in college reading it saying he was fascinated by it and wanted to talk to me about it.  So we wrote one together on how the internet was going to impact business.
Speaker 1: You know, that is very--how do I want to say it? So you're in really, in some respects, a very creative space that people don't really know what's going on, you're really, you're creating the market and being able to benefit from that all at the same time.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --all at the same time, and defining the market; and your definition of it changes the market because no one knows exactly.  They're looking for someone to define it, so if you're saying it's going left, a lot of people go left.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's-okay.  But didn't Morgan Stanley, wait a minute, no, no.  I'm trying to--when does the internet bubble?  Is that 1998?
Speaker 2: No, it was more 2000.
Speaker 1: 2000.
Speaker 2: 1999 was a fantastic year, so it was really 2000.  It started to slow down, but it was really 2001 when you could see it's starting to change.
Story_ID: 106753
Speaker 1: Okay. But I mean--you should describe this period and who the, you know, who the leading the companies are, and who are the, some of the leading people, and out of that come personalities also, so can you describe some of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot the people who were leading technology companies today, we were all learning and involving this at the same time, so whether it was Marc Andreessen who is now a major venture capitalist, he was, at that time, founded the Netscape, and I met him when he was a very young man.  Morgan Stanley took him public.  Whether it was [Lawrence] Larry Ellison I met when his company was doing probably doing seven million dollars and now it's forty billion or whatever.
Speaker 1: And that's Oracle [Corporation].
Speaker 2: Oracle, and I went to work there later, but you name it, Eric Schmidt, who was, at that time, the CEO [chief executive officer] of Novell and ended up going to Google, and-- which was the best decision in his life.  So all these guys were people I met early on before they were as well-known as they are now.  And they were building parts of the industry and parts of the internet and major companies whether it was the founders of Sybase, which a major database company that is now owned by SAP [SAP SE].  I knew all those guys.  I mean could just--the list just is endless because there were so many companies.  It was so much more fragmented than it is now, it ended up merging, but I know the taxonomy and pedigree of--this company has five companies that I knew back then, and then they got bought.  So it's all those histories is part of the experience.  Also to give a certain perspective of where the technology came from, when it was bought, when it was hot, and when it became not hot, and why, and what they missed.  So I've seen all the cycles come and go.  I saw mistakes that people made, so I learned from that.  The other major benefit of being an analyst is you get to analyze every company, visit every company.  They tell you their strategy from CEO down.  You meet every head of sales; every head of development, and you can kind of compare.  It's like you're a student of industry.  You get the entire industry wants you to know what you're doing, and it's teaching you at the same time.  So I had a unique prospective--you could see what everybody was doing, and what was working or not working, and what not to do.  So that was a good kind-of graduate degree in business, better than any M.B.A. you can get because I had the best minds in technology begging me to spend time with them, and I would go do that, and that's what I would explain to the investors what each company was doing.  And I dug deep.  I made sure I understood the technology.  I focused on the product always.
Story_ID: 106754
Speaker 1: Was there any prediction that you were wrong in, you know, or you were following something that really wasn't?
Speaker 2: Always in technology, there is always a high risk of any particular companies.  There are always a few start-ups that had a promise in technology, and somebody came up with something better, or bad management.  They got bought out, so it's always some of that, but, for the most part, for the big bets, the reason that you get to be II [Institutional Investor] year after year is you gotta be right most of the time.  But the--I was very careful in IPOs [initial product offerings].  I did a few of them but not a ton of them.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't do a ton of IPOs?
Speaker 2: I did the ones that I thought were good, but during the bubble, I could have done one every week if I wanted.
Speaker 1: That's fine, I mean, because it was ridiculous.  I mean it was like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, and so, resisting that, having the discipline to resist that, even though we left money on the table during that, we just didn't think it was sustainable, and it was a lot of pressure to do that.  We should be doing more; we're going to lose market share, but if I couldn't explain the technology on why it was unique and differentiated for a long period of time, not just for this week, I didn't want to do because if thing looked like it was fleeting or easily could be replicated, it would be eventually, and--but that turned out to be, so there was a period of time you look wrong for not doing those because could have made a lot of money doing those in '98 [1998] and '99 [1990], there was a lot pressure to do that, and it looked very wrong because there was a lot of money, but then by 2001, it looked very smart.
Speaker 1: I mean because it was just like, I mean, people were just investing in anything.  It was like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I'm too structured and logical, I have to be able to explain it; and I have to explain it to investors.  So if I couldn't figure out how it could be a real company, I couldn't really do it, so I just chose to sit-out if I didn't-- couldn't see it.
Story_ID: 106755
Speaker 1: You know, Charles, I have another question too.  What role is the federal government playing, and what is--also where the international piece of this, and where are the techs centers?  I mean, at this point in time, like SAP [SAP SE] came out of where?  Isn't is part government?
Speaker 2: Government didn't play a big role other than forming the basis the internet, which people forget about, and that's-- the precursor of the internet was DARPANET [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Network] and ARPANET [Advanced Research Projects Agency Network] started in the military.  And that's what created the technologies that surround the internet; and I saw that early because I was at the military.  So we had email and all the stuff that became the internet later, very early on.  Um, and so that--but when it became commercialized and they gave it to the universities to do with what they wanted to, that spawned all this innovation.  Um, but after that, it was mainly the U.S. companies by far, Silicon Valley and a few other cities around the east, but a lot of it was Silicon Valley.  University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] was important in it, and Carnegie Mellon [University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but the great universities in the U.S., it was really not foreign competition.  The only company of note that survived and became important was SAP and that's out of Germany because Germany has great engineers; and it all comes back down to engineering always.  And even they didn't create base-- didn't have anything to do with the internet, the base technologies.  They applied--they built applications on top of all that for, you know, counting systems and all that stuff, which is using those technologies, but they didn't create the base technologies.  That was all in the U.S.  So being in the U.S. at that time, when all of this innovation was exploding, was the best place to be.  It was attracting--smart people wanted to come here from all over the world because you couldn't get that anywhere else, and so it's just, the U.S. is unique for technology.  It is one of the few technologies that is 90% U.S.
Speaker 1: Is someone outside that--I mean what you just said is sort of shocking because--you know, I keep, like, you know, when we were talking earlier and you were saying, you know, with Infor, a lot of the companies were in Europe and then you were talking about Norway--wait, was it Norway?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So there's that perception.  I don't think you really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Well, it's the application of technology saying, "I'm going to take all this great stuff and I'm going to build something that does accounting--that's applied technology, but the base creation of its--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --is here in the United States.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --of kind of what the internet looked like, the database technology that stores the data, the design of the disk drive-- all the infrastructure underneath that, that was created here; and even the best software companies, even the ones in Europe, a lot of the design work--you may have programmers in different places, but the design and the thought process, the original concepts were created here.  So you can take our companies where we have some key products where we have developers maybe in India or Manila [Philippines], they can bang out the code, but the concept of what they should be doing and what code to write and the design of the product is still done here largely.  And that's the way, it's that way for a lot of companies, so that intervention piece of it has not been replicated very well anywhere.  There are a few pockets.  There are some in Sweden, some in London, small, but nothing close to what is in the U.S.
Speaker 1: You know, I don't think that is largely known outside of, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you know, they look at all these people in India--there are 1,000s of people who execute on design but their thought process on an idea, on what the design, what you should be doing, a lot of that is still in Silicon Valley here and different places around the U.S.--
Story_ID: 106756
Speaker 1: So why did Silicon Valley--how did it get really started, Charles?  And where was its origin--you know, I mean?
Speaker 2: So Stanford [University in Stanford, California].
Speaker 1: So it's all- it's Stanford's.
Speaker 2: Stanford was a great engineering school.  It started out focused on that and it had a good weather.  So, a lot of the engineers who wanted to be around a low regulatory environment, whether grade school and you had a Hewlett-Packard [Company] there at the time, so a few of the companies there--they were small at that time and they spawned spin-offs and all that.  The West Coast was just tailor-made for spending all your time in engineering and then going outside and enjoying some good weather year round.  But a lot of those companies spun out of Stanford though.
Story_ID: 106757
Speaker 1: So Charles when you were looking at trends and companies, what were the barometers--what were the indicators of, or predictors of success?   I know management is one thing, but what are the--but you talk a lot about innovation, so is there a way of assessing or predicting things that are innovative?  I'm sure--I'm just asking what are the? --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's hard to predict innovations because they happen so fast and in so many areas, but you have recognize when one is valuable, and when it's disruptive, and when it adds--it's either a better way of doing something, more efficient, much cheaper, but it has to be hard to replicate as well.  Is it a protectable?  Is it different enough to make people switch from what they're doing today and stop doing it this way and do it that way?   Does it sufficiently add value?  Can I get something done faster?  Can I get better information, better security?  Can I know more about my business if I do it this way versus that way?  That is the beauty of technology, there's always somebody coming out with something better and disrupting.  That's what makes it constantly interesting--the push where smart people are saying, "How can I make this better?"  That's also why it's an industry that loves young people, young engineers coming in because what you need for innovation is someone who doesn't know how it was done in the past and doesn't care, they think it could be done better and they come up with a new way--and they don't know what can't be done, so you need fresh eyes coming in looking to change the world; and you give them impossible tasks, and they surprise you and figure it out sometimes.  So you gotta to be willing to have a lot of failures to have innovations, so you have to try a lot of different things, iterate--I'd like to say fail fast--try something that is not working, get it over with, and go to the next thing, and try different things.  And that's-- if you see a company that has a lot of innovations, they're trying things all the time; and it's okay to fail in different projects and have competing projects.  So it's hard to put your finger and say it's one thing, but just a culture you're set up to say, "We're gonna constantly be trying new things."  Some will work and some won't, but you don't need all of them to work.  A few big ones can go a long way, you know.
Speaker 1: So, okay--I'm gonna go back to--I just, I didn't know--I was gonna, I didn't know all of this--sort of is exciting--
Story_ID: 106758
Speaker 1: What I'm interested in is the transition from analyst, analyst, analyst-- research analyst, to actually being part of--running, you know, part of a company.  And so I want to understand, 1997 Morgan Stanley merges with Dean Witter Reynolds [to form Morgan Stanley Dean Witter] at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then there is Discover that is created and [Philip] Phil Purcell is there--this is like a time of a lot of change happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you unaffected by that, or is the company changing?  Or on you on a side that is really not affected with-- because there are a lot of thing that sort of happen?  I think there was a lot of turmoil on the top end of the--
Speaker 2: It didn't really affect my day-to-day job.  Of course, we were worried about the health of the firm while all that was going on, but, for what I did, it was pretty the same--pretty self-contained.  The company got bigger and healthier and made it through all that; with the change in management, and all that.  But it was never in any immediate danger.  It was just the different strategies, they were-- but investment banks are like that.  They have these different components with very different businesses; and they shave off sometimes.  They get new ones.  But the core of it is still the public markets, the research, the investment bank.  And that's always there, the fixed income, and then there are the little thing around it.  So that was a fun time because Morgan Stanley at that time was still the size firm where it felt like a partnership, everyone knew each other, everybody--the managers, the directors, there weren't that many of them.  So it was more the old style investment bank where you had a few partners, just like a law firm, and you talked about the firm as it was, you know, a small partnership, and it felt like a partnership in culture.  Then, at some point, they go public and it changes everything, but it was a first-class company to work with though.
Story_ID: 106759
Speaker 1: And then what, what--then how do you end up then going--well, the bubble happens first, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the bubble happens in 2000 and--.
Speaker 2: Kind of 2001 time frame.
Speaker 1: Right, well that's around 9-11 [September 11, 2001].  So there's 9-11, bubble happens--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --2000 to 2001, around in there is when it was slowing down.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, so then what--so but you're still busy in the work you're doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it almost doesn't matter what direction the market is going because people need advice either way, whether it's going up or going down.  There's billions invested, so that was--there is always tons of interest in technology either way because you could make money either side of it.  So it was really 2003 when I had been doing the same thing for a long time.  I enjoyed, but opportunity came up to go to a private equity.  I was going to be hired by a company called, Silver Lake.  It was one of the major private equity firms; and they were just starting out.  Some of my friends of mine were going there.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --'cause who, who is the main person over at Silver Lake?
Speaker 2: Glenn Hutchins.
Speaker 1: Right, Glenn Hutchins, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So he's a good friend of mine.  So I was going to work with him in the early days Silver Lake when they were started out, but then Larry Ellison found about it and called me, "Don't do that.  You can always do that later.  You can come help me get started on acquisitions, and you know, come here, you know, and be VP of strategy or something."  So initially I said, "No, let me be on the board, but I'm going to go over and do this other thing," but he is a persuasive guy, and I'd known him since forever, and watched him grow up in the industry.  He was probably the-- one of the-- the main company I followed for many years in terms of explaining to people what they do, advising Oracle [Corporation] and all of that stuff, so I had a lot of respect for him and what he had built.  And he is the guy who also helped prove my predictions were right that we would move from mainframe to relational databases.  So I had helped him; he helped me, so we had a good relationship.  Um, so I decided to go to a very undefined job.  I was gonna be-- Okay, I'll go there for a year or two and see what happens.  I'll be the VP of strategy, help him get started on acquisitions, and nobody really reporting to me, not really a defined anything, and within six months, I was president with 50,000 people reporting to me.  And what supposed to be for a year or two, turned out to eight years.  So we grew the company from about ten billion in revenue to about 35 billion.  During that time frame, the stock went from about 11 dollars to about 35 dollars, and made about 70 acquisitions.  So it was a unique time period in Oracle's history, just kind of drifted from a software company to a major technology, you know, almost a household name now during that time period, so it was a fun, fun thing and very unusual that Larry would call someone like that and hand pick them to do that, coming at that level, so I said, "Well, this is kind of unusual opportunity even though this is not what I was planning to do, but it can't hurt me.  Let me go try it."
Speaker 1: What did he say was the opportunity?  Charles, what did he say he wanted to do and was acquisitions in his strategy or is that what you brought to him?
Speaker 2: Well, because of what I had been doing, I knew all the companies. Right, obviously I was an analyst; I had relationships; I knew all the CEOs [chief executive officers].  I had them all on my cell phone.  I had been predicting the industry for years and what was happening; and I had the puzzle of the industry and kind of where all the pieces were.  I had a unique prospective because I could talk to everybody and they would all tell me what they were doing.  And I could see over the years in pattern recognition, so if you're gonna make acquisitions, you want someone who has the road map, who understands that industry well, and knows who has done what; what products work; and the whole history behind the product lines; and who's good and who's not; and why they're there and where the bodies are buried.  So I had all that knowledge, so if you're going to start acquisitions, that's, that's what he wanted.  The second thing is he knew that anybody who has been a captain in the Marine Corps knows how to lead; "he has the right personality and I like him, he'll figure it out and I'll put him in charge."  So it's nothing more than that, and it was a wonderful learning experience.  He is a very smart guy, just being around someone who is that brilliant day-to-day and who had been in the same industry even longer than I had, so he had a unique prospective as well, not as many companies, but at least from what he had to figure out from point A to point B very successfully.  We had some common experiences, so it was great, great run we had.
Story_ID: 105238
Speaker 1: This is how the world is working too, right?
Speaker 2: I do think it's hard to be a leader of a technology company if you didn't start in engineering because you need that basis of understanding of what the parts are doing to be able to make decisions with confidence, and--but it's the same thing why investors needed me because they needed someone who could understand what was going on first before they could make a decision on what stock to buy, but I think the same thing is applicable to run a company.  It's hard to run a company if you don't know what it does, right.
Speaker 1: So talk about Larry Ellison and his background and talk about Oracle [Corporation] at the time you sort of came in.  And what you did-- You were in an aggressive--I mean you took your rolodex and you went on an aggressive spending spree--or acquisition spree.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Oracle had kind of hit a plateau.  It was kind of going sideways, for four or five years in a row, it was looking like a mature company.  And then the industry was slowing down because it had gotten big, just harder to grow, doing one thing, so I think prior to him coming, the stock had been flat for literally four years; and I had been suggesting to Larry that it was time to making acquisitions because the industry was fragmented but it was maturing and somebody kind of needed to make it more efficient, and there's too many companies competing for a limited amount of dollars.  Nobody can grow if you do that.  Some point-- when the tide is rising, all boats, everybody can do well because of so much demand, but now post the bubble [dot-com bubble], it's not like throughout anymore.  You need to rationalize.  That's not coming back.  That's never going to happen again.  We've had that fun, so you need to start buying before somebody else starts buying and aggregate these things.  And he finally agreed with that logic.  So, anyway, the-- knowing where all the companies were and what they did, and which ones were valuable and why, yeah, we were able to make a lot of acquisitions quickly, and a lot of that became the differentiation of Oracle because they had so many unique products that brought under one umbrella, now it became more important to customers because instead of buying products from 10 people, all those 10 important products that I needed, I can get from Oracle now.  I know those are all unique products and they're all integrated now.  It's one stop shopping; and it made it easier for the customer to make a decision.  "I can just go with this because he has this now."  So it made a ton of business logic, the industrial logic, as we say.  Nobody else was doing it, so the prices were reasonable, so we weren't competing with ten other people bidding on it.  So if they're going to let us buy off all these companies, let's buy as many companies as we can, as quickly as we can before they start responding.  No one was competing with us, so we just kept on doing it until finally, they started realizing that we can't let this one company--
Speaker 1: So you were going to own the whole space.
Speaker 2: Right, which they finalized realized, "We gotta start competing with these guys," so SAP [SE] starting bidding.  But that was after we had already bought fifty companies by then, you know.  So, you know, who knows what would've happened if other companies would've started doing the same thing earlier, but it was-- allowed Oracle to get in a unique position in the industry.
Story_ID: 105239
Speaker 1: So who was critical on your team, Charles?  Who did you assemble and was--did you have to build that within Oracle to do that?  Or were you working without--I'm just trying to understand because that had not been in place, and we're talking about you've been there six months, and you're made president, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's a big place.  So I had, at that time, I think we had 130,000 people in the company, so it was always a lot of people coming and going over the years.  But it wasn't--it's not so much the people the decision to go do that, as the strategy that had to be made.  Once you do that, with the right team, there are enough smart people around, but it's more, is it the time to make acquisitions or not because prior to that, the philosophy was acquisitions are bad, focus on your core technology, it's distracting.  And getting over that to get to where you saying "Yes, acquisition is a way to bring in more innovations.  It's okay to make acquisitions and nothing bad about that.  Once you decided that, that becomes the strategy.
Speaker 1: What are you learning about leadership in this, in this realm because that's one thing you've transitioned from?  You're using your context and everything but you're actually applying it within a company.  You almost have one client, I guess it's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but leadership doesn't change, so it's the same thing I was doing in the Marines [United States Marine Corps].  You know, you gotta lead people, find a way to motivate them, communicate, be fair, make sure you over communicate the strategy, especially a company that size; keeping everybody informed and saying the same thing is a big job, so being willing the same thing 100 times over and over again; go traveling, which is why I keep traveling now.  You have to go out and explain to people "This what we're doing, any questions," and make sure they understand what you want them to do and it's clear.  So those things don't really change.  I did the same something twenty years earlier, so I did the same thing all over again.  And I am still doing it now, so it's all about being-- having a logical strategy that you can explain.  People can follow your lead and they can accept changes as long as it makes sense.   They don't like following you if you're erratic or they can't explain why we're doing what we're doing, or I don't understand what we're doing.  So that is the main job of the leader, and I think Napoleon had the best quote on leadership to me, it is: "The job of a leader is to define reality but to inspire hope."  So you have to do both and make sure we don't fool ourselves, there are some problems; here is the reality, but here is the hope; here is the strategy; here's how we are going to get there.  You can't be too negative.  At the same time, you can't be too negative, you can't be overly positive eight.  But you have to be more positive than negative and balance that, so you keep some tension on that we have to work on our problems and this is the reality of what we're dealing, but we figured out a way to improve it, just follow me here.
Speaker 1: So you did PeopleSoft, right.
Speaker 2: That was the first deal.
Speaker 1: And PeopleSoft, that was large?
Speaker 2: That was a large deal, yeah, probably one of the largest, about a ten billion dollar deal, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was all game for it?  You didn't have to do any convincing or anything at this point with Larry Ellison?  There was no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was a joint decision.  I was just me, it was me and my co-president too, the staffers, so we were all for, for doing this--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so, the team.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The other thing that I wanted to, to ask is who is mainly Oracle's [Oracle Corporation] clients at this point?  Where are the big--I'm sorry, not clients, I'm sorry, customers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much any large company in the world has Oracle somewhere, so I was visiting the largest companies in the world and meeting with their CIOs [chief information officer], so, yeah, you name it, at least for the database, less so for the application, but for database, pretty much everybody uses it.
Story_ID: 105240
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you wanting to--were you thinking that you would be Larry Ellison's next, you know, CEO [chief executive officer]?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't go there to do that, and I didn't even think I was going to be there that long.  And obviously people wrote that; and certainly at times people suggested that, but it wasn't really something I really thought about because I tend to every ten years, do something else.  It didn't feel like--and I'm not a California person.  I didn't want to be there the rest of my career.  That was only for that one job.  I'm an east coast person and kept my house in New York, and all my family is in the east coast, so it didn't make any sense for me to forever be out, but it was a great opportunity to get Silicon Valley experience, working for the most brilliant minds ever in the technology industry, but I didn't plan on being there forever.
Speaker 1: Charles, how do you define--because what he, what he was doing--is Oracle enterprise development--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Enterprise software, yeah.
Speaker 1: Enterprise-- so can you describe what that term means?
Speaker 2: So it's a term I actually starting using when I first tried to get Wall Street to create a little category and define what I was focusing on because at that time, most of the software companies that were public or known were PC [personal computer] companies, like Microsoft, Lotus, Novell, WordPerfect, household names.  And the stuff I did was not known because it was back office--it was software that ran businesses, not personal productivity.  So just like now we all know iPhone and all that stuff, but you don't know who makes the equipment for the network it runs on for Verizon, you don't care about all the routers and all that stuff in the background.  So this is the equivalent of that.  There's software that we use everyday on our PCs, but there are a lot bigger part of the industry, there are multiples of that, that run accounting systems, manufacturing systems, hospitals, billing systems, hard stuff that has to get done everyday on how companies and governments run; that all has to be automated too, and it's much larger.  So we call that enterprise versus personal.  So that is just kind of the term of our--said "enterprise" because since it's business and government, you couldn't say business software only; you couldn't say government software.  We do both, so "enterprise" kind of covers anything that is big, and kind of corporate oriented.  So all that complex stuff on, you name, Boeing aircraft get built, well it's got thousands and billions of parts and someone has to manage that and today, that's what we do, all the supply chain and all the procurement, managing all the parts when it arrives.  So whether it's them or (unclear), or Heineken beer, however it gets brewed, it's managing all the hops as they come in, all that stuff is automated now.  And so enterprise means doing all the complex stuff for businesses versus the personal thing.
Speaker 1: And that's become increasingly--the internet just made that more and more important in some respects, right?
Speaker 2: It made it easier for companies to exchange data because you could do it over the internet.  It made it easier for the professional users who have to use that software.  They can use it from anywhere because it is now over the internet and they can access it.  So it made it a lot more reasonable to use the applications in many more places.  Just with the glue that held it all together.  So the internet changed that whole industry as well just like it changed consumer industry.
Story_ID: 105241
Speaker 1: And what about cloud computing?  When was it its origins?  When do you see cloud computing sort of coming into, into existence?  I mean is it something that started around the '80s [1980] and we're just seeing it manifest, or is it a more recent development?
Speaker 2: Versions of cloud computing, although it was called something different, had been around since the '70s [1970] and they used to call it "time sharing" or "outsource" that somebody else runs your computers.  And then the cost of computing came down so much with PCs [personal computers] that people could buy their own computers and install it themselves and so businesses quickly automated.  And now we have come full circle where the cost of doing that, just because of managing it all and changing it all is actually pretty expensive relative to now somebody who can do it over the internet for you because they do it professionally, and that is all they do for a living, and they have multiple customers.  They can amortize their cost to multiple customers, so we changed the name to "cloud computing" because it now uses the internet, and that sounds more current, but the concept is the same; let me run the applications for you instead of you installing it on site.  So it's just now much more doable because of the strength of the internet and the resiliency and it's matured and it just makes a lot of sense now.
Speaker 1: But then there're issues around cyber security?  I mean those issues--and I'm sure they were always the case, but the hackers seem to have their own to--so how are companies dealing with those issues too in your space?
Speaker 2: Security issues, in general, have always been there, so for most people, for most companies that have a security breach, it's to their own employees, it's internal by far ninety-seven percent.  So for most companies, they actually, their security is improved, if they put it on Amazon or some cloud service because Amazon is better at it than they are.  You're not going to be more secure and better data center than Amazon if you are an X, Y, Z company.  Amazon is just huge and this is all they do for a living.  They have better systems; more secure; more tested; more rigorous and they are more careful about who they let access them than most people are with their internal system.  So all these things you read about Target and all of that, it's always, they run their own systems.  So I think that is a reason to outsource, to go to cloud because they give too many of their employees access; there is no one looking at it.  Whereas if you make your living to making sure that doesn't happen, that's your job, you tend to do it a little bit different way, put money behind it.  So it's perception--that's the perception the whole cyber thing and it is a problem, but it's more a problem for running it yourself.
Story_ID: 105242
Speaker 1: Now, Charles, tell-- talk about how you end up with the position-you leave Infor, I mean you leave Oracle in 2010, you--  this other opportunity comes with Infor and can you talk about this company that now you are CEO [chief executive officer] of and how that opportunity?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so about the same time I was making acquisitions at Oracle [Corporation], I saw the fragmentation of the software industry; it needed to consolidate.  The owners of this company, Infor, Golden Gate Capital [Partners], saw the same thing.  So they started around 2002 really, started making acquisitions.  They bought around 40 companies and I bought about 70.  So they were doing the same exact strategy, aggregating and so they called me, knowing that I had done what I had done and said, "Now that we bought all these companies, we need somebody to come in and provide some kind of product leadership and innovation.  You can't just buy a company, you have to ask, "Okay now what am I going to do with those?"  You need a professional management team that is used to running software and can innovate on top of that, and I was intrigued because a lot of the companies they bought were some of the companies I knew from Wall Street.  I already knew the companies from back in the day.  Most of the companies they bought, I already knew; and secondly it was east coast based, and it had some scale.  It was one of the few companies in the application's businesses.  It was already doing at that time over 2 billion.  So I decided to come back east and bring a team with me, so me and three other people from Oracle joined the same day in December to really take the company to the next level, rationalize best how a bunch of engineers--we had fifteen hundred engineers, and really go through the products, and rewrite them and get them modernized, and start growing the company.  So it was just a unique opportunity of a company who had very important software, automating Boeing-- all the companies, Siemens, Heineken, 72% of the hospitals in the U.S. use this software, 1,500 state and local governments.  So they had scale, which is important in our business because you need enough mass to be able to invest and the ability to do it kind of the way I want to do it with my own team was intriguing and to get back to New York [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: So who, who is your, your, the founder was Jim Schaper but he--did the investment team take over and then hire you or how did you--because with Oracle you got recruited by the founder [Larry Ellison].  Here this is a different structure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the investors own the company here, so there was a single founder because the investor decided to put these companies together.  They brought Schaper in to run it as the first CEO [chief executive officer], but they had already bought the companies and he was one of the companies they bought; and they put him in charge.  So he decided that we need some product focus to take all the stuff we have and you can't just put things together.  He was good for aggregating and all; took out all the cost, but he recognized it was time for the next phase.  So he was the one to actually call me, Schaper, himself, to call me and recruit me and say, "We need some guys with your type of background who can kind of innovate."  And so we talked on and off for six months and finally decided to do it.
Story_ID: 105243
Speaker 1: And what do you see as the opportunity?  And what do you want to do here [Infor]?  You've been here now for four years, right, and you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Not quite--almost three-and-half now, but the opportunity is to take this complex software that I understand well and to try to make it as easy to use as consumer software, so we are taking some of the concepts from Apple and some of these, what you associate kind of iPad consumer-like technology, take it to this very complex area as we understand and merge those two things; make it less complex.  It still does the job, but make it innovative and more fun to use, and that way, more people can use it.  A lot of our software, you go to a company and you need this specialist who understand all this stuff and 10% of the people in a company can use it because it's so complex.  And sometimes if you understand something complex, you can make it simple for other people to use too to make it simple and use.  So that's what we're doing is taking the concept of a beautiful design; taking these designers who worked in many different other areas other than enterprise software, and media companies, and creative agencies and then rethinking the way the software is used and designed to make it consumable.  And that way 100% of people in the company can use it because they don't have to read the manual; it's not frightening to them; it's not intimating, and make it just like reading news on your iPad.  So that's what we're doing with it for different industries.  And it gets--we still have to do all the deep processes that industry needs, and that's part of our differentiations, so we understand how a hospital works, we know how they hire people, we know how they pay people, we know what the doctors care about; what the nurses care about; what they're worried about, so we automate all those things, but let's make it fun and easy to use at the same time.
Speaker 1: So it's not industrial-looking or feeling?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it has to do industrial things, but it shouldn't look like that.  It should be intuitive just as easy it is for your phone to use--the idea is--because usually it's you have the choice of using this very beautiful software for your phone at home, but when you come to work, there's this ugly stuff you don't like to use.
Story_ID: 105244
Speaker 1: So were you working with Infor in, in Georgia?  Did you start there and then come here, is that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the company was headquarters in Alpharetta [Georgia], which is right outside of Atlanta [Georgia], when they were recruiting me but that's mainly because the last CEO [chief executive officer], [Jim] Schaper, lived there at that time.  We decided to relocate the company here because I thought New York [New York City, New York] was a more exciting place for a technology company to be; easy to recruit, certainly easier to see customers here.  So there weren't a lot of reasons to leave it in Atlanta in terms of finding engineering talent.  All the things you need in a technology company, it just wasn't an ideal place.  And that has been one of the best decisions that I ever made, was moving it here.  It has really helped the company.  It got its initial level; it got its access to talent.  So we were down there I mean literally six months into it.  Then we moved it here.
Speaker 1: It's almost, 'cause here, what do you, they call it?  "Silicon Alley?"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so the city was anxious for us to come here.  We're the biggest technology company ever moved here.  We're the biggest software company in their town; one of the biggest tech companies in New York.  It's just a unique thing for New York City, so that's, you know, our throw weight, the fact that we're hiring more people, you know, taking up more space, and bringing people here and helping put New York on a map.  We work with a lot of startups to teach them the technology we have, let them use some of our technologies, give them space here sometimes.  So it helps them recruit other companies as well.
Story_ID: 105245
Speaker 1: And you envision, I mean, also the whole thing with Hook--I mean I want you to, you know Hook & Loop, the whole design of the whole space.  I'd like to talk a little bit about this because this is your thought process.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So when we decided that we wanted to be disruptive and take this aerial complex software and really rethink it; and change the way people work; change the way they used the software; how they thought about using applications in a business setting, we thought it needed a radical departure from where it was that the engineers that build this complex software had done it the same way for a long period of time.  They didn't really care about how the software looked because no one ever evaluated them on that basis.  It was how secure it is; how scalable it is; how fast it is, all these detailed features.  And it was normally built by technical people and sold to technical people.  And the people who usually signed the checks for the software were usually executives, CFOs [chief financial officers] and CEOs [chief executive officers].  They didn't have to use the software.  There were other people-actually, they never saw it.  So we said that's changing because we want everybody to use the software and the new people coming to work for us.  They're used to using iPhones and iPads.  They're not going to use these applications that looked like green screens, very complicated and not fun to use.  And too complex.  But to do that, we need people who came from that world with that type of thinking; who think design is important, who think usability, who build great websites that have an eye for beauty; an eye for detail.  And those are different people from these engineers that built these complex applications.  They're still valuable.  We need them to do the detail stuff underneath, but they don't have the skill set, or the just the eye, or the inclination to care about that level of beauty.  They think that is something almost for kids; that's for a Disney application.  They don't think it's important.  So we thought it was important that people--it can be powerful and still be easy to use.  Those two things aren't opposed to one another.  So we decided to find people and create a company within a company called "Hook & Loop."  And we had to find people out of creative agencies, people who had design as pedigree, as their experience, that's what they want to do all their life.  So they came to New York [New York City, New York] to be an architect, be a fashion designer, a writer, something else, and somehow along the way, they started picking up technology skills.  A lot of the design houses in New York have technology tracks now.  You can learn that too.  So we looked for somebody who was first a designer and secondarily cares about technology because that creativity is what we needed and appreciation of beauty.  So I found a person from my Morgan Stanley days who had started-- done a startup in (unclear) city, an internet startup, and she's in that community of people who do startups and do designs for websites.  And I asked her to find me two or three guys to talk to who might want to, you know work on this.  She is an African American woman, by the way, so she sent me, these are all 20-something people.  You can't call a recruiter because they're not on recruiter screen radar yet.  They're all young people, and you can't call a recruiter to find some of these people.  You have to find someone who is already in that community.  So I started meeting these guys and most of them had never heard of enterprise software; didn't know what we did; didn't know that there was a whole world of stuff because it's just not-- because we're not household.  It's not something people think about.  So I started explaining to them.  So they said, "Why are you calling us.  Why we want to work with you?"  I said, "Well, you can stay; you're start up with ten people; you may or may not make it.  You may not be the next Google; you may or may not be, or you can come here, where I have 70,000 customers, 20 million people log into my applications everyday; a 3 billion dollar company, and if you have beautiful designs, a lot of people will use it every day, you will have impact here.  And you can change the way people work.
Story_ID: 105246
Speaker 1: I mean, and so it took them a while to get their head around that.  So the first couple guys I got to accept, they said, "We'll try it out.  This is different.  We're not really sure what this is, but we know how to design.  We can make anything beautiful in software because we're creative people.  I don't know what you guys do."  I said, "Well don't worry.  I have other people who understand what a hospital does, or what a manufacturing.  I don't need you to be the expert on that.  I need you to be the expert on how you get the people to use the software, just make it just compelling.  We'll teach you enough about each of those industries, so you can rethink it."  So the first thing we did was, you know, hire a couple of those guys, they'd hire some of their buddies.  And they started bringing in their friends because we couldn't find them yet.  That is why we had to create a separate company to have in the community.  You have to keep them together very kind of prima donna-type people, and they have their own culture.  Then we'd say, "Okay, do your thing.  We won't mess-- You hire your guys.  You work when you want to work.  You guys want to come in at noon, that's fine.  You want to stay until midnight, that's fine.  You want to work weekends; whatever culture you need to create, but I need the creative people.  I'll tell you what I want.  I don't care how you get it done, but I tell you what I need to be done.  And you have the freedom, where if you work in some creative agency, they are the low man in the totem pole in the advertising agency.  They say 'hurry up, do this ad, do this and that.'  Here, you'd be the big deal because we need that."  And so that was the sales pitch and now they've hired ninety people here from those different walks of life.  I have the guy that did the special effects in the "Avengers" movie; I have a Pulitzer Prize winner for information graphics, the first Apple i ad creator; I have Kenneth Cole designer; I have a documentary film maker; just people--all these creative who didn't even know what enterprise software was two years ago, but now we take them to a customer site and go, "Watch this, how this hospital works for a day.  They will teach them what they're doing, and come back and tell me how you would do it."  and because they're young, fresh and different, they come back and go, "I noticed all the stuff that the engineers have been putting on here is just like 500 things here, 80 of them are cramming the screen, making it's very hard to use, but they only really need four of the things they use 90% of the time.  Why don't we just simplify and do that?"  Engineer, of course, always says, "No, no, no, everything I just did was important.  You can't touch anything."  But that is not what the customer wants.  The customer agrees with the creative guy.  So they change the screen, and it's better.  So you needed someone with fresh eyes with that creative instinct who had no allegiance to the old thing to say, "I know you think it's important, but that's not want the customer told me.  But I'm going to do this because that is what you told me and I'm going to make it fun.  And I'm going to do a few things the customer hadn't thought of to make it interesting" because they think of problems in a different way.  And the beauty of design people who come from the kind of ad agency-type world is they have to design something to attract people to come to their website.  They're used to drawing people in.  Business applications don't have to do that because they have a fixed audience; you have to use this application.  They don't have to attract anybody so they don't think like that.  If you come from the creative world, you have to-- you're selling, you're creating an ad.  So you have to make it engaging or fun or you can go to the next website.  So they think a design in a way of "How can I make people have fun and want to come here versus I'm just automating this task?"  And so that was a culture change to get those two groups together--the guys who understand with the industry to work with the guys who are creative, and now we've got a good working relationship.
Speaker 2: How long did it take to merge like that sort of, it was?
Speaker 1: To get them to work together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It took a good eighteen months.
Speaker 2: So it's coming really now into its own?
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, it's really hitting stride.  We have had some breakthroughs in that first year.  The first six months was a little rough because these other guys were like, "Why do we need these guys?  We don't-- You know, why are we doing this?"  If you're an engineer, they think they can do it all because engineers like solving problems, but not all engineers can do everything; you're not good at this think.  "You're good at this.  Let them be good at that, you know."
Speaker 2: So you have how many employees?
Speaker 1: So now we have about ninety people in New York and we just got five more for us, so we're going to keep--once that is open, we'll hire probably another ninety people or so.  But specific skills sets, they're hard to find.  And you have to be careful and bring in people with that, what we call, left-brain creatives, you know.  They have the engineering side enough where they can program, but their DNA is the creative right brain.
Story_ID: 106760
Speaker 1: I wanna talk, want you to talk about the team you've assembled here [Infor], how many employees you have, you know, and where the--and what your sort of plans are and then I--'cause you also acquired Lawson Software, which was a big--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah.  So I brought, like I said, three people with me from Oracle [Corporation].
Speaker 1: Their names?
Speaker 2: We started together in day one, so it was Stephan Scholl who ran consulting for Oracle and then he ran a couple of business units, they were reporting to me there, big business units there, and then Duncan Angove who ran the retail business unit, which was one of our acquisitions, first acquisition, one of our earlier acquisition I should say.  And he reported to me as well.  Then Pam [Murphy] joined us.  She was the senior person in the office of CEO [chief executive officer] for operations, so making sure, behind the scenes, things got done.  So those were the original three, but since then, we now have 13,000 employees and 3,000, actually about 3,500 of them joined in the last two years, so we've had a lot of upgrading, change, new people coming from the industry because I know a lot of people from the industry.  They come and bring a team with them.  They bring seven people with them, you know.  So, before you know it, know, after twenty-five years in this industry, people you know start coming in.  Everybody is calling you, so we're able to cherry pick and pick the best that we want, and upgrade.  That's how we got a lot done quickly is bringing in aggressive people who we knew, and you could hit the ground running if you already know.  So fast forward, three-and-a-half years later, we've shipped 300 new products, 1,100 enhancements to all the products, over a thousand integrations, so just expediential increase in terms of new products and innovation hitting the market.  And none of that was really happening before.  They hadn't had really any new products in years.  So that is what we came to do is let's rethink all these applications and do something different that is disruptive; solve all the problems we've learned about this industry.  We know what people don't like about enterprise software, the difficulty, the complexity; it's a long list of things they don't like.  We know what the list is.  Let's go solve them one by one and get those done, and recreate how it's done and change it.  So that was the entry.  That at the heart of it is why people are excited, it's: we can do it our way, and we do it.
Story_ID: 106761
Speaker 1: Now why would you go after Lawson [Software] and why was that important?  That was a large acquisition for a company your size so early in the process still?
Speaker 2: So Infor, three years ago, was largely manufacturing software, so a lot of the big companies I described earlier, automating their manufacturing plants, some of the financials, and human resources, I wanted some services industries to diversify some because manufacturing is cyclical, some of the times some of it gets outsourced, and I also wanted healthcare.  So Lawson has an enormous presence in healthcare--like I said 72% of the hospitals with more than 150 beds, were already in.  And I thought it's an industry that's going to be big.  It's 18% of the GDP [gross domestic product], not many people understand the services well.  I knew already Lawson from back in the Wall Street days.  I knew what they had.  It turns out it was a better decision than I thought because now with the Affordable Care Act, that's undergoing enormous change, and now hospitals having to get their cost down; they're having to invest.  They want to know what they'll be able to measure and benchmark doctors knowing what the cost of outcome is, integrate all these applications.  They're in cloud now.  They're under tremendous pressure to get to know more about their cost and manage themselves better because they don't have unlimited reimbursements anymore.  So that has changed the whole industry, so that is driving all sorts of opportunity for us.  So we're partnering with companies like Cleveland Clinic, and Mayo [Clinic], and Geisinger [Health System] to help them build, and co-innovate, and build the applications to manage a hospital differently.  And, it turns out, our manufacturing experience is totally relevant because, there, they have to know they cost in billing things, activity-base costs; and you run it like a business.  They want us to take that experience and bring it to healthcare, and know how much it costs to cure this patient, do it the most efficient way--let's not order six x-rays when one x-ray will do; why is this doctor have the same patient with the same type of condition, he solved it for 20% of the cost than you are, why is that?  Doctors don't do that now.  No one has every asked them.  No one has ever compared the data.  Doctors do whatever they want to do.  Now, they can't anymore.  And we all the data, we have the cost data, we have the labor data because we see through the scheduling.  We have the materials data because we see the financial and the procurement, and we have all the integrations between all those applications, so we're the natural partners in healthcare for these hospitals.  So that one thing alone, that buying Lawson and getting health-- owning healthcare, is the future can change everything for this company, and it is.  I'd rather be lucky than smart, but I wanted healthcare, but I didn't know the Affordable Health Care Act was going to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was gonna propel you forward.  So you're saying that really healthcare is going to be absolutely critical to Infor's growth-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean given-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where we are and all the things that are going to have to be changed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the infrastructure--
Story_ID: 106762
Speaker 1: I-- what I want to know is how much of your, how much are you building businesses for people and managing the back ends?  I mean, is it--I mean are you-are you doing also do you also have a service unit that manages like they outsource, the management--are they doing that themselves? What percentage is it?
Speaker 2: The part that is cloud business is twenty of our businesses, but it's growing the fastest, more and more hospitals are getting comfortable letting us run the system.  And we run on it on Amazon.  We partner with Amazon, so we don't build a physical data center.  We use their data center with their computers, but we manage it all and do everything.  So that is, and, of course, in all industries, that is becoming obviously more popular but especially in the healthcare, it's new thing to them because it's hospital, it's personal/patient data, they are worried, but I think they're becoming comfortable now that Amazon is more secure than they are, as I said earlier, and Amazon is a known brand.  And they know us.  They have known us for years, so they're comfortable with both of us, so now, they're starting to say, "You know, I can't keep up with all this, all this change happening."  There's new regulations, a thousand things they have to keep track of; it's being the capability of most hospitals.  They didn't spend on technology before because they didn't have to, and now they have to spend on it.
Story_ID: 106763
Speaker 1: I have one other sort of business-oriented questions, during this whole time period that you've been in this, in this industry, open source really--I mean because Infor is still close--I mean, it's a proprietary, so open source had really grown, so where do you fit in the whole open source--I mean because open source was groups of people coming in to develop systems, you know, software systems that could be used to solve any nature of problems, and viewed as a source of innovation actually?
Speaker 2: That's actually a key part of our strategy for us and key differentiator force.  So we use a lot of open source.  So our applications are proprietary because that is hard to build open source because you have to understand how a hospital works; and be able to talk to the hospital and get it right; and all that, but the stuff underneath it, like the database, which is where open source is good; the database and the operating system, things that aren't industry-specific that people can work on that are fairly generic, that's good for open source, so we've moved all of our applications to an open source database called postgres.  It also runs on Lenox, which is an open source operating system and JBoss, which is an open source application server.  So we still support--you want to write on the proprietary stuff, you can, but you recommend the open source because it's cheaper and it's more innovative.  So that's one of the ways we were able to lower our cost for the outsourcing for the cloud business for these hospitals saying, "Well you can take out all these costs.  You don't have to run all these expensive products on the database and all that stuff.  You can run it on an open source and we can do that.  So we were one of the first, large application vendor to do that.  And the reason we were able to do that is because we don't sell databases.  We don't care what you're running on, what operating system.  We're indifferent, so why not choose the cheap one?  And the other ones all--also, in addition to trying to sell you the applications, they're trying to sell you the whole thing; the database; the operating system and the hardware.  They want to do all of that.  We don't care about what's underneath.  We just care about the automating the hospital part of it, so we would put it on open source.
Speaker 1: That's--okay, I didn't even--I mean--I didn't--I had read that you were proprietary and I didn't know about that and that question (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's a good question, but that's what we talked about on stage just a couple of weeks ago on the Amazon announcement.  The top layer is proprietary, where we tell--we automate how hospital works, but it needs the other stuff, the infrastructure underneath and that can be open source.
Speaker 1: Well that's interesting because it was either/or before.  You were either were in one camp or you were in the other.  You didn't combine those at all.
Speaker 2: So we were trying to take advantage of as much of it as we can.
Story_ID: 106764
Speaker 1: So where do you see the whole industry going--like if we looked at--I'd like you--first I want you to talk about where you want to see Infor in let's say five, ten years, but also where do you think the industry is going to, to go?
Speaker 2: I think more information will be available in more places like we never imagined before, which will create enormous opportunities for automation and new companies.  So let me give you an example, so we automate hospitals today, but what they really want is much more granular information to know exactly where a doctor is at all times; what patient is he seeing; where is he spending all his time.  Same thing for the nurses--to know exactly where the patient is throughout the hospital.  So you need sensors on everything, so we will have it on whether it's your phone or a mini sensors, or your ID card, we will be able to tell where everybody is at all times, and that becomes important to benchmarking people.  Why did you spend so much time with that patient?  You know why is this nurse spending too much time in this room?  Why is this patient waiting in this room for this long?  They don't know any of that right now.  We can't tell where people are in the hospital.  They have what they call "admissions, discharge and transfers," those are kind of three steps.  You don't know where exactly where people are.  Somebody hands you their chart and says, go to X, Y, Z; you don't know when they got down there.  So if you want best practices to understand how to optimize, you need information all the time over some wireless mechanism.  Same thing in retail stores.  Now, we have customers who are working with us that are grocery stores, where because your phone has an I-beacon in it, you'll walk pass the shelf, we'll know it's you.  We can give you a special offer right on the spot because you're a frequent shopper.  We will know where people are in the store; that you've been waiting too long at this checkout counter; that you've been looking at this shirt and somebody should go over there and spend some time with you explaining what you're looking at, so instrumenting everybody's movements where you are at any given point in time, optimizing the store layout now because now there's too many people waiting here, and there's more traffic over there, you learn how to optimize traffic within, whether it's a hospital or a retail floor, you want to know what people are doing.  You can warn people not to be in an area that's unsafe for safety regulations, not to go to an area where they shouldn't be breathing something they're breathing--so instrumenting us, as people, kind of the "internet of things" as we call it, people and all of their devices that creates a whole other level of insight and information.  So that's what is coming.  We have customers that are instrumenting the entire hotel down to buoys in the ocean so we can where the waves are, so they can tell the guests are up right now, they might want to go surfing.  We got people doing all sort of things, but the more these wireless sensors everywhere, and we know where people are; what things they are doing, we can create new concepts.  So that is what is coming next then.  So if you're uncomfortable with the privacy issue, you gotta get over that because that is what's coming.  Cameras everywhere and sensors everywhere, and we will be able to model everything.  So what we're working on now with the hospitals is a lot of diseases break out inside hospitals.  It's a very good place you can catch diseases 'cause so many sick people come there.  Well, if we have sensors on everybody, and we have sensors on the devices, and all the equipment, we can actually draw a heat map, we can see where all the diseases are coming from--where the people are getting sick, they all went into this one room; and now you start to treat that.  There is something going on with that piece of equipment in the x-ray room.  So all this pattern of recognition--things that you could never figure out before--if you have enough data, you can figure out almost anything.  So there is going to be a ton more data--that's where the term "big data" means, but that's where it comes from--things that aren't instrumented today that will be instrumented to give us data, so ever piece of equipment, every person, everything will be publishing data all the time.
Speaker 1: So really data will control going into the future--I mean data--computerized data, I mean data--.
Speaker 2: So they computerized everything; your clothes; your appliances.  We have people with electronic stoves, so if you left your stove on, it'll tell you.  You have--be able to tell you if your parents left their stove on, you can call them and you can turn it off--everything.  So as the population ages, they will be more homecare--more people who are elderly living alone.  All that's going to have to be automated so we can watch and help take care of people.  So healthcare will move partially out of the hospital to the home, and so we will make homecare applications to help monitor what is going while you're at home; are you taking your medicine?  We'll be able to tell that.  Why not?  All that stuff--also you won't have to make as many trips to the hospital.  We can administer that care with what we call "patient engagement" remotely.
Speaker 1: Fasc-- no, it's fascinating because it's here.  It's not even--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's possible now, and we're working on all those things.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Story_ID: 106765
Speaker 1: So, Charles, where are you, where are you in your life right now?  Why don't we talk about that--I mean because--when you were a little boy, could you imagine where you are now?
Speaker 2: I imagined that I'd be doing something fun and intellectually stimulating, but I didn't know what--that it would be.  I mean this career has been so serendipity.  I've had so many careers.  It would have been impossible to imagine all the paths that I took but I--part of being innovative and open-minded is evaluating things as they come along and changing your mind and I got new information.  I'm going to try this.  So I couldn't have modeled it out, but you have to be open to change, and I grew up being open to change because I had to be, so I was able recognize opportunities internally and left when I knew to.  All right, I'm going to stop doing this.  Now, I'm going to do this.  And not being afraid to try new things.
Story_ID: 106766
Speaker 1: But you're also--you're very--I mean I know people have told you this, but you're obviously very bright.  The other thing that I want to ask, you've been very involved philanthropically.  You have your own foundation [Phillips Charitable Organization], and I want you to talk about that interest area that you and your wife [Karen Phillips] run, and then you've been also active on boards, both corporate and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we always wanted to find ways to get involved in the community to help people less fortunate and all.  You know, someone helped me when I was younger getting me into computers.  They didn't have to do that; and it changed my life.  So I felt I owed that back, so nobody makes it completely on their own, no matter what they say.  There is always someone helping somebody--at least that is my view, so I wanted to do what I could do.  So I started by getting on a few boards, and always contributing to things, but I never quite knew what the impact was.  You can't see what happens on the other side of it; and I never knew how efficient the organization was; and I always used to try to analyze and to trying to get more efficient all the time, so it was a little bit frustrating.  So we decided, "You know what, the only way I can know for sure is let's form our own foundation, and 100% of the funds will be used to help a person, different people.  We won't spend any money on general administrative expenses; overhead; office supplies, space; all that stuff.  The board members will personally fund that if we need any of that, but anything that we raise, will be going directly to help someone.  Um, so I didn't want a bunch of layers.  The second we wanted--there are a lot of people who need help urgently, especially when so one of the targets were single mothers, and then the other target was engineering students and wounded veterans.  Sometimes they get a lot of the people we help, when they need help, it's "I'm about to get evicted," or "my car has been repossessed;" or "kid got kicked out of school.  I was trying to keep him in a Catholic or private school."  Whatever it is, they don't have time for a nine-month application process.  It's they're in the brink of disaster by the time they call us, and so the ability to act fast and have a small board, and not have this long application process is a difference between them recovering from that and kind of getting back on track or disaster, you know, permanently.  So we said, let's fill that segment of the market where, you know, just because we grew up around a lot of single mothers in the African American community, we knew about that, and they tend to get hit hardest when there is a downturn in the economy, whether it's a job issue--whatever it is; and just because of what is going on in the community, it's a big problem.  You wish there weren't so many single mothers, but the fact is that is the way it is.  And now, just from doing this, I had no idea how many and how hard it is.
Speaker 1: What, what is the percentage?
Speaker 2: So 49% of African American kids are growing--born into single parent families; and even the ones that are born into married families, then there's divorces and all that.  So most of us in the African American community are in single parent families, so it's big.  Then you have teenage pregnancies and all that crazy.  It's a huge thing; and no one's talking about it.  No one is addressing it.  No one is trying to change it.  You know, we're not enough to change it, but we can certainly help some; and so it turns out that is 80% of the grants are for single mothers, and usually it's some sort of emergency where "This disaster happened with the kid or the husband left--or usually not married, but the boyfriend left and he took all the money; and the bank accounts are-- and they can't get to work the next day; there is no gas in the car; and what am I going to do; and I have my mother living with me."  So those are the thing we try to do, respond quickly, and get them back on track, so we can't solve all their problems.  If it's a long term, where they need social services and some assistance forever, that's one thing--we can direct them to the right agency, but if it's something that has happened and they're trying to get back on track; they're just trying to get a job; they're trying to pull it together; with a little boost, as we call it, they can get back on track; pay their utility bills; get back to work; get daycare, it can change their life with-- for not a lot of money, they can get their life back in order and feel some dignity and control again because a lot of them are teetering.  They can go either way, and you don't want them to give up, and say, "It's just too much.  I don't care anymore."  Whereas someone shows that "You do matter."  No one is helping them.  No one cares about them and with a little help, you can get them back on track, it just gives them some self-confidence as well but these are people who have nowhere else to turn.  There's nobody who is going to say, "Okay, I'm going to pay your rent.  I know you have problems.  You're about to get evicted with your two kids."  Where do you go to get that quickly?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: They don't-- there's nowhere to go.
Speaker 1: They fall outside of the radar screen--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --out of the radar screen.  There's no one focused on it.  I know because they've been trying, use--they call everybody; no one will--we don't do that, so unless you have something, cancer, something big like that, but this basic thing of there's too many single mothers, and there aren't enough jobs to go around; and a lot of them didn't have the greatest education to begin with.  They don't have access and yet they're trying to raise three kids. That's a hard thing to do and it's almost an epidemic, but no one seems to, you know, hear about it, you know.
Story_ID: 106767
Speaker 1: Charles, so--and you also are on the board, I think, of Viacom [Corporation], so you have that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you still remain very much leader in the tech space where there are not a lot of African Americans in that space.  Um, I want to ask you, and this is, you're talking about this when you're talking about the single moms, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community as you look where we are right now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm naturally a kind of a positive person, you have to be when you're leading a company and technology, you're always looking to the future, so I hate to sound negative, but it's frustrating that when I look at, you know, whether I look at the single mother problem or whether I look at the skill sets that we're getting for the jobs that will be available.  There is a secular change in the economy where we're moving toward specialization, so a lot of these generic degrees won't do much for you because people, just-there's not enough jobs to go around.  A lot of the middle-management is things that used to be a job that was labor intensive has been automated away, so we have to train people for the job market that will exist.  And we don't have enough technology; STEM-related studies going on; people don't want to do the hard work or they don't think they can, or they have just not been steered in that direction.  So I just would like to see us accept that we're going to have to do more of that and train people, give them hard skill sets more often.  It doesn't have to be technology.  There are all sorts of other crafts and trades that people can do, but I just think we just need to realize that the job market is different than it was thirty years ago.  Some of the jobs that have gone China and India, they are never coming back and yet we still keep having that debate.  I mean it'd be great if they did, but it's not a realistic thing to hope for.  What's left over is very sophisticated jobs, increasingly sophisticated and competitive.  So I'm just hoping that (1) we can address the single mother issue a little bit and that's just talking to our kids more and make that something we educate people on and (2) we got to get parents involved in education--I mean the fact that we lead kids in under-performaning schools and accept that in many cases because we like the local teacher; we like the local whatever, but the kid is not getting a good education.  We got to have higher standards and say, "No, this school should be closed down, or we should have a charter school," but that starts with getting the parents involved in the education.  But I find that sometimes they don't know what to do.  They're not engaged in the child's education, and so that's why we try to get the Civil Rights Organizations to take this on, so me and Bill Lewis [HM William M. Lewis, Jr.] and a few guys like that got NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the leadership of the NAACP, National Urban League, United Negro College Fund, LDF [NAACP Legal Defense Fund], we had them over to my house for dinner several times and we funded an off-sight meeting saying, "This education is something that you should all have in common.  Can you solve that problem?"  And the reason we went to them is because they have field organization.  They can reach the parents, get them focused on education; here is how you manage your school; here is how you manage your teacher; here's when you fire your principal; here's when you want your school closed down, and you gotta sit down with your kid every night and do homework--those sorts of basic things.  We need a sea change in how we think of that and what parents, your responsibility as parents is that.  And some people don't know that--a lot of us don't know that, so we couldn't get them to agree on how to attack that, and it's a hard thing to say to your community because they-- this is their constituency, I understand that, but that's what needs to said, and no one wants to say that.  So we were trying to find a way to--they have credibility, they can say it.  And we haven't been successful with that, but that's my frustration.  There is an elephant in the room, we know what it is, we got a change--we got to get people educated; the job market is changing; we're going to let these kids go through a failing school; we have no skills and they get out; there's no jobs because they have no skills, so they turn to crime.  We have seen this.  We know what's going to happen.  If we don't catch them by the time they're five or six and start doing this--and so we're just trying to find ways to--who can help with that problem, you know.
Story_ID: 106768
Speaker 1: So I wanna to ask you two more questions and it leads to that.  I have thoughts about that myself so--.
Speaker 2: I'd love to hear any.
Speaker 1: I have a lot of thoughts about it, but--and I appreciate the effort so--I mean even that there is an effort because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --we tried a lot.
Speaker 1: This is then I want to ask you what the legacy of your generation, which are the--you're even under me-- you know, the beneficiaries of the Civil Rights Movement--what do you think your legacy will be?  Or, you know, its--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we were post-Civil Rights there, but we were able to demonstrate to enough people that it can be done.  You have to start somewhere.  Do I wish I had seen other people look like me in technology when I was coming up?  Sure, I didn't see 'em, but there are a lot of African Americans who stop by this office and say, "Hey, I've been reading about you, I just want to meet you.  I've been inspired by that and what to talk about, can I make it in technology?  I want to do this--what do you think about that?"  So just pioneering and opening up a little crack a little bit to saying, "I'm not different from you.  I didn't know anything and I didn't have any special whatever.  I can be done if you want it bad enough and you work hard; and you're focused; and you're, you know, you have the fire in the belly; here's how I did it.  It's not the only way to do it, but this is how I did it, and just encouraging people--so I think just examples in our generation, any walk of life, you can point to somebody, maybe not to as many as you want, but you can say it can be done, so I think that's probably what our generation is like, "Okay, now, if he can do it, I can do it too."
Speaker 1: So that's the legacy, you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think enough--because the prior generation was fighting for the opportunities.  Our generation took some of those opportunities and showed it could be done.  Now, we need to scale it in volume.
Story_ID: 106769
Speaker 1: And what do you want your personal legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't think about that a lot.  That's one of the faults of being a technology person--always thinking about the future; you don't spend enough time thinking about those sorts of things.  I'm always paranoid about the next innovation that I need to know about that's going to hit the market in two weeks.  Um, so I just if I can help people along the way and figure out something in how to enlighten them and to that technology is the path for them--other areas, sometimes it's law, it's getting people into law school as well, that's all you can hope for, and I just want my son and wife [Karen Phillips] to be in a great position and just enjoying watching my son evolve, so I'll probably think about it more and differently ten years from now, but, for right now, I'm still running the fast races and enjoying the race.
Speaker 1: How old is your son now?
Speaker 2: He's eighteen, finishing up his last three weeks of high school, about to go off to Bowdoin College in [Brunswick] Maine.  That was his first choice.  He got into one of the little, mini Ivies [Ivy League] and he has had a different experience.  I didn't even know what a mini Ivy was at the time, so his experience and growing in Manhattan [New York City, New York] and has been to, I don't know, probably a dozen countries already and saw them the right way.  It's just a different experience, so it's a big jump between how I grew up with my father [Charles Phillips, Sr.] and each part of that, and there will be another even bigger jump with him because he just started off so much smarter and saw so much early.  I kind of slowly by hook or crook figured out by happenstance and had experiences and kind of got there, but he will know more.  I didn't know a lot of things when I was in high school.  I didn't know what the choices were.  I never knew a business person, and didn't know anything about any of these industries because I had just been in this cocoon in military stuff, which gave me other advantages, but I didn't know what the rest of the world was like.
