Story_ID: 311765
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with Mr. Gerard Peterson [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] at his late springtime, summer and fall home.  At 22 Debettencourt Place, in the town of Oak Bluffs on the island of Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts.  The date is June 21, 2005, the interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Mr. HistoryMaker would you please state your full name and spell your name for me including your middle name?
Speaker 2: It's Gerard G-E-R-A-R-D, Mertley M-E-R-T-L-E-Y, Peterson P-E-T-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: September 10, 1932, in Hartford, Connecticut at the Hartford Hospital.
Speaker 1: I know that you are retired but how would you characterize or describe your professional occupation what was your, what was your profession briefly?
Speaker 2: I guess I would call myself a manager.  I managed enterprises primarily profit-making, but I worked in the nonprofit world also.  And most of my time after graduating from the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] I was in some sort of supervisory or managerial position.
Story_ID: 311766
Speaker 1: We have a few warm-up questions, magazine type questions, to give the viewers of your HistoryMaker interview a certain sense or dimension of your personality.  And so I want to ask you what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food I don't know maybe chicken.  If I had to choose just one thing I could exist on roasted chicken with gravy for quite some time.
Speaker 1: Me too (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably springtime when things are growing and blooming, and it's not yet warm but it's warm enough to go out and play my favorite game which is golf.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: If I could just get back to Paris [France] I think that would be one of the great thrills of my life.  I'm gonna do it one day I'm just not sure when.
Speaker 1: When were you there last?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], I went on a trip around the world, and one of my stops was Paris, France prior to going to London [England] and then on to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to use from time to time or some philosophical time?
Speaker 2: Actually it's my father's [Rufus Peterson] and I--we were having dinner once some years ago.  And I said, "It is time for you to say the blessing Dad," he said, "Well I don't have a blessing but I do have a statement."  And I said, "What's that," and he said well, "I know a few people who are living as well as we are but nobody's living better."
Story_ID: 311767
Speaker 1: We're going to in a few minutes talk about your father [Rufus Peterson] because we really want to talk about your family history and your family background.  So that we have that as a context in which to look at your youth years, and your young adult years and the development of your life and your career.  And I'd like to start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you give me her full name and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Edythe Mae Crosby [Edythe Crosby Peterson] was her maiden name, and she was born in Hartford, Connecticut.  And her mother and father, Anna Crosby her mother and Benjamin Crosby her father, my grandmother and grandfather were probably most instrumental in raising me as a child.  I lived in their home in south, in Hartford. (Background noise) And my mother graduated from Bulkeley High School [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut] she was in the first graduating class of that, that school.  And she was a salutatorian very bright, very capable and went on to Howardto University [Washington, D.C.] after that.
Speaker 1: Did you give me her date of birth maybe I--do you recall her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh goodness, I wish I did know I wrote it down, but I don't really remember, oh goodness.
Speaker 1: That's all right we can, we can come back to that and find it through the documents (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It was--yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me what you know about or what she told you about her growing up years as a child and as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Well she was a real product of my grandmother and grandfather also who believed that education was the only thing.  If you went to school that was a job you went to school just like you had an eight hour a day job.  You were required to do the best that you could do.  And I can remember at a very early age three, four, five years old having my mother and other members of the family talk about going to college.  I didn't have the foggiest idea what college was, but I knew that they had a better understanding of where I should be going as an adult or young adult than I did.  And so I did look at college as a possibility or a probability maybe.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her growing up years at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up primarily in the same neighborhood that I did.  Had lots of friends in the neighborhood I think her experiences were similar to mine. It was a, in quotes, integrated neighborhood, because there were a few members of minority groups, but primarily it was an Italian, Swedish, German, Irish, Polish community.  And it was really the melting pot that we think about in the United States.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Lots of folks came from other countries this was their first home in the United States or their second home perhaps.  But a very interesting neighborhood and a good neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: A lot of fun.  The neighbors were more inclined to invite to invite you in to eat than to tell you to get off the lawn, a nice place to live.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that she went on to Howard University?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And did she finish there?
Speaker 2: No she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She married after her first year at Howard and never did return to school.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.  When you were born and as you were a youngster along with your siblings naturally she was raising her family did she have an occupation or did she work at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah she primarily did day's work as they, they call it she was a maid and somebody who worked in service.
Speaker 1: This was in Hartford?
Speaker 2: In Hartford and in the suburbs of Hartford, West Hartford [Connecticut] and Farmington [Connecticut] and places outside of Hartford.
Story_ID: 311768
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] as a person her personality?
Speaker 2: I think she probably had the most magnetic and bubbly personality that you can find.  She was a, in high school [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut] she was a musician, played the violin. She was a great dancer she loved to laugh and sing and was just a very outgoing kind of person.  And I think she gave all of us some of her personality.  My father [Rufus Peterson] was a little more subdued, but again he was kind--very humorous guy had great things to talk about and think about and discuss but at the same time he was a very playful guy, you know.
Speaker 1: What aspect of her personality dimension of it, is within you right now do you think as you reflect back?
Speaker 2: My goodness, I think that the, the most important thing she passed on to me was to just be yourself, and let yourself go put your hand out first and say, "Hi how are you?  My name is and, you know, would you like to play.  Let's have fun together." I think that, that is something that is still my personality. I thank her for that.
Story_ID: 311769
Speaker 1: Tell me about her [Peterson's mother, Edythe Crosby Peterson] parents your maternal grandmother [Anna Crosby] and grandfather their names what you know about them?
Speaker 2: Yes, my maternal grandfather was Benjamin Franklin Crosby [Benjamin Crosby] and with that auspicious name.  He was the same kind of person, he was a very distinguished kind of guy. When he walked down the street all the neighbors thought he probably owned Hartford [Connecticut], because he walked with such great confidence and, and love, to strut his stuff if that's one way to put it he was always extremely well dressed.  He wore he, wore spats back in those days those things that covered your shoes (laughter).  And he's probably the best-dressed guy in Hartford, a hard worker he would come home from doing his, his job and go directly to his garden.  He grew a lot of his own vegetables, we had fruits trees in the yard, grew a lot of the fruits that we ate and canned.  And used in those winter months when nothing was blooming anymore, or nothing was being harvested.  My grandmother was a chef she was one of the great chefs in the Greater Hartford area.  As a matter of fact when she was twenty-s- 1926 she wrote her own cookbook.  I don't know whether she was the first African American in New England to do so, but I would think that's probably correct.
Speaker 1: You have a copy of that cookbook?
Speaker 2: I do have a copy yes.
Speaker 1: Maybe we can bring it out later?
Speaker 2: I will try to dig it up yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe we can use it with the photo shoot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't, I don't have a copy of the book I have a reproduction of the copy, but yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll take a look at it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she did her own recipes was very highly thought of by people who hired her they were most prestigious and important people in Greater Hartford.  The mayor of Hartford at one point a lot of the doctors.  And executives, business executives in town were the ones who wanted her to be there their chef for their homes and for their events.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And in the summer time she was the chef at a tea house in Massachusetts, in Princeton, Massachusetts.  And people would come from miles around to taste her cuisine she was, she was famous.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.  You like to cook too I understand?
Speaker 2: I do, and she taught me everything that I know.  And I was her, her sous-chef, junior sous-chef started at I don't know eight or nine years old working in the kitchen with her.  And I loved every minute of it--she taught me a whale of a lot about how to prepare things and how to present them.  She was a great person for making things just look wonderful, and she said the proof of the pudding is in the tasting but make sure that it looks nice.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And people think it tastes better when you look nice which is true.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Crosby, grandfather, what was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He was a caretaker, janitor, maintenance man for the Wells family.  The Wells family were all physicians and Horace Wells was the inventor of anesthesia.  I mean he was the grandfather of the Dr. Wells that he worked for very, very famous physician family, did most of their work at the Hartford Hospital [Hartford, Connecticut] but also worked at Saint Francis [Saint Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut] and Mount Sinai [Mount Sinai Hospital] in Hartford.  But were very well thought of and he worked there until he retired probably when he was maybe seventy-two or three.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: He, he didn't want to retire they sort of made him retire--gave him a retirement and sent him on home.
Story_ID: 311770
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I note that both are your maternal grandparents [Anna Crosby and Benjamin Crosby] were born in Virginia?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Can you tell me what city or town and what you know about their life in Virginia?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, it was a pretty small town, a place called Mathews County [Virginia] in the Tidewater area not far from Newport News [Virginia].  I don't believe that they knew each other, I mean it wasn't that small, but once they arrived in Connecticut all of the Virginians, you know, palled around together and went to the same churches and the same organizations, they were members of the same organizations.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: It was a real rural setting my grandfather, I believe he left Virginia because he was looking for greener pastures.  There just weren't any jobs or the ones that he wanted.  I think back on it this was just not too long after slavery had been abolished theoretically.  But, you know, some of those rural areas the mores didn't change even though the law changed.  I remember him saying he wanted to vote and couldn't do so.  And Frederick Douglass was one of his heroes and Frederick Douglass said you can vote just go on down to the city hall the town hall and register.  And he wasn't allowed to do that in Virginia, so one of the first thing he did when he arrived in Hartford, Connecticut was go down to the city hall and put his name down on the voting rolls.  And he was just proud to, and my grandmother also I mean they never missed voting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you know why she left Virginia?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was a cook and a good one, and again she wasn't able to get the kind of opportunity to work for families that had a lot more money than in that rural area just weren't families like that.  So she couldn't do she had all--she'd gone to the normal school there, which taught more teaching at home economics than anything else.  And she wanted a--spread her wings.  And in those days, if one person from Virginia found a good place that person would write back and say, you know, "There're jobs here, and you can stay with me until you find your own accommodations.  Why don't you come on up to Connecticut?"  So grandfather worked his way up on a boat and then just got off the boat when he gets a Hartford and never just got back on the boat.  But my grandmother came a more traditional kind of way with the train I don't know how you got to Hartford I guess the train went all the way to Hartford in those days.
Speaker 2: Probably did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 311771
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father. Would you give me your, your father's full name and where and when he was born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Mathews County, Virginia and came to Bloomfield, Connecticut, at an early age probably five or six years old.  He--his name is Rufus Mertley Peterson [Rufus Peterson]. He and I have the same middle name.  And I don't think there's any place, anyone else in the world who has that name.  I don't--have no idea where it came from (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna as you where it came from.
Speaker 2: And neither did he (laughter), neither did he so.  I asked him about it he said he didn't know the genesis of it.
Speaker 1: My grandfather's middle name was Butler, and I do a lot of family history, and I can't figure out where the Butler came from, but I'll find out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: But my father's birthday was February 1, and he was born, you know, around 1910 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now you said 1919.
Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919] forgive me.
Speaker 1: Is there right?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's closer to it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Approximately?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he passed away a few years back but during the time that we spent together he was just a wonderful leader. He taught me just all the things that I needed to know.  He was a, a master of, of welding, but he also knew carpentry and plumbing and electrical I mean he just knew everything so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was born in Virginia also?
Speaker 2: He was born in Virginia, but grew up in Bloomfield, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.  Where, where did he acquire the skills in these various trades?
Speaker 2: I--just doing our jobs for people, working with folks, you know, going to work as a helper for so and so, and he's great observer, watching.  I mean he could see something and remember whatever it was that he saw.  And he was good about showing me how to use a screwdriver and a wrench.  And how to how to fix things he was a great fix it guy.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Until he went to work for the United Aircraft [United Aircraft Corporation; United Technologies Corporation, Hartford, Connecticut], he was a maintenance guy, and I was his assistant landscape helper at a place where he worked.  He was a chauffeur, he was a maintenance man at the bank, he taught me how to mop the floors and shine the brass. I was his, his helper.  And when he graduated from high school, he was the captain of the baseball team the captain of the soccer team.  And the only reason he wasn't a captain of the basketball team was because he thought it was just a little too much and he wanted one of his friends to be the captain.  And he and one of his classmates wrote the school song which is still the school song at Bloomfield High School [Bloomfield, Connecticut].  He was born a little too early if he had been born two later he would've gone on to college and been a great professional athlete I think.  I mean he really was--had great hand and eye coordination but he and my mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] married at a pretty early age--they were in their early twenties and started a family.
Story_ID: 311772
Speaker 1: Bloomfield [Connecticut] is a town adjacent to Hartford [Connecticut]. And you say he [Peterson's father, Rufus Peterson] arrived there when he came from Virginia.  Were there many African Americans or black families in Bloomfield at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes in this sense, there were a lot of families particularly from Virginia, who came to Bloomfield and bought a lot and use it as a garden.  So they didn't necessarily build on the lot when they bought it, but as soon as they could build on it they did.  And I would think that in Bloomfield there were probably as many African Americans as there were percentage wise, as there were in Hartford.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: But in those days there weren't a lot of African Americans in New England as, you know.  And in Hartford, you know, it looks--I think my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Crosby] and grandfather [Benjamin Crosby] knew just about everybody in Hartford at one point I mean literally by name (laughter).  And then the Second World War [World War II, WWII] came, and there was a great influx from the South because there were jobs available.  And the men who had been drafted just left these job openings.  And that's the reason my father had an opportunity go to work for United Aircraft [United Aircraft Corporation; United Technologies Corporation, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: World War II.
Speaker 2: World War II.
Speaker 1: How long did he work there?
Speaker 2: Oh I--thirty years or so, you know, he retired when he was sixty-two.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And moved to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], which is the reason that I am here today.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: He bought a lot prior to the time that he retired. I think for something like seven thousand or seventy-five hundred, he bought two building lots.   Which are--
Speaker 1: But he didn't come to Martha's Vineyard until retirement?
Speaker 2: No he came prior to that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And set it up.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: You know he was he wanted to retire here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I see.
Speaker 2: He built the house probably a year before he retired.	This beautiful little two-bedroom house over on in the Highlands [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] as they call it.  And he said to me one day, you know, if you really like this place you should buy a lot.  And I did at a time when it was a lot less expensive than it is now and I did the same thing he did.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Six or seven years prior to my retirement I built a house. Knowing that this was the place that I was going to spend some of my retirement days.
Story_ID: 311773
Speaker 1: What else did he [Peterson's father, Rufus Peterson] share with you that you recall about his childhood and youth years in Bloomfield [Connecticut] and the Hartford [Connecticut] area did he share stories with you?
Speaker 2: I think one of the (laughter) greatest testaments to his ability to do things and to be the kind of person he was.  I ran for public office in Bloomfield many years later.  I ran for the town council as it's called, and I knocked on the door one day and this elderly woman came to the door.  I said, "I'd like to introduce myself I'd like to ask you for your vote."  And she said, "Are you related to Rufus Peterson?" I said, "Yes that's my father."  And she said, "Well you come inside.  He was my student in high school [Bloomfield High School, Bloomfield, Connecticut] and if you're anything like your father I will vote for you in November" (laughter).  And we sat and had some tea and talked and she told great stories about what a wonderful student my father was what a great guy he was.  And how impressed she was with him, and eventually I think she did vote for me because I did get elected.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: He had the reputation I've never met anybody in life who said a bad word about him.  I mean every single person who knew him would say to me, "You know, your father is a great guy."  "What a great man he is. I just think the world of your father."  And that, and that was the way he treated his children and the neighbors and his friends and his coworkers.  He was a union man in the days when being a union man was even, dangerous.
Speaker 1: This is at United Aircraft [United Aircraft Corporation; United Technologies Corporation, Hartford, Connecticut] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) United. Yes, he was one of the lodge--the International Association of Machinists [International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers] lodge number six, I think it is. He was one of the charter members.  And I saw his name on the charter when I went into the building years later.  He was a union steward, and he was somebody who knew how to represent himself and he was concerned about his fellow workers.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Seeing that they all received a fair shot.
Story_ID: 311774
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father's [Rufus Peterson] parents, parentage, your paternal grandfather and grandmother. What did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I didn't, I didn't know my paternal grandfather, he passed away prior to my birth. However I knew my grandmother, Eliza Gwen Peterson, and she was just a marvelous, wonderful person.  She probably knew more about farming than most of the men in Bloomfield [Connecticut].  Grew every kind of conceivable vegetable and some fruits in her yard had a great walnut tree as I remember it.  At age sixty-one, I remember her and my father having a foot race and she beating my father in the foot race.  She kept telling me that she were sixteen years old, and I couldn't understand that 'cause I knew my father was in his thirties how could she be younger than my father.  And she was really sixty-one, and she was just making a joke.
Speaker 1: I noticed you listed her occupation as farmer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Virginia, where was the farm?
Speaker 2: Now it was just a small plot of land I shouldn't say small plot it was probably the size of a another building lot, and she farmed it.
Speaker 1: Where was this?
Speaker 2: In Bloomfield.
Speaker 1: Oh Bloomfield?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I've never seen the homestead in Virginia I don't have any knowledge of that.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share stories with you about her early years in Virginia?
Speaker 2: No not really and she's very pleasant very--a lot of fun and she was a good friend of my maternal grandmother [Anna Crosby]. She'd come and spend time with her.  And at times, I would go and stay with her along with my brothers and sister [Anne Peterson Jennings].  And she would just teach us everything we needed to know about farming.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And it was fun.
Story_ID: 311775
Speaker 1: Mr. HistoryMaker [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] you had mentioned earlier to me that your [maternal] grandmother Anna Crosby was especially influential in your growing up years.  And that she raised you in, in many ways you were in her home a lot.  Would you say more about that experience with her?
Speaker 2: Yes, my three brothers [Raoul Peterson, Manning Peterson, and Rufus Peterson] and sister [Anne Peterson Jennings] and I lived with my grandmother and grandfather [Benjamin Crosby] in Hartford [Connecticut] and what is the south end of Hartford.  And it couldn't be a better place for a kid who likes sports.  We were about four blocks away from a baseball stadium where the Boston Braves farm team played baseball.  So it's almost Major League Baseball and on the weekends the--the Negro Leagues would play on Sunday against a team called the Savitt Gems.  So that, we had an opportunity to go to this baseball stadium and learn baseball from real experts.  And I served as the bat boy for the visiting teams on occasion.  And therefore, had a chance to see Satchel Paige and some of the real superstars in the Negro Leagues as they came through.  And it was just as--very exciting, about six blocks away from where my grandmother and grandfather lived was a park, a public park.  And in this public park was a golf course and that's where I learned my golf, and there wasn't very far, from a country club [Wethersfield Country Club] that was probably six or seven miles away in Wethersfield, Connecticut that's where we caddied at the country club.  And learn all that we could about golf and earned a pretty good buck because at the time my older, oldest brother--my younger brother and I were caddying at the same time.  So that when we brought our caddied money home after a weekend of caddying it was a sizable amount of money for my grandmother.  And she certainly needed it and used it wisely and, and gave us an allowance so that we were living well.
Speaker 1: How old were you now when you lived with your, your grandmother you and your siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably from the time I was a youngster, I don't really honestly remember what the age was.  But I, I went to Naylor School [Dr. James H. Naylor Elementary School; Dr. James H. Naylor/CCSU Leadership Academy, Hartford, Connecticut] at age six.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: A year after I was supposed to go.  But I skipped kindergarten so I never did have a chance to go through that kindergarten experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you come to be living with your, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] and father [Rufus Peterson] divorced and my grandmother and grandfather were really our guardians or whatever you want to call it.
Speaker 1: They have a big house, what was her house like?
Speaker 2: It was a three family house and on the second-floor my aunt and uncle [Irving Crosby] lived.  And on the third floor we the children lived and on the first floor the--my grandparents lived.
Speaker 1: I see what street was this on?
Speaker 2: Brown Street.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: Which is not very far from Wethersfield's suburban line and that's where we caddied at the country club.  Yeah, a great neighborhood. The, the big concept of melting pot that we hear about sometimes my next-door neighbor was German.  The neighbor on the right side was Italian, the neighbor down next to her was Polish.  And the neighbor next to her was Italian across the street was some Irish folks there were some Swedish people, there were some folks from Canada (laughter) that was.  I mean they were just from all parts of the world.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did these people do generally? Do you recall their occupations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them were, were laborers, or they worked in factories, or they worked, you know, they were people who worked for somebody.  I think the Margesons [ph.] had their own family business like their carpentry business or some such thing as that.  But most of the people worked for somebody one of the big employers or medium-size employers in the Hartford area. It was a lower middle-class community.
Story_ID: 311776
Speaker 1: Living with your, brother--your brothers [Raoul Peterson, Manning Peterson, and Rufus Peterson] and your sisters [Anne Peterson Jennings] and your [maternal] grandparents [Anna Crosby and Benjamin Crosby] which we gonna talk about your siblings in a few minutes.  But what do you recall about the favorite family times?  Any favorite holidays or traditions that your grandparents and you and your siblings celebrated. What special days you remember?
Speaker 2: My grandmother and grandfather were very attached to the Union Baptist Church [Hartford, Connecticut].  So all of the holidays that had any religious aspect to them were celebrated in, in a great way.  And my grandmother being this wonderful chef that she was she might have a dinner that she was preparing for the mayor of Hartford [Connecticut], but before she would go to work there she would prepare the same kind of meal for our household before she went to work.  So she was up at four o'clock in the morning getting things ready (laughter).  And she would work sometimes for days making sure that everything was perfect.  And we did have meals that were more like feast than, you know, the average kind of holiday meal that some people experienced.  She fed us just like she was feeding her employers, everything was wondrously festive.  I mean, there was not one holiday that we didn't have fun celebrating and part of that celebration was wonderful food.  And even though we didn't have a lot of money we always had gifts for each other, some of which we made (laughter) rather than purchased.  And it was a lot of love and a lot of respect.  But at the same time my grandmother and grandfather were always talking about, you know, when you finish high school.  You know, you going to college and you have to get ready to go to college.  And all of her children attended university, college, in someplace, and my uncle her youngest son my grandmother, grandmother's youngest son went to Colgate University [Hamilton, New York].  At a time when I think, there were five African Americans on the campus in those days.  And one of his roommates was Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he was a great, Daniel "Major" Crosby [Daniel Crosby] his nickname was major.  And he was one of the great football players in New England in those days that's how he went to Colgate on a football scholarship maybe track also he was a good track man.  But he went to prep school after Hartford High School [Hartford Public High School, Hartford, Connecticut] and years after he graduated from Hartford High School one of the sportswriters in Hartford wrote a column on the best football game he ever saw when Hartford High School played Weaver High School [Thomas Snell Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut] and Major Crosby ran an end around play and won the game seven to nothing.  I mean he--this is twenty-five or thirty years after he was out of school that this column was written, so he was a memorable athlete.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And a good guy, one of my mentors he taught me a lot at times he was a little gruff, tough to deal with but I realize now that that was the way that the instruction was given in those days.
Story_ID: 311777
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had the guidance of your [maternal] grandparents [Anna Crosby and Benjamin Crosby], and but you also had the guidance of your mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] and your father [Rufus Peterson]. They were still in Hartford [Connecticut]? Or did you have much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well my mother was, was in New York [New York] and in Stamford [Connecticut] and other places and working outside of Hartford.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my father was a constant person coming back and forth and, and at times lived with us.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: But he always had three jobs until he went to work for the United Aircraft [United Aircraft Corporation; United Technologies Corporation, Hartford, Connecticut] then he only had two (laughter).  But he, he worked a lot, and when he could, he was out there with us on occasion came and played baseball with us.  That's when I thought, I mean, I never saw anybody hit a ball as far as he hit it.  I mean, he was a left-hand hitter, and he hit the ball one day and lost it.  I mean knocked it in the woods we never found it again so the game was over because he, he hit a great homerun but we could never find the ball (laughter).  But he was such a good guy I mean just a delightful man--a, a great feeling for his children seeing that they reached a higher level than he did and encouraged us a great deal (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about, let's talk about--we're talking about Gerard [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] but let's talk about your siblings.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Would you give me their names from the oldest to the youngest? And approximately when they were born and what you remember about them growing up and where are they today?
Speaker 1: Raoul Crosby Peterson my oldest brother was born in September 18, 1930, he's two years younger than I am. Oh, two years older, forgive me, than I am.  He was the fellow who is a bit like my younger son.  Now every time there was a uniform he had to have it.  So he was in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and then during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] he was a Junior Air Raid Warden.  And eventually when he graduated from college went into the [U.S.] Army and spent ten or eleven years as a, a captain in the Army.  And served in Korea and Vietnam I believed, and was a great athlete in school didn't spend too much time worrying about academic things.  But was fortunate enough to go to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] and ran track there--was a good track guy.  And while he was in West Virginia, he discovered he was really a scholar.  And upon graduation was a Fulbright scholar, however he took his commission in the service and never did go through the Fulbright process.  He has a master's degree in a couple of areas was a great school teacher for a while.  And eventually one of the foremost counselors and substance abuse people who can assist you in solving problems and has done that in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] for a number of years.  He was one of the founders I believe of Narcotics Anonymous or least was in there at the time when it was being founded.  Great student and now he's a golfer he's, he's reach the age now where golf is more important than any of those other sports.  I think for a while he ran in the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament, Augusta, Georgia] kinds of races even when he was in his forties and fifties and maybe when he was in his sixties and ran against some of those folks who in earlier years who were world-class runners who, who beat him.  And after they got older I think he was beating some of them, so that was satisfying for him.
Speaker 2: Then you were born is that right?
Speaker 1: Then I was born.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 311778
Speaker 1: And then my brother Manning Carlisle Peterson couple years younger than I am.  And he--I believe is, February 3 is his birthday if not mistaken and he's I think 1934.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If I'm not mistaken, but he's a couple years younger I am, and he was an athlete, primarily a golfer, played on the high school golf team at Bulkeley High School [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut] and did very well.  Played in the Junior Amateur [U.S. Junior Amateur Golf Championship] and some of those other events in those days.  Caddied at the country club [Wethersfield Country Club, Wethersfield, Connecticut] attended the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] and eventually went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And received his master's degree in urban planning. Came to California to do an internship with the Alameda County and I don't think he's ever gone back to the East since then.  I think he fell in love with California and then attended Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] for a while in the doctoral program.  He and my brother [Raoul Peterson] are substance abuse counselors who are really at the top of their game.  It's really some of the best in the country and have done wonderful things for lots of people.  And they are very close, and they collaborate on occasion doing consulting and, and working for corporate clients and individuals.
Speaker 2: And your brother Rufus was named after your father [Rufus Peterson]?
Speaker 1: Rufus Franklin Peterson and March 16 is his birthday.  And he's a couple years younger than, then Manning. He and Manning were close and I think they had a chance to do some golfing together.  And he followed Manning's footsteps and played on the high school golf team but he went farther than all of us.  He was a state golf champion in high school the Connecticut Interscholastic Association [Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference] champion.  And at the same year he was the runner-up for the Junior Amateur, so he was as good as any player in Connecticut when he was coming along.  And when he went in the [U.S.] Navy played on the Navy golf team and was quite good at that.  Great instructor loved to teach and eventually moved to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And we spent a good amount of time here together playing golf and having fun together.  He attended the University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut] on I think a basketball scholarship (laughter) then they found out he could play golf.  I think he went there to play basketball.  But eventually went in the Navy and spent I don't know ten or eleven years in the Navy and then went to work for the federal government at the sub base [Naval Submarine Base New London] down in Groton [Connecticut], New London [Connecticut] area in Connecticut.  And eventually worked for the Steamship Authority here on Martha's Vineyard loved the sea loved the Navy and was very good at anything that he ever tried.
Speaker 2: I certainly remember finally meeting him here I guess ten years ago and knowing him up until his, 'til his passing.
Story_ID: 311779
Speaker 1: And your fourth sibling tell us about--
Speaker 2: Last but not least is Anne Crosby Peterson [Anne Peterson Jennings], and her married name is Jennings, but she was the smartest one in the group, you know.  I mean, I think all of my brothers [Raoul Peterson, Manning Peterson, and Rufus Peterson] were really bright but she was outstanding in every way.  And academically she excelled and went on to nursing school [Hartford Hospital School of Nursing] at the Hartford Hospital [Hartford, Connecticut].  She's a registered nurse and one of the first nurse practitioners in the United States.  As a matter of fact at one point, she was writing the certification exam for the nurse practitioners.  Visited Washington, D.C., to work on this commission that did that each year for four or five years.  She was the youngest to my knowledge charge nurse in the operating room at Hartford Hospital after she graduated from her registered nursing program.
Speaker 1: What decade was this roughly? This would have been--she was born in 1940?
Speaker 2: I think this was in the '60s [1960s], you know, probably around '64 [1964] perhaps.  She was one of the best nurses at Hartford Hospital worked in many different specialties.  I've forgotten how many but, but certainly dozens of specialties and was an expert in those specialties because were it not for the fact that she had that expertise she never would've been moved on to other places to lend her knowledge and expertise.  But she went to the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] for her nurse practitioner degree.  And was honored recently by Hartford Hospital for their black history program as one of the most important members of their community.  And particularly because she was the first African American, who finished the nursing program perhaps the first admitted to the program and finished.  And she was a great catalyst because she--behind her came, a lot of other folks who now are her friends.  And they saw her as a shining light and, and a beacon and they followed in her footsteps.
Speaker 1: Now where does she live now?
Speaker 2: She lives on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Full time.
Speaker 2: She lives on Martha's Vineyard full time she lives in the house that my father [Rufus Peterson] and stepmother built here.  And she now improved it greatly, and it's an estate rather than just the house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is she still practicing her profession at all?
Speaker 2: Only in a consulting capacity I'm sure people call her and asked her what to do.  I turn to her--I call her Doctor Anne.  She probably would've made a wonderful doctor in those days women were not encouraged to go on to be physicians, but I would bet you anything she'd be as good a doctor as she has been a nurse.
Story_ID: 311780
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father [Rufus Peterson] coming to Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], how did he happen to come here and when did that happen, and--?
Speaker 2: I think in the, in the '60s [1960s] or maybe even the late '50s [1950s] he came here on church excursions when he was associated with the Shiloh Baptist Church [Hartford, Connecticut].  And I think that was one of the first time he came here.  And he just loved it because it reminded him of his childhood in Virginia.  A very quiet placid, peaceful, wonderful place with friendly people and he bought a lot.  I think it probably took him about ten years to pay for it. But I think he paid something like seven thousand dollars or seventy-five hundred dollars for this lot, and that's where he built his house just prior to retiring.  And lived here twenty more years prior to his passing away and every single day on Martha's Vineyard for him was a wonderful day.  You know, I would call him from Hartford [Connecticut], you know, how are things going? "Oh, had a great day.  We went down and got some call hogs, and we made some chowder. We're sitting out here on the deck now, talk to your mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] she'll tell you all about how wonderful it is here."  And, and he did he, he enjoyed every single day.  He and my stepmother were the pillars of the First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church of Vineyard Haven] in Vineyard Haven [Massachusetts] he was the soloist in the choir, and she was the organist and he also worked in the Sunday school.  And every Sunday all most they went up to Gay Head now Aquinnah [Massachusetts] and helped put on the services at the church there, so they had a lot of friends in, in Gay Head. And he worked at the high school [Martha's Vineyard Regional High School, Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] he was a maintenance engineer as he called it.  A great maintenance guy I mean he really--when he finished making something look good it always looked wonderful.
Speaker 1: Sounds like he was a perfectionist?
Speaker 2: He was, and he was awfully--he loved it I mean when he waxed the floor or sign some brass or cleaned the window.  When I built my house here, he was the clerk of works he came here almost every day and helped the contractor (laughter) build the house.  And he, he gave, you know, the benefit of his thoughts.  And I think this is the tightest house I've ever lived in I mean it's absolutely weathertight in every respect.  I should also thank the contractor Emanuel Horn, who was the guy who actually was the general contractor on the job. He is just like my father he's a perfectionist.
Speaker 1: Emanuel Horn?
Speaker 2: Emanuel Horn, you know, Emanuel Horn--
Speaker 1: From Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: --yeah.  Yeah in his spare time. While he was building his house.	He built this house too (laughter).
Story_ID: 311781
Speaker 1: I wanna come back to the Peterson boys because there was approximately two years age difference from the oldest [Raoul Peterson] to the youngest [Rufus Peterson].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, so you guys were pretty much in the same age range?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about besides the golf?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And belonging to the sports activities what other kind of things did you guys do as brothers?
Speaker 2: Well I, you know we had a neighborhood where you were always playing some--a game.  I mean if it was a baseball season you're were playing baseball.  The football season you're playing football.  I mean, and that's all we did we--my brother, oldest brother  was a worker he always had a job.  I mean, when he was in high school [Hartford Public High School] he was working in a shoeshine parlor up in the center of Hartford [Connecticut], downtown Hartford.  And it was a hat cleaning store and a shoeshine store, and he was the shoeshine guy.  And I always had, and my brothers always had a shoeshine box.  I mean that's what we did, you know, for a living when we were nine or ten, eleven, twelve years old before we started caddying at the country club [Wethersfield Country Club, Wethersfield, Connecticut].  But we always had jobs I mean we deliver the newspapers, and we worked on farms.  And we all worked on tobacco during harvest time. I didn't work on other farms.  But I know my oldest brother did, and my younger brothers probably had that experience too, but they were more into the caddy world then my brother and I.  We had different circles of friends because of age, but we all competed in sports.  And the schools in those days were always open for recreation.  And we spent a lot of time doing recreation in, in those places.  So we were always out of the house we were never just home--there was no such thing as being a couch potato.  We never had a TV set so we couldn't sit in front of the television.  And the radio my [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Crosby] had control over so we had to listen to whatever my grandfather wanted to listen to and so when he was listening things that we like we'd gone in there, the living room with him.  But when he was listening to things that just didn't make any sense to us we gravitated to another part of the house.  And played some games or, you know, got on the phone and called a friend or whatever.
Story_ID: 311782
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up in Hartford [Connecticut], briefly?
Speaker 2: I think the sights that were most satisfying growing up were the parks they were always green.  They were always well manicured. They were always available for fun.  And they were close. We could walk without too much time.  I think the sounds that I remember most, probably growing up early were the streetcar signs they were--you could hear them clang, the bell clanging when they rang on those steel rails, you know, they make a lot of noises, and they just seem to be exciting to me.  We lived on a street that was well trafficked going north and south.  So we heard a lot of the traffic from the trucks and cars that passed by therefore we didn't cross the street very often.  To play on the other side until we grew old enough to be able to negotiate that traffic.  The smells were always my [maternal] grandmother's [Anna Crosby] cooking, you know, but on Sunday when she cook those puffy rolls that she had with scrambled eggs and the sausage and the bacon and the apples.  And the things that she had ready for us when we were ready to go have breakfast I mean you--that would get you out of bed quicker than anything in the whole wide world.  So those were wonderful experiences and I could still smell those rolls. I mean they are gonna be with me forever.
Story_ID: 311783
Speaker 1: Mr. Peterson [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] tell me about you're--the start of your formal education what elementary school did you first attend, where and how old were you what you remember about that school?
Speaker 2: I remember the first day going to school my mother [Edythe Crosby Peterson] brought me there and I--the year before I couldn't go to school.  I was five years old and being born on September 10 I missed going to school by three or four days and I--whatever the time period was.  So my neighbor across the street was a young lady who was the same age I was, but she was born in a different month, and she was going to school.  So every day when she came home from school she would across the street say, "I'm in school, and you're not, you're a baby and I'm in school."  Oh man that was just awful, and I arrived at school and the--I'm not sure how I got to the principal's office.  But my mother brought me to the principal's office and the principal asked me if I knew how to count and I said yes.  My brother [Raoul Peterson], two years older than I was, was a teacher even in those days he'd come home from school, and he teach me what he learned.  And I'd have to sit there and endure this lesson because he was the teacher. "Sit down now, I'm gonna teach you how to count.  Now all right now one, one say one, two, three (laughter)."  So I knew how to count, and the principal said, "Well count for me."  I said, "Well do you want me to count by ones or fives or tens?" 'Cause that's the way we counted when we were playing hide and go seek.  You count by tens. They said, "All right count to hundred."  "Ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty--."  So she said, "You can count by fives, and tens?" I said, "Yes."  She said, "Well count by ones."  "One, two three, four, five, six--."  She said, "That's enough of that."  She said, "Now around with the fives."  "Five, ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty, thirty-five."  "How about ten?"  "Ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty."  She said, "Well you're going to first grade."  So I went to the first grade. Guess who I'm sitting behind, the girl across the street who was giving me all that grief (laughter) for a whole year.  She was mortified, here I was coming to first grade and skipping kindergarten, so I never did go to kindergarten.  But it was a great school, Naylor School [Dr. James H. Naylor Elementary School; Dr. James H. Naylor/CCSU Leadership Academy, Hartford, Connecticut] it was called.  One of my teachers at Naylor School, my sixth grade teacher Ms. Godfrey [ph.] called me years later when I was appointed executive director of the Hartford Civic Center [XL Center, Hartford, Connecticut] she called me.  And my secretary buzzed me and said, "Ms. Godfrey from Naylor School wants to talk-, speak with you."  I said, "Ms. Godfrey?" I was twelve years old when I left Naylor School. I probably saw her three or four times after that, and here I was fifty years old, Ms. Godfrey is calling me.  She called, I got on the phone, she said, "Gerard [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] how are you? I've been following your progress.  I just wanted to congratulate you for what a wonderful job you gonna do at the Hartford Civic Center.  And I know you--I knew that when you were in my room in the sixth grade that you were going to be a terrific person."  And I mean that's how the teachers I think in those days had a real interest in kids and probably had more time to do some things in those days than they do now.  A lot of the administrative things that they have to do now they didn't have to do in those days.  And I think that there was a great dedication, teachers in those days seems to me were scholars.  I mean they really learned how to teach and wanted to make sure that their students actually learned what needed to be learned to get to the next level and were proud of each one of them not just me.  And she also asked me how my brothers and sister [Anne Peterson Jennings] were doing because she had us all I guess at one point.
Story_ID: 311784
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, I no-, not to the point of excellence. I think there were a couple times in my life where I got off the track a little bit.  And in order to get back on the track, I was required to work a little harder in junior high school then I had prior to that.  And therefore, started getting on the honor roll, was an usher for the graduating class when I was a junior in high school.  So I, I was a pretty good student.  But I really didn't work quite as hard in junior high school and high school as I did in college [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] after I finished my two years in the [U.S.] Army.  I really did knuckle down and worked very hard after that.
Speaker 1: How many years were you at Burr Junior High School [Alfred E. Burr Junior High School; Alfred E. Burr Elementary School, Hartford, Connecticut]? Was that a seven, eight nine?
Speaker 2: Seven, eight, nine years, yeah.  And the first year of high school you did at Burr and then you were a sophomore when you arrived at Bulkeley High School [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Burr Junior High School just went by, you know, very swift again and there were some teachers there who were very helpful. Was a math teacher in eighth grade as I remember and she was very supportive and this geometry teacher who took all the troublemakers and gave us extra credit so that we wouldn't bother her during the class, we had a lot more work to do.  And the problems were more difficult than the ones that we were studying because she knew that the three or four of us were the mischief makers could probably use some extra credit and some extra work. To keep the noise down.
Speaker 1: In junior high was there any subject that you especially liked and kind of was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think mathematics was something that I really enjoyed algebra and geometry. And I went on in college I took some mathematics courses as electives.  I'm sure some people probably wouldn't touch like calculus and analytical geometry. But it was because of my teachers in grammar school, elementary school, high school it gave me that [background].
Story_ID: 311785
Speaker 1: Background (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Junior High [Alfred E. Burr Junior High School; Alfred E. Burr Elementary School, Hartford, Connecticut] and as you move to Buckley High School, is it called Buckley?
Speaker 1: Bulkeley [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut], yes.
Speaker 2: Bulkeley yeah.  Did you have any beginning dreams or aspirations about what you wanted to do with your life, what you wanted to be as they say?
Speaker 1: I think in those days I probably wanted to be a dentist.  I probably wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  My uncle in Detroit [Michigan] wanted me to go to the University of Detroit [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] and live with him there.  He was a very supportive guy, who at the drop of a hat would put a couple hundred bucks in an envelope and send it to you and say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his occupation profession?
Speaker 1: He, he worked for Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] my uncle Theodore [Theodore Crosby], he was I believe the second youngest member of the Crosby clan.  And he went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], he had a master's degree from Atlanta University but couldn't find employment where, you know, he should have found it perhaps.  So he went to work for Ford Motor Company, and I think he was in the rubber processing part.  I mean, you know, the real tough part of the plant.  But he again was like my father [Rufus Peterson] he's very interested in the union movement.  And he and Walter Reuther became friends and United Autoworkers [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers (UAW)] were very good to my uncle, and my uncle was very good to the United Autoworkers and did very well in Detroit, loved Detroit--
Speaker 2: What was the influence that seeded your initial interest in dentistry was there person or experience that you or--
Speaker 1: I don't know maybe because my teeth were so bad I wanted to have free dentist, dental work or something I'm not sure. But I, I do remember that was one of my thoughts even when I arrived at the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut].  I was kind of a pre-dental student for a while until I discovered economics.
Story_ID: 311786
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your high school years both academically and extracurricular activities at the high school [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut].  What was life like for you at high school?
Speaker 2: Again it was full of sports, intramural but I also played on the high school golf team.  And that was a great experience, same friends that I had growing up were the--on the golf team.  So we palled around together and spent a whale of a lot of time at Goodwin Park [Goodwin Park Golf Course, Hartford, Connecticut] practicing and playing and caddying together.  The academic work I, I guess I was reasonably good not absolutely terrific. I didn't, I didn't make the honor roll every time maybe every other time.  And then my senior year I kinda said, hey I've worked hard enough it's time to play golf and excel in golf.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I played in our state golf tournament and for nine holes I was doing rather well and didn't do very well on the back nine.  But I know that when my younger, youngest brother [Rufus Peterson] won the championship [Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference championship] I mean I knew how hard that is to do.  And I applauded him greatly I think I was in the [U.S.] Army at the time that he won. And I just thought that was the greatest feat that anybody in our family could ever achieve.  I mean, being high school golf champion for the entire state of Connecticut wow that was to me wonderful.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers, counselors at the high school that were particularly influential guiding you or stimulating you?  Anybody stands out?  You talked about your elementary school teacher [at Dr. James H. Naylor Elementary School; Dr. James H. Naylor/CCSU Leadership Academy, Hartford, Connecticut] who saw something in you when you were in grade six and believed in you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there anybody else who was particularly influential?
Speaker 2: I think there's a guy who wasn't our--wasn't at the high school very long a guy named Dr. Melrose [ph.] who was a math teacher.  In one study hall, I went just to ask him a question, and I think he somehow gave me so much information that from that point on the course just opened up for me.  I mean he was wonderful at describing, I guess the theory of what it was that we were studying rather than, you know, here's the formula just do it.  And my physics teacher Dr. Kierstead [Ralph Kierstead], was the toughest teacher I've ever had in my entire life.  I mean he prepared us for college, I mean he--if you did well in this class, then you really worked hard.  One of our classes we all came toward the end of our (laughter) senior year I guess none of us had done the homework really, and he started asking questions.  And he wasn't getting any answers, so he put the entire class out said, "Get out.  I don't want you in my room."
Speaker 1: Where did he put you? I mean--
Speaker 2: Said, "Get out," he didn't care where we were going (laughter), "You're not gone be in his room anymore you're not prepared."  I mean scared us to death so we had to hide for the whole period around the school and not get caught you know 'cause they would say your cutting class.  And but from that point on you can believe that we were always prepared for Dr. Kierstead.  And as it turned out he was the person that the State of Connecticut turned to, to change the science curriculum for the entire State of Connecticut after the Sputnik [Sputnik 1] went up.  And it scared most of the science teachers in the world, in the United States anyway.  The Russians [Soviets] are way ahead of us there in space, and we're just sitting here twiddling our thumbs.  And that was the first time I knew that he was a Ph.D., up until that point we called him Mr. Kierstead.  But he was a bona fide Ph.D. from one of the fine schools I think he graduated from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].  So we had some incredible teachers, and we were blessed in the Hartford [Connecticut] school system.
Story_ID: 311787
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers who were African American?
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact I was the only African American in my graduating class [at Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Only?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There were other high schools in Hartford [Connecticut] at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes but in our neighborhood there were very few African Americans, there were few.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And Bob Walker [ph.] was in the class with me but he decided to join the [U.S.] Army before he graduated and so he left me there alone.
Speaker 1: Being the only student of color, black American in high school, in your graduating class, let's put it that way, were there any issues or problems, how do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Oh I'm sure there were some that were there I mean I didn't have any dating opportunities because they're just wasn't anybody who I could date if you will.  So I had my church [Union Baptist Church, Hartford, Connecticut] which was on the other side of town, and that's where I went for most of my social life.  And the friends that I made in church were my African American friends, were my friends some of them whom today, Mander Henry [ph.], in fact, was one of my buddies growing up and we're still friends.  But there--I was really fortunate to find students, I mean they were the same attitude as I was, you know, they were going to go to college.  And we were, we were academic people as well as, you know, folks out looking for a good time.  We discussed a lot of things that had to do with school.
Story_ID: 311788
Speaker 1: Well you knew early on that that you were going to college? Really early on, yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there wasn't any option my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Crosby] just kept saying you're going to college.
Speaker 1: That's very clear in what you've said. How did it happen to be the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: It was cheap, and it was close.  And I took a test the entrance exam, in order to get in there, but it wasn't very difficult, I mean it was, you know, it was like duck soup.  And I think it cost about six hundred dollars a year to go to school in those days, and that was--the tuition was heavily subsidized it was a hundred and twenty-five dollars for a year's tuition at that college.  And I knew something about it but not a lot, a lot.  It was about thirty, thirty-five miles from Hartford [Connecticut] I could commute.
Speaker 1: You commuted?
Speaker 2: I didn't commute, but I could on the weekends when there were, you know, I needed to find work. I went back to caddy on the weekends to make enough money to go to school during the week in a sense.  And then during the summers I worked, earned enough money to pay tuition room board and books.  I worked in all sorts of jobs, I mentioned tobacco earlier that was a well-paying job, Broadleaf tobacco, very strenuous and difficult.  I worked in construction, but primarily around the golf course. I tried to make my living that way, and it worked out.
Story_ID: 311789
Speaker 1: Tell me about caddying, how much did you make in those days what was caddying like, where did you caddy?
Speaker 2: Caddied at the Wethersfield Country Club [Wethersfield, Connecticut] primarily.  And I was so blessed I met the pro who was from Scotland whose name was Dave Campbell [ph.].  And I met him at an early age, I think I was twelve years old when I went there.  My brother [Raoul Peterson] was caddying there, and I thought anything my older brother did I wanted to do to, so he went to caddy and I saw him bringing this money home and I--this is-I'm going to.  And but I was too small to carry the bag, but the pro took a liking to me some reason and asked me if I would be willing to work for him.  That is, getting the balls that the people hit out at- during the lessons that he was giving, he thought golf.  And when people would hit the ball out I'd go get it and bring it back I mean, you know, it was lots of balls.  There were lots of lessons, and I heard him give the same lessons a hundred times that summer.  And the following summer I was big enough to carry small bags.  And again he looked out for me made sure that I had a caddy for the women, they're bags weren't very big or the older man who were carrying only a few clubs.  And eventually, I became one of his favorite people.  I was sixteen years old, he made-, named me the caddy of the year, and he gave me a set of golf clubs matched irons that, that was my first matched set of golf clubs.  And I used those for many years afterward, and he was a real taskmaster.  In the Second World War [World War II, WWII], he was a sergeant major in the Royal Marines [Corps of Royal Marines].  And I mean that is probably as tough a task master you can ever find in life.  So he was a disciplinarian and told us as caddies in no uncertain terms we had to tow the mark.  And I did, I was there early and stayed late on occasion when the bus, last bus had left he would take me home in his car.  And drop me off at my house because it wasn't too far off his way home.  And we had nice conversations about things, and he was very encouraging about, I wasn't a terrific golfer, but I was a reasonably good golfer.  And he wanted to make sure I stayed with golf, and he introduced me to a friend of his named Tommy Armour.  Tommy Armour was one of the foremost golfers of the world, well he was at that time probably was in his early sixties, so he had passed where he was playing on tour.  But I was his caddy and because Dave Campbell recommended me as one of the fine caddies and, and whenever Tommy Armour came to Wethersfield Country Club he would ask for me.  And I became a friend of his in a sense, as a caddy.  And he encouraged me I think one of the things he said, "You'll gonna meet people in golf you're never read anywhere else.  So you stick with golf and that--it's a wonderful game.  And try to play it as well as you can but most importantly, you know, you have to be a gentleman being a gentleman and being a good golfer they're synonymous. You have to learn the rules of etiquette and the rules of golf and make sure that you stay with the game," and I have and he's right.
Story_ID: 311790
Speaker 1: You played on the golf team at the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: My freshman year.
Speaker 1: Freshman year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then it ceased?
Speaker 2: Then I went into the [U.S.] Army for a couple of years.  I was drafted into the Army during the Korean War.
Speaker 1: Oh what year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: You were drafted out of college?
Speaker 2: I quit the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], which means you are immediately eligible for the draft.
Speaker 1: Why did you quit ROTC?
Speaker 2: Because I didn't want to--at that time it just didn't make any sense for me too, you know, my brother [Raoul Peterson] was in the [U.S.] Army.  And I didn't love the things that he was doing, I mean they would, you know, he was going here and going there.  He couldn't never tell us where he was I think he was in Korea, his mailing address was San Francisco [California].  But I--it just didn't appeal to me I didn't want to go the same trail and down the same trail and as it turned out when I got drafted they put me in infantry (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: So you were a year in college? And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A little more than that.
Speaker 1: And then into the service for how long?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I did two years in the Army and then came back and went to the University of Connecticut again.
Speaker 1: Briefly, where did you serve, where were you located when you were in the Army?
Speaker 2: I started in Fort Devens, Massachusetts and then went to basic training in a place called Indiantown Gap Military Reservation [Fort Indiantown Gap Military Reservation] in the mountains of Pennsylvania. This was in February, our training was in the snow in the dark.  And it was grueling, it was so grueling that when I came home on leave, I couldn't sleep in the bed.  The bed was so soft I couldn't sleep.  I had to sleep on the floor which was much more to my liking. I was sleeping on the ground out there in Pennsylvania and on the floor when I came home.  Fortunately, the Korean War truce [Korean Armistice Agreement, 1953] was signed before I went to Korea because that was an awful place to go in those days, half of the people I was drafted with never came back.  I mean literally 50 percent of the people who came to Fort Devens with me didn't come to Fort Knox [Kentucky] with me in order to get discharged.  And when I started inquiring about people I mean I just stopped because, you know, the answer was, "Oh he get killed his first day."  Or, "Oh well he was here, he lasted two weeks."  But, you know, that was it, "Oh we never did find him, you know, he was up in the Yalu River somewhere with the snow, you know, we couldn't go back, and the Chinese overran the position so."
Story_ID: 311791
Speaker 1: Parenthetically at Fort Devens [Massachusetts] was there a golf course on the base and did you play there?
Speaker 2: At Fort Devens when I was there was the winter time so no I didn't.
Speaker 1: But there was a course there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) However years later, a year or so later when I was in Camp Pickett Virginia [Fort Pickett, Virginia], I left the infantry and went in as a quartermaster because I told someone that I knew how to use a desk calculator which was true.  I used it in statistics at the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut], so I had a new job that was an office worker that was my first office working job.  And I was promoted to corporal, so I was no longer private, and I didn't have to do KP [kitchen police] and that sort of stuff.  But the, the golf course was more of a driving range and maybe like a miniature golf course.  But when I arrived at Fort Knox [Kentucky], they did have a golf course there.  And I did play the golf course and as a matter of fact in basic training once, not at the place where we were.  But in Hershey, Pennsylvania, a guy named O'Leary [ph.] and I went there played the golf course there he was a good player.  So there was a little bit of golf in the [U.S.] Army but not a lot.
Story_ID: 311792
Speaker 1: Bring us back to the University of Connecticut [UConn, Storrs, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: University of Connecticut was the first time that I really had a chance to see what college was. I'd been talking about it all my young life, you know, you're going to college.  And I didn't know what college was and arrived there, very large classes in your freshman year, survey courses they call 'em.  And I didn't particularly do to well in school. I was below average.  And I, I guess learned a lot about the social life and fun part of the school, but I didn't learn enough about the, the classes and the academic part until I went in the [U.S.] Army.  But two years in the Army will make you a student for sure.  And when I came back from doing my two years I knew I wanted to major in economics, engineering was a possibility but I liked economics a lot.  And so I took lots of economics courses and a few math courses and some government courses, so I'd have a minor and thought very seriously about going to school and being a city manager for little while until I went to work for the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: How did you feel when you graduated from UConn?
Speaker 2: I felt like a million dollars, but I also knew, at that time I was married that I was going to have to find a job, and I also knew that jobs weren't easy to come by, Mander Henry's [ph.] mother worked for the Aetna in those days.  And Corrine Henry [ph.] asked me if I would be interested in working for the Aetna.  I--sure I'll work for anybody I was about to going take the exam (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you was still at UConn?
Speaker 2: I was just graduating.
Speaker 1: Just graduating.
Speaker 2: And she had a boss who was looking for someone to come and working in the payroll audit department.  I had no idea what that meant, but I went, she literally took me by the hand to the personnel apartment and introduce me to the receptionist who then put me onto one of the personnel assistants.  And I was very fortunate, that personnel assistant turned out to be the assistant supervisor of the personnel department a guy named Paul Alterch [ph.].  Paul and I over the years became friends, and he pointed me in the direction, after I had my interview with the payroll audit department, that I had never even considered, and that was being a computer programmer trainee.  I didn't know what a computer was so being a computer programmer trainee is out of the question, but I learned that maybe I had the attributes that they were looking for, and sure enough I did.
Story_ID: 315135
Speaker 1: --In addition to gaining your bachelor's degree in economics from UConn [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] and was able to move to Aetna Insurance [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] what were the experiences in nonacademic things at UConn that prepared you to go into the corporate world i.e. Aetna what else happened to you in college?
Speaker 2: When I finish my two years in the [U.S.] Army, and I had a good experience in the Army learning how to manage people in stressful situations that's one way to put it.  I, I took some of that experience to the University of Connecticut.  I was a member of a fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and was elected an officer and eventually the president of the fraternity. I worked for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this a social fraternity or an academic?
Speaker 2: Social fraternity, we had our own frat house, it wasn't anything like the 'Animal House.'  We were more concerned about having a nonsectarian interracial experience, and it was.  I mean we had folks from every walk of life and every nationality and every ethnic group and religion.  And we, we prided ourselves on that I think we were the only fraternity on campus that had that that kind of mix and mixture.  And being the president of that fraternity where some of the members were older than I was, that was an interesting kind of experience.  They were veterans of the--some of them of the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  I mean they were much older.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then there were some other folks who, you know, my same age group but hadn't gone through that Army experience and that was very valuable to me.  I joined the campus radio station [WHUS Radio] as an announcer, and I had my own jazz program.  Eventually became the chief announcer of the radio station which was a very interesting and difficult job because I had to make sure the announcers were at their places when they should be.  And unfortunately, if they couldn't arrive there I had to substitute for them many times.  But again it was a good way of learning how a process and learning how to manage people.  And since we weren't paying them that was really interesting. Yeah you want somebody to work like the devil for but you not giving them anything except praise.  And I found out that praise sometimes is more important than money, and I've used that approach along with the one minute manager for most of my managerial life.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Were you involved in any student government activities at UConn?
Speaker 2: Only in the sense that I was a representative of the Interfraternity Council as the president of my fraternity, help do what was necessary to keep the fraternities on the right track.  All of them. By using again some of the same techniques that I use as the president of my frat.  But no I never ran for office. At least at that point.
Story_ID: 315136
Speaker 1: Well you graduated [from the University of Connecticut (UConn), Storrs, Connecticut] in June of '57 [1957], now were you married at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you get married?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: In April of that year my wife [Carole Peterson] and I tie the knot in Hartford [Connecticut].  And she at the time was working for the State of Connecticut. She was working for the secretary of state for the State of Connecticut and she worked there until our son was born and after that, she said she wanted to help him grow up, so she never, never did go back to work until he was much older. And--
Speaker 1: Did you meet her in Hartford or at the UConn how did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met her in Hartford through a mutual friend.  She went to the University of Bridgeport [Bridgeport, Connecticut], and our mutual, my mutual friend also did, Irma Anderson [ph.] was her name.  And she came to visit Irma one weekend and we went out on a date and we dated ever since that point, 'til the point when we married.
Speaker 1: And your family started at this point also your first son was born when?
Speaker 2: In September of that year, 1957, he was a premature kid but I think he was only about, I don't remember how many pounds but he was very, very small when he was born.  And eventually did come home from the incubator and was the light of our lives and turned out to be one of the brightest smartest people you ever want to meet and also one of my best friends.
Speaker 1: Where is Brian [Brian Peterson] today what's he doing?
Speaker 2: Brian is in Hartford, Connecticut.  He's a substance abuse counselor in Hartford.  He is one of the best, he's dedicating his life to helping other people, and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Influenced by his uncles [Raoul Peterson and Manning Peterson]?
Speaker 2: Influenced by his uncles for sure and is being mentored by my brother Manning, probably spends more time on the phone with Manning then he does with anybody in the country including me.  Very bright, very capable and I'm just very proud of the fact that he sees himself serving others.  And spending time helping others. And that that's very satisfying to me, and I know it is for him too.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your second child who is also a son his name and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name is Bradford Minor Peterson, and Bradford is the, the guy who like my brother Raoul, every uniform he ever saw he wanted to be in it.  So he was a Cub Scout, and a Boy Scout then he joined the U.S. Marine Corps.  And spent time in the Marine Corps eventually was the bodyguard and chauffeur and aid for General Petersen [HistoryMaker Lieutenant General Frank E. Petersen, Jr.], who is a commandant of the Marine Corps while he was in the Marine Corps.  And so he, he had a great job and learned a lot from it and after that spent some time in the [U.S.] Army and his last hitch he was in the naval air force.  And just completed it not too long ago, his wife [Beatrice Peterson (ph.)] was also in the naval air force, and she was just retired this June.  He lives in South Carolina. He's in the security world as well as some other things that he does.  He's a service man he really loves being in the service and, and serving.
Speaker 1: Just to continue to, to look at your family, grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Have one grandchild Brad and Beatrice have a grandchild named C.J. [C.J. Peterson (ph.)].  And C.J. is in high school and smart as a whip and great guy and is on his way to college.
Speaker 1: Which one of your sons is the golfer or both of them, golfers?
Speaker 2: Brian is the golfer. Brad plays on occasion, but Brian is a very good golfer he's probably in the five or six handicap world, hits the ball a mile, loves golf is a real student of the game.  Played a couple times with him last week and he outdistances me but every now and then I sneak one up near the whole.  He's great guy to play with a lot of fun. He's a student, period, spends a lot of time learning his craft and sharing, good teacher loves to teach and a joy to be with.
Story_ID: 315137
Speaker 1: Let's move back to Aetna Life and Casualty [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] because you were there from June 1957 until February 1965.  So say a little bit about the details of your--the progression of your development at Aetna during those first roughly, oh eight years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started as a computer programmer back in the days when there wasn't anybody that I knew who knew what I did for a living.  So when they said, "Well what do you do there?"  And I'd say, "Well I'm a computer programmer," and they'd say, "Well what is that?"  And then there were some people who'd say, "What do you mean you're sweeping up over there? What are you, tell us the truth what you do there?"  I said, "Well I write instructions for this computer, and the computer does what the instructions say."  Oh wow, this guy is--and that's what they called us the eggheads at the Aetna.  There were only about ten of us in the department and as a matter of fact when I joined the department it was called the data processing development department they weren't sure if it was going to be permanent.  Because they weren't sure, they were going to keep the computer.  In the country in those days, there was probably a hundred and fifty computer programmers in the whole United States of America.  I went to school for three days at the IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] school across this street from the Aetna and came back as a programmer.  And really learned on the job but loved it, enjoyed it very much worked a lot of overtime and learned enough so that I became the supervisor of the programmers and then became a systems analysts.  And then became the human resources director if you will of the computer area and that meant that I was responsible for hiring and training the new programmers.  Because I told my boss we had such an inadequate training program, he said, "Well write one," and I wrote one and sent the memo to him. He said, "Hey this is pretty good, now you are in charge of training."  I said, "Well does that mean I've been promoted?" He said, "No you're just in charge of training (laughter)."  But it was a great experience because it sent me off to the personnel department now called human resources and I did some projects with them.  And computerized some of their records and met some people in the process.  About that time I also thought that I needed to learn more about presenting myself, so I joined the Toastmasters Club [Toastmasters International] at Aetna.  And loved that and that was something that allowed you to prepare speeches and be evaluated by your fellow Toastmasters.  And you improved as you went on, I was a Toastmasters for many years, you know, six or seven or eight years.  I remember it, and became the president of the, maybe the vice president I'm not sure, but I was one of the officers of the club.
Story_ID: 315138
Speaker 1: And somehow somebody referred me to a fellow named Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Jr.], who at that time was working as a White House counsel for president of the United States, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].  And he called the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] and asked the Aetna if I could be a possible candidate to join the Plans for Progress staff in Washington, D.C.?  I had no idea what he's talking about, he said after he talked to the executive vice president of the Aetna, Howard Marine [ph.] was his name.  "Why don't you ask Gerry [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] to come to Washington so I can talk to him about the Plans for Progress program I" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why did he call Aetna I mean, how did he know about you?
Speaker 1: Because Aetna was one of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did he know about you?
Speaker 1: Aetna was one of the Plans for Progress companies.  I guess maybe the first insurance company that joined the Plans for Progress program.  Plans for Progress was a program that promoted equal employment opportunity.  What you did if you were the CEO of a major corporation or a defense contractor. The Aetna was a government contractor because they did the Medicare claims for the United States.  Therefore, they had a rather large government contract, and he called the CEO of the Aetna thinking that maybe there was one of the loan executives from the Aetna who would like to spend a year working this program in Washington, D.C.  So I flew to Washington, and I met with Hobart Taylor, who was quite impressive and let me know in no uncertain terms this would be good for the country as well as for the Aetna.  And I would learn a lot, and I would be working with some of the brightest folks who ever came to Washington, D.C.  I think at one time he said, you know, every real, intelligent, bright, capable person in the country eventually works in Washington, D.C. for a while maybe not for a career, but they have to come here and work for a while.  So he encourages me to do it, and I came home and talked to my wife, Carole [Carole Peterson], and we decided that that was something we like to do it was a one-year assignment.  And it was like the dollar a year people you went there and you, the Aetna paid all of my expenses.  And I was still an employee of the Aetna on leave working for Plans for Progress (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great, great opportunity.
Speaker 1: It was, and my fellow loaned executives that was the first time anybody called me executive it was pretty nice too I didn't know I was an executive up till that point. I was an administrator in the data processing department, and I hadn't reached that level.  I didn't think I had reached the level of an executive, but that's what I was called a loaned executive.  And I had friends the staff with me from various major corporations in the country Mobile Oil [Exxon Mobil Corporation], Rockwell International, Lockheed [Lockheed Martin Corporation], Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] we were all there doing our year and promoting the Plans for Progress program.  And what we had to do was fly around the country and try to get other companies to, to do the Plan for Progress (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 315139
Speaker 1: This was right at the time, the mid-'60s [1960s] when the Civil Rights Movement was at its--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: The civil rights legislation was passed '64 [1964], '65 [1965] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct, yes.
Speaker 1: So here you are in Washington [D.C.] how did all that affect you're coming there, and you're being there you were-- tell me about the mid-'60s [1960s] for you?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you how exciting it was. I mean we were in the same building where the Office of Federal Contract Compliance [Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs], Ed Sylvester [Edward C. Sylvester, Jr.] was the director of that organization.  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was located in the same building.  And we knew all of the commissioners we went to all to their events and receptions.  The secretary of labor came to our meetings, the vice president of the United States, Hubert Humphrey, was an ex-officio member of the board of this organization, Plans for Progress.  And Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Jr.] was the one that orchestrated everything from the White House and then eventually became a director of the Export-Import Bank [Export-Import Bank of the United States].  It was as exciting as you could imagine. I was in a room once with Roy Wilkins who was the executive director of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in those days.  And Whitney Young, who was the executive director of the Urban League [National Urban League] and they were discussing the ways that, that those organizations would interact and interface with corporate America to assist them in finding ways to promote diversity.  And also to find candidates because they would always say, "Well I'd like to hire some people who are a minority group but I can't find any."  Well, Whitney Young said we're gonna help you do that we're gonna train people we're gonna locate them and we're going to refer them to you.  And we're located all over the country as an Urban League and all the major metropolitan areas, and if you're located in a rural area, we'll even go out and help you in that regard.
Story_ID: 315140
Speaker 1: I remember Hubert Humphrey from a distance as a very genuine, very affective, very powerful person, did you have any relationship with Hubert Humphrey?
Speaker 2: Hubert Humphrey was our champion and when we had meetings of the executive committee this was the executives from major corporations who were managing and making the policy for the Plans for Progress program when we had those meetings Hubert Humphrey would come to the meeting.  And he would deliver his comments or questions about how we were doing, and what we were doing, what kind of progress we were making and how could the federal government help Plans for Progress?  And he put in our disposal the [U.S.] Department of Labor via the secretary of labor's office and the [U.S.] Department of Commerce via the secretary of commerce's office.  And those who were the, the areas and the level that we worked on.  I mean it was almost like being a Brookings Institution [Washington, D.C.] fellow.  You worked at the highest levels of the government, but you had your own responsibilities, and you had to achieve those.  I, at one point, was the coordinator and the administrator for the vice president's task force on youth motivation.  So when we had meetings the vice president would come to the meetings.  And that--what we tried to do was to get primarily African Americans, but some other minority group folks and some women particularly into the group and trying to get them to go to high schools and junior high schools and grammar schools to be living witnesses.  That if you stay in school, and if you really work at it there is a reward.  And you ought to be looking at the reward as well as a possibility of, of being one of us.  And we had a very, very large organization, and we were represented in every major city. And visited almost all the schools in places where we could have some influence we thought.  But Vice President Humphrey was foursquare behind that and said to us at one meeting while you're in their motivated the students make sure you motivate some of the teachers too because sometimes they need a little motivation.  And they need to see that there--some success in some of the students that they been working with over time and you all now are working for corporate America or you working in some major nonprofit like the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] or you working for some organization like the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America].  I mean, you know, there are places that you can go and do things that are important for our country. And, and we're trying to make that representation even greater than it is today. By asking some employers to change their ways and look at these business opportunities you have. So we put them in touch with the, the black colleges [HBCUs] that turned out lots more students than some of the non-traditional schools.  And work very closely with those organizations to bring some of their staff and hire them as interns during the summer program, summers for some of these companies.  So they could learn the personnel practices of the companies and, therefore, bring that back to the campus and make sure that their students understood how to, how to get hired as well as how to get schooled.
Speaker 1: Your son Brad [Bradford Peterson] was born in 1964 just before you went to Plans for Progress, your family went to Washington [D.C.] with you?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yep.
Speaker 1: How'd that work out while you were busy seven days a week?
Speaker 2: Oh that was, that was great, 'cause they had the chance to do something they wouldn't ordinarily do to. Brian [Brian Peterson] went to a school, I don't think that, at Amidon School [Amidon-Bowen Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] in the southwest of Washington, there were kids from every country.  I mean not just every city I mean and the children that he played with he was, oh I don't know seven or eight years old at the time.  He went I mean, around the neighborhood--one of his best friends was Thurgood Marshall, III [sic. Thurgood Marshall, Jr.].  I mean that was his running buddy his--and he the--kids I heard him talking to some of his friends one day.  They were talking about well, you know, I lived in Malaysia for a while, I lived in France, I lived in Sweden, I mean because that's what their fathers did.  I mean, they were in the [U.S.] military, or they worked for the state department [U.S. Department of State], or they worked for someplace that--where they traveled quite a bit. And Brian asked them if any of 'em had ever been to Rhode Island and none of them had so he was one up (laughter) he had been to Rhode Island.
Story_ID: 315141
Speaker 1: Okay after Plans for Progress what was your next step what happened after that year?
Speaker 2: I went back to the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], and they asked me what I wanted to do literally.  Because they were recommending that I use some of that experience that I had in Washington [D.C.] to assist the Aetna in their goals and aspirations.  So I went to work in the marketing world in group insurance it's called and went to a school, called group schooled in those days, and learn how to be a marketing representative in the home office.  And I had a lot of friends still in Washington, D.C. and some that I had met in the labor movement.  And the Aetna, some of their marketing when you go to sell a group insurance policy to a major employer you better have the union on your side too, or else you not gonna be able to get the corporate people to say yes.  So I learned how to get around the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations] and me some people there, and assist the Aetna in selling some group insurance and enjoyed it immensely.  And did that for several years until I ran into a fellow who was the assistant to the president at Stanford University [Stanford, California] when I was traveling for the Aetna actually in California.  And he asked me to come down to Stanford and, and just chat with him, Jim Simmons [James Simmons] was his name.  And I knew him reasonably well he was from Connecticut and at one time ran the ABC program [A Better Chance program] for the State of Connecticut and then went to work for Stanford.  So while I was sitting and chatting with him in his office.  He said, "While you here I like you to go over to the business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] and talk to of the new dean over there.  Arjay Miller is a former president of Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan].  And we were discussing something a he said he thought you knew you from Plans for Progress," and I said, "Well, you know, I guess I do."  I didn't really know him intimately, but maybe he was at one of those meetings in Detroit [Michigan] where I was talking up Plans for Progress and went on back to Ford and said, "You know, I saw this guy from Washington, you know, he really had me thinking we ought to get on this Plans for Progress thing here," and they did.  They were very instrumental in doing some things in the Detroit area, but I went to the business school and sat down with the dean and talk to him about all sorts things.  And he asked me if I was interested in being the assistant dean. I said, "No I'm not interested in working for the university.  I'm working for big, major, corporation you know I why would I wanna come work for you at the University."  He said, "Well just think about. It's something. I know I think we could do some great things here together.  And see what, what you've done in the past I know a lot of it has to do with motivating people and selling people on what we want to do.  It might help us in the fundraising, you know, sound like a guy who can sell our programs."  So I did think about it went back and he sent me a telegram, it was a two-page telegram asking me to come to be the assistant dean at the school.  And I talked to Carole [Carole Peterson] about it, talked to some other people about it, who said, Stanford, are you kidding me that's a great opportunity you ought to go do that.  And one of the people I talked to was the chairman of the Aetna at the time John Filer [John H. Filer], and he didn't, you know, encourage me to do it.  But he said it was a great school and I ought to consider it very carefully because it could be very helpful to the school.  And indirectly to the Aetna and so I did--I decided to take a leave from the Aetna not in a literal sense.  But I resigned from the Aetna as a corporate officer at the Aetna and went on to California.
Speaker 1: Your brothers were already out there?
Speaker 2: No, my brothers were living in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: They gone to California yet?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It wasn't until I arrived there and started telling them about all this wonderful weather and this great golf course and all the things that are opportunities that were there that they decided yeah, they'd take a look at it also. So my older, oldest brother Raoul [Raoul Peterson] came, and he just fell in love it and immediately started doing some things that he's still doing.  And my younger brother [Rufus Peterson] did it because he had came out there for an internship while he was at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] and that's the reason he stayed.
Story_ID: 313863
Speaker 1: You become an assistant dean at the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] and what year was that?
Speaker 2: I think '69 [1969] somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that assistant deanship what did you--what were your responsibilities, how did it go, what were your accomplishments?
Speaker 2: Well I'm not sure what my accomplishments were but I do know that it was an exhilarating experience.  I've never been near a place where I had so many brilliant people in the same building.  The business school in those days was self-contained, and it was just one building.  The faculty offices were upstairs and the classrooms were downstairs, so it wasn't like some schools where you had to go find your professor.  I mean, it was easy to find in the business school at Stanford.  It was a time when school was trying to become more diverse, up to that point I think a handful of African Americans students had gone through the school.  To get an M.B.A. or Ph.D. And when I arrived here, there was a reasonable number fifteen something like that, well there were three hundred students in the class, in the incoming M.B.A. program.  And approximately twenty or thirty Ph.D. students each year that interred.  And my responsibility was the placement office that is to assist the students in finding opportunities.  Which really wasn't as difficult as it was in some schools because lots of people wanted a Stanford M.B.A. in those days.  And as a matter of fact, corporate America was clamoring to get a Stanford M.B.A. on the on the staff.  But I believe that I had an opportunity to be a mentor to some of our minority students and give them some understandings of how things worked in the real world.  Many of them had already had some experience, but not certainly at the office or corporate office level at their companies, and I had.  In addition, to that, there was a, a grant made by the Merrill Foundation [Merrill Lynch Foundation], from the Merrill Lynch family.  To give the students who were at the M.B.A. program or some of the Ph.D. students a chance to work in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] community with minority businesses.  And give them some of the expertise that we had at Stanford to assist them in becoming a better organizations than they were.  And that was, was my responsibility to find interns and to manage that program and that was a lot of fun.  And we did do some great things for some of the small businesses in the Bay Area that needed assistance.  We were blessed to have students who had experience in some of those particular areas.  One that I remember we had a student who had worked for Restaurants Associates [Restaurant Associates] a very large organization prior to coming to school to get his M.B.A.  And when he went to work for an organization in the Bay Area, I mean he just brought some knowledge and understanding and contacts that the owner never would've had without him.  And the students were very diligent they worked the entire summer during their first or second years for that organization.  And then during the year they came and did various projects as part of their class work to assist that organization and that company and that was exciting.
Story_ID: 313864
Speaker 1: And I went out and helped raise money for the school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], primarily for minority student internships and scholarships.  We at the same time when out and found businesspeople we brought in the executive vice president of North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company] and put him in our summer executive program to give him a different kind of understanding of what goes on in the world that he perhaps has not had an opportunity to be in, and he became the CEO of North Carolina Mutual.  And as I understand it and remember it, I think he sold some group insurance to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] while he was in school.
Speaker 2: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 1: Bill Kennedy [William J. Kennedy, Jr.] I believe his name was if I'm not mistaken.  We also had goodness, fellow from Xerox [Xerox Corporation], who went on to be the CEO of Xerox in our program.  He at that time was a vice president of Xerox.  And he came for the summer executive program and stayed to get an M.B.A. and that was exciting to me.  I mean to know that we were bringing some minority group folks into the summer executive program on scholarships because the Merrill [Merrill Lynch Foundation] internship program allowed that to happen.  And prior to that time, you know, going and asking somebody, you know, to take four months off, put your life in the airplane and come on out and live with the executive for four months it was not possible.  You know, somewhere in North Carolina or Michigan, I can't leave my job for that length of time when I come back I won't have the job (laughter).  You know, what you talking about and to convince him that it's more important to spend that time learning about some of the new concepts and techniques and programs.  But more importantly, to be with people who were from corporate America, who might become customers of his or, or friends of his and consultants of his.  People that he can turn to when he needs a contact in that particular area or that particular company.  And it worked, and Barry Rand [A. Barry Rand] from Xerox I think became the CEO of Xerox because of that I mean, he didn't have an M.B.A. prior to that.  And he certainly didn't have the same level of contact that he did when he finished the summer executive program.  But he was smart enough to say well I'm not going back 'til I get the M.B.A. and he stayed another year I think. And Xerox allowed him to do that.
Story_ID: 313865
Speaker 1: How was the golf in California?
Speaker 2: Oh goodness, that is just hard to describe. Stanford University [Stanford, California] has its own golf course [Stanford Golf Course].  One of the reasons Tiger Woods eventually became a student at Stanford I think it was because of the Stanford Golf Course (laughter).  It's a great, wonderful golf course and it's great it's right on the campus.  I mean, it takes five minutes to drive there from the office and to me, that was one of the real fringe benefits that I enjoyed immensely.  And it was subsidized. I mean it cost, I can't remember it was something like thirty dollars to play ten times on the golf course.  It was three dollars every time I went to play golf there, but I had to pay for the cart (laughter).  But the things that I learned at Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], I'm still using today and some of the contacts that I made at Stanford I'm still blessed to have today.  And it's, it's like Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] I mean it's at a level that very few other schools can achieve because of the endowments, I mean it had unlimited resources.  I explained to the dean once that I needed more money to go to New York [New York] during winter because I had to me with Morgan Stanley [New York, New York] and some other banking companies in New York who were going to be recruiting at the school.  And I said should I just take my budget and amend it?  He said, "No don't worry about that spend what you need to and get it done."  I mean that that was the kind of, of resource that they had, financial resource that they had at that school.
Story_ID: 313866
Speaker 1: What was one of the things that you learned at Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] that you're still using today 'cause that's what you said that there're some things that carried into your life today what are they? Just one or two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think yeah, just I think that what Stanford does or did at that time, I don't know about now, was to make sure that  when you're planning a project that you actually get the problem defined.  Because so many people don't define the project, they think they've defined the problem, and they go off solving some other problem rather than the one that really needs to be solved.  So in problem definition take all the time that you need to, reasonably, and make sure that you have the problem defined.  And then don't ever overlook the option to solve the problem.  Don't say I've arrived at these five options that's all there are.  You know, think outside the box I guess they call it today.  About ways that you might get that problem solved whatever it happened to be.  And stay in touch with the people that can be helpful to you.  You know, be a good communicator, you know, email today makes it a lot easier than it did then.  But have that list of people you know or people that can be helpful to you in the future and you can be helpful to them.  I mean it's a two-way street, you know, you're gonna get some calls from people who have been friends and associates and students of yours asking you for advice in a area of your expertise so--
Speaker 1: We want these HistoryMaker interviewers to be very useful to the coming generations by young people.  So this kind of advice that you are giving will be very helpful for young people who look at your, at your interview so--
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: Good, good points.
Story_ID: 313867
Speaker 1: You were at Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] three years you ended in 1973 I think. Why did you leave Stanford?
Speaker 2: I was visiting the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] one day trying to raise some money for Stanford and in the hallway ran into the CEO.  John Filer [John H. Filer] still my friend, asked me how are things at Stanford. I said, "Things are good John," and he said, "Well before you leave I want to come up to my office and visit with me."  So well, of course, I'm going to do that, and I finished my conversations with the foundation [Aetna Foundation].  Aetna has a foundation and I'm trying to get some scholarship money for Stanford minority students. I think we did get some.  But I went up to the eighth floor of the Aetna, the penthouse office, John was in there doing--he said, "Oh come on in."  I came in and sat down. He said, "Oh how's everything at Stanford?"  I said, "Great." He said, "When are you coming back to the Aetna?"  I said, "I didn't know I was coming back to the Aetna (laughter)."  He said, "Well wait a minute hold it," and he got on the phone, he called the vice president of human resources, Bert Nofty [ph.].  He said, "Bert come up here I want to talk to you," he said, "Gerry [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] might be coming back to the Aetna.  Won't you find something really good for him to do so that'll help make up his mind?"  So Bert obviously had his marching orders, and I went back to Stanford and a week or so later I had a call from Bert Nofty.  "Gerry, I want to talk to you, you know, we're trying to bring up the first HMO [health maintenance organization].  And we think you'd be somebody who'd like to do the marketing and the operations for that. What do you think?"  Well, I knew what an HMO was, I was in one I was at Stanford.  I went to Kaiser [Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, California] and joined their HMO when I found out what it was because it was so much better than just helter-skelter kind of health care that you get when you just, you know, sign up with some indemnity company as they're called.  So I knew what the model was and I, I was intrigued by it, and Dan Patton Gail [ph.] was in actuary, was the head of this project, vice president of the Aetna.  And I spent some time with him, and we corresponded back and forth and eventually I said I, I think I would like to do that.  And the Aetna made it easy for me to do they, paid for all of the transportation, and moving and gave me a big bonus and a nice job.  A great office, appointment as an officer of this new organization.  So I, I went back to bring up the first health maintenance organization that the Aetna conceived.
Speaker 1: Was that a real challenge for you or--
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely fascinating because it he gave me an opportunity to use all my marketing background and skills.  And my sales skills in bringing people a new idea and a new concept.  You know, this is what we going to be doing, you know, selling the Aetna people first was the hardest part, 'cause they're used to selling group insurance where you had medical and dental and hospitalization and, you know, prescription drugs (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aetna was the home office--I'm sorry, Aetna and Hartford [Connecticut] was the headquarters right, the home office?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, of the national and international?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was more national than international, but we did have an international operation also.
Speaker 1: How big was Aetna nationally in terms of dollars and people I mean can you give a scale of the--
Speaker 2: I have to say of the ten largest insurance companies in the country it was in the top ten.  Now where it certainly wasn't in the top three or four 'cause those are in New York companies Metropolitan [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company], New York Life [New York Life Insurance Company], and Prudential [Prudential Financial, Inc.]. I think they were bigger.  But Aetna, Travelers [Travelers Insurance; The Travelers Indemnity Company], Connecticut General [Connecticut General Life Insurance Company] they were all comparable, and they were big.  I mean, I think we had a hundred thousand employees countrywide or worldwide we had not very many outside of the United States, but we did have some international kinds of organizations also (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I was--a scale on this yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we were big, one of the biggest and one of the largest employers in Connecticut, certainly greater Hartford.
Speaker 1: You were the marketing director of this health maintenance organization?
Speaker 2: I think I was the director of operations in marketing.  Marketing and operations something similar of that and the assistant vice president of the Aetna Health Management company, I believe it was called.
Story_ID: 313868
Speaker 1: What came next at Aetna Life and Casualty [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], what was your next step up?
Speaker 2: Well I stayed in that area until there was a mild depression that happened (laughter) in our economy and the Aetna decided to get out of managed-care business at that point.  Even though if you look at them today they're one of the largest managed-care companies in the country.  It was done the second time by mergers and acquisitions.  They went out and found organizations that were Aetna-oriented in their way of doing business.  And that's the way--the reason they're so large in the managed-care world today.  But we, we actually went out of business, and I went back into the group insurance division and went to marketing group insurance again.  And then one day received a call from the city manager of City of Hartford [Connecticut] asked me to come and spend a little time with him.  And he asked me if I was interested in being the executive director of the convention center and arena that we had at Hartford called the Aetna--the Hartford Civic Center [XL Center, Hartford, Connecticut].  And I said no, but thank you very much I'm flattered that you would ask me.  And he said, "I would really like you to do this and you ought to think about it and when you go back to the Aetna why don't you talk to John Filer [John H. Filer] 'cause I've been talking to him also."  And I went back to the Aetna, and I thought about it and because of my Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] thinking, I started thinking outside the box.  And saying well what would that be, what would I do when I do that?  Then when I thought about, oh I probably could do a better job in marketing than we're doing now.  I went to the back--some back issues of the Hartford newspaper [Hartford Courant] and looked at the record, at least, the way it was portrayed in the media, and they weren't doing very well.  And they didn't have very, very good reputation. They were at best neutral, but in some senses negative.  And I thought this my chance to make this a better organization and I also thought, you know, working in show business that might be fun.  So I did--I went back to the city manager and said I'd be willing to do this, and John Filer agreed that it would be a good place for me to be.  The Aetna had a very large financial interest in the shops that were around, and offices, that were around the Hartford Civic Center it was, you know, a several million dollar investment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When was the Civic Center built and finished?
Speaker 2: It was built in 1975 I believe and then it--the roof fell in, in 1976 and I think in 1978 or something like that. As I remember it they went back in the business the roof went back on.  And five years later, 1983 I went to work as the executive director and at that point it needed a lot of marketing kind of assistance.  And the organization was pretty sad.
Story_ID: 313869
Speaker 1: Now was, was this a public and private finance center or was it--
Speaker 2: (Cough) Yes, the building, the arena and the convention center [Hartford Civic Center; XL Center, Hartford, Connecticut] were owned by the City of Hartford [Connecticut].  But it was a, a city block and part of the city block was offices for commercial offices and shops.  It was a retailing kind of entity and the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] owned that part of the enterprise of the city.  So it was a real public, private partnership, and I was managing the public part of it.  However, the Aetna being the owner and manager of the private part, I was very close to the people who did that.  And we did a lot of things in a synergistic way because we had a chance to do them.  And because we knew each other and we knew it was good for both of us.  So bringing the right kind of entertainment into the Civic Center sent people to buy things in the shops and made the folks who were renting the office space happy because their employees had a chance to take part in this festival marketplace if you will.
Speaker 1: You have spent a considerable, time of your early career with Aetna and three years at Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  How was this move into this executive director position, how did it, did it change you in any way?  Were there new things you had to learn, was it a whole new, different ballgame for you or?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, when I arrived there I didn't know anything about the world of entertainment, and we were renting out our space for major concerts and for major events, convention events we had lots of mini conventions, and regional conventions and some national conventions coming and using our space.  It was an exhibition hall as well as an arena for entertainment.  It was a sports arena, University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] basketball team, the Boston Celtics.  We encourage the women's basketball team of the University of Connecticut to play there, the University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut] basketball team played there.  So we had a lot of sports events as well as concert events.  And it was a major entertainment center for Connecticut and perhaps even New England.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I had to learn how to deal with promoters, the people bring entertainers there, their agents and their managers.  I had to learn a lot about contracts and how they work.  And how they can be revised to make it better for both parties.  I had to learn about managing part-time employees because we had a lot of folks who only work there a few hours a day.  Or a few hours a week, had other jobs because that was not--I don't know 20 percent of our employees were full-timers, and 80 percent were part-time they only worked when we needed them.  And that is a totally different kind of person to have on your staff compared to somebody who comes to work eight hours a day forty hours a week.  And fortunately, at one point 1985, we were named the arena of the year by Performance Magazine.  And that was a distinction I'm just as proud of as I can be because (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's only two years after you went there.
Speaker 2: Yes, yep.  And I was named the manager, the arena manager of the year same year, so it was a doubleheader.  But why that happened was I had all of these contacts at the Aetna, at the city.  I mean this is my city, I know people in the City of Hartford.  I knew how to go to the members of the city council [Court of Common Council] and asked them to help do things.  I was never impeded nor at any time did the mayor or the city manager or anybody ever come over to the Civic Center and tell me how to run the business.  There was no such thing as political interference thanks to the coliseum commission, which I actually worked for, you know, they took all the political heat and never gave me any.  Describe to me some things we can do better but never insisted that we do something that is politically correct.  It was always done because this is good for the city, it's good for the business, it's good for the employees, it's good for the taxpayers, you know.  So we went from a, an organization that was in the red to being in the black for the ten years that I managed the place which was quite different from most arenas in the country.
Story_ID: 313870
Speaker 1: Ten years directing the Civic Center [Hartford Civic Center; XL Center, Hartford, Connecticut] and what was next?
Speaker 2: What was next?
Speaker 1: Were you ready to retire or?
Speaker 2: I was ready to retire (laughter), yes.  And then I ran into the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Hartford] president [Esther Bush] who asked me to come there and help her which I did for few months.  And then I ran into somebody from Johnson Controls [Johnson Controls Inc.] who asked me to come and be a project manager for Johnson Controls, which I did for about a year and then I was--
Speaker 1: What was Johnson Controls?
Speaker 2: Johnson Controls was was one of the largest companies in the country that deals with one of their divisions deals with making sure that projects are done in the proper way in managing real estate.  In the case of my case they had come into Hartford [Connecticut] to be a partner with an organization called Educational Alternatives Incorporated, EAI.  And they had come in to help the City of Hartford run the public school system.
Speaker 1: I remember reading about that.
Speaker 2: And Johnson Controls was given the bricks and mortar part of that project, and I became the project manager for the school buildings and, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: How long did you do that?
Speaker 2: Did it for a year. And then EAI lost the contract and by that time I was ready to go retire.  But it was a great experience Johnson Controls manages lots of major real estate projects in the world. Including NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and IBM Europe [International Business Machines Corporation], and some other places at least in those days anyway I don't know about now, but it's a major billion, billion dollar company.   Johnson, Mr. Johnson [Warren S. Johnson] invented the thermostat so a lot of his controls, control how a building, office building, for instance, operates and works.  And I never--I wasn't in that part of that division that's highly technical compared to my management expertise but I did the project management for that schools project for the City of Hartford.
Story_ID: 382631
Speaker 1: Mr. Peterson [HistoryMaker Gerard Peterson] golf has been a very significant and continuous ongoing part of your life.  And you have also influenced the world of golf because you've been involved in organizational golf early on in your young adult life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Before we talk about your organizational activities you want to tell us your best score ever (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The best score I have ever had was sixty-eight.
Speaker 1: Where was that?
Speaker 2: At Keney Park [Keney Park Golf Course] in Hartford [Connecticut] and it was at playing in the Presidents Cup for the Keney Men's Club. After they finally gave me the opportunity to join the Men's Club.  Initially, they told me that I couldn't become a member and then described to the city manager in the City of Hartford the reason I couldn't become a member was--even if I had a state handicap card the State of Connecticut golf association [Connecticut State Golf Association] would not let me be a member.  If I apply for a state handicap card because they didn't allow in quotes, Negroes, to become members of the Connecticut State Golfers, which was not true.  So I had to go to the city manager of the City of Hartford and explain to him why I was not happy about the fact that I couldn't join this club.  And he then turned and informed, eventually informed, the Keney Men's Club that if they were going to use the City of Hartford, Keney Park Golf Course, they better stop discriminating and they did. So that at one point I played the champion of the Keney Men's Club and had my best round of golf, thank God, that day.  And beat him by two strokes, three strokes he shot seventy-one, and I shot sixty-eight.  Never been that close to it again, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, you started playing golf as the caddy at the Wethersfield Country Club [Wethersfield, Connecticut].  And you played in high school [Morgan Gardner Bulkeley High School, Hartford, Connecticut], a little bit in college [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut].  So it's been with you in your life pretty much--how many holes in one did you have?
Speaker 2: I only had two.
Speaker 1: Two holes in one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one in Westchester [Westchester County, New York] and one on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] at Mink Meadows [Mink Meadows Golf Club, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts]. But a hole-in-one is more luck than anything else the--in order to evaluate a golfer you need to find out what his handicap is.  And if the person is in the single digits, you know, zero to nine that's somebody who's probably in the top one percent of the golfers in the country.  That's a very hard handicap to obtain and to retain.
Story_ID: 382632
Speaker 1: But I think golf just changed my life completely, becoming a caddy gave me a job.  Gave me a way to interact with totally different people most of the, the golfers that I interacted with were business owners or business executives or professional doctors and dentists. Actually, there were a couple of priests I caddied for who were members of the club who were--became very good friends.  Father Divine [ph.] were both of their names both of them were Father Divine, which is kind of interesting.  And the pro at the club introduced me to Tommy Armour one of the great golfers of the world who gave me great advice and he was absolutely right, stay in the game of golf.  It can be very valuable to you in everything that you do. For instance when I was at the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] I played on the golf team.  I was invited by the members of the team to join the team because they knew that I was a very pretty fair golfer.  When I was in the [U.S.] Army, I had an opportunity to one day give a lesson to a major out at the driving range.  And I might have something to do with my classification and assignment after that 'cause he was in charge of C and A. And I found myself at Fort Knox [Kentucky], and a pretty nice job.  I think because of my golf. I on many occasions at the Aetna played golf with insurance brokers who made their decision about the Aetna based on conversations we had on the golf course.  At one time I had a broker from Portland, Oregon, call me up and said meet me in Monterey [California] this was in February, now I'm in Connecticut and snow was up to my nose.  He said, "I need to talk with you about this proposal that you're given.  You want to ensure all of the, the plumbers in the State of Oregon and that's--I'm the administrator for that association, and you're gonna have to talk to me.  You come on out here," and all he wanted to do was play golf.
Speaker 2: Bring your golf clubs (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We played golf at four different golf (laughter) courses. Spyglass [Spyglass Hill Golf Course, Pebble Beach, California] I remember as being the best and most wonderful courses, the Del Monte Lodge [Del Monte Golf Course, Monterey, California] and two other courses that we played in.  We had a great time, and I had an opportunity to give him the Aetna story.  You know, without sending a letter. Sending a memo or, you know, standing in front of him when twelve people were standing there in a presentation, and we did get the business. I know that that was important, but it isn't only golf, tennis does the same thing for you.  Or, you know, if you own a boat, and you get somebody on your boat, and you have a captured audience. And I know that I played golf with my boss when I first went to work for the Aetna on Saturday him and his uncle.  And I know that gave me a chance to discuss some things with him that I never would been able to in the office I couldn't get that much time. But out on the golf course I had him for four hours.  And then after we finish we go in, and we have a bite of, you know, some lunch and some ice tea and by that time he had a different impression of me completely. And I know that--and he's still my friend even today.
Story_ID: 382633
Speaker 1: You have made and are still making a great contribution to the game through your organizational affiliations.  Tell us about your early organizational activity in golf in the City of Hartford [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Well I joined the Midway Golf Club [Hartford, Connecticut], which was an African American golf club an old--been there for many a years and probably started in probably in the 1920s.  And by the time I joined it in the late '50s [1950s], it was flourishing, and eventually, I became the president of the club.  And that entitled me to be a member of the United Golf Association, which was the African American national organization.  I was the vice president of the New England region and spent a lot of time trying to get youngsters involved in golf.  That was one of our, our aims and objectives including my son Brian [Brian Peterson] successfully.  But I've had some youngsters, not young anymore, but folks who started caddying at the golf club where I was playing or playing at that same place.  And we encourage these youngsters to stay in golf and be part of golf.  One of them eventually received a scholarship to Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], Sanford Kyle [ph.] became a very fine player.  But I know that he was encouraged by the adults and the members at the Midway Golf Club.  Another one Lance Gordon is now the executive director of Hartford Housing Authority and went on to college including MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to work on some of his, his graduate work.  And it's really satisfying to be able to use golf the same way that I have other people use it with me. I mean it's a way to interact with people that you never will have a chance to. Tommy Armour's example was he played golf with the King of England [King Edward VIII].  At one point when he was growing up, he was one of the poorest people in the town, he went from being one of the poorest people in Scotland to playing golf with the King of England.  I mean that that was his example of how far golf can take you, of course, he was also the British Open [The Open Championship] champion that's how he had that reputation.
Story_ID: 382634
Speaker 1: I consider you also somewhat of a historian of golf.  And I'd like to go back to the initiation of the Midway Club [Midway Golf Club, Hartford, Connecticut], 1920s in Hartford [Connecticut].  What issues and problems were black golfers facing in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] in Hartford where could they play?  Where couldn't they play what brought them together?
Speaker 2: I think they had the opportunity to play at the local golf courses because I don't think there were, number one there weren't very many of the folks doing it.  And they were probably the doctors and the dentist and people who could afford to own golf clubs and to pay the fees and spend the time away from work.  I mean most of, other folks who I knew were like my father [Rufus Peterson] they were paid by the hour.  If you didn't show up, you didn't get paid.  And you, you were, you didn't have that, that luxury of being able to golf and play golf.  My father caddied during the Depression [Great Depression] with my uncle at the same country club that I caddied at Wethersfield Country Club [Wethersfield, Connecticut].  But he never had any real time to be going out playing golf I mean he had three jobs.  You know, for him hitting a bucket of balls and coming out watching us hit some balls.  I mean, that's as much golf as he could get in. But he encouraged us to do it because he knew, as Tommy Armour and others know, it gives you a different stage.  A different world, a different center of influence and why not do it if you can get, get it done that way.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 382635
Speaker 1: Tell us about your current ongoing association and activity in organizational golf. What organizations are you acting with year-round now?
Speaker 2: Primarily interested in being the, the green chairman of Mink Meadows Golf Club [Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts], that's my golf club here on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  I really have an abiding interest in making sure the superintendent and his staff and I do the best job that we can to make that a wonderful golf course. And I think--thanks to our superintendent, Matt Crowther [Matthew Crowther], I mean it is really a beautiful track. In addition, to that, I work as a volunteer for the United States Golf Association [USGA].  And once a year I am a member, a member of the rules committee that, that puts on the senior amateur, the United States Senior Amateur Championship.  And this year it's gonna be in Georgia at a place called The Farm [Rocky Face, Georgia].  I've never been there but in order for you to, to get the privilege of having a United States Golf Association tournament at your club you must have impeccable credentials. I mean, you must be one of the best in the country because everyone wants that distinction and they all send in proposals saying, we're better than anyone else choose us.  Last year at the Bel-Air Country Club in Los Angeles [California] one of the finest golf courses, golf clubs in the country this was a milestone.  The fiftieth anniversary of the championship and it was as usual, beautifully done.  I as well as, oh I don't know how many members are on our committee but let's say seventy-five.  We all show up and we have our chores to do, and we assist the paid staff of the United States Golf Association to put on the event in a very excellent way.
Speaker 1: Are there any other African Americans who are fulfilling these positions and doing what you're doing?
Speaker 2: From Connecticut I know two, Stanford Cloud [sic. HistoryMaker Sanford Cloud, Jr.] I believe is on the mid-amateur committee. And Tom, not Tom, but Tom's brother, Edmonds, John Edmonds from Yale Golf Club [The Course at Yale, New Haven, Connecticut] is on one of the committees.  I'm not really sure which committee it is.  But we were both, all three of us were appointed at the same time in 1994. With the help of John Merchant who at that time was to-, a member of the executive committee [of the USGA], the first, only member of the executive committee happens to be African American. And at that time John encouraged the various state golf associations to think about diversity as one of their goals and objectives.
Story_ID: 382636
Speaker 1: When we played together last week you were relating to me briefly some experiences with Tiger Woods and his father.  Tell us how you know Tiger and his father and your presence with them. Where did you meet them?
Speaker 2: Well John Merchant, the man I just mentioned who is on the executive committee [of the United States Golf Association].  By training his, an attorney, and he became the attorney for Tiger Woods' family in a sense and was very instrumental in organizing the first corporate sponsorship contracts that Tiger Woods entered into with Nike [Nike, Inc.] and Tigers for Joy [ph.] and some other companies.  But John being a very close friend of mine asked me on occasion to join him and Earl Woods, Tiger's father, to play golf.  I was helpful with John in an organization that we were part of at the time the National Foundation for Minority Golf.  Oh no, the National Minority Golf Foundation, forgive me.  And we were very active at that time, and I had a chance to be around Tiger Woods and his father.  Play golf with Earl a couple of times, he's a shark don't give him any strokes.  And Tiger came to John's golf club in Connecticut and played at least twice in exhibitions with people that John invited to come and play. So, John would invite ten fourths of some people that needed to be right around this, this young phenom- and Tiger was in high school the first time he did it.
Speaker 1: Oh that way back?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then the second time he was in college. And I think it's in--at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I know that I didn't have anything to do with him going to Stanford, but I did mention to him that Stanford was a mighty fine school. And he agreed.
Speaker 1: When did you see him last?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh you haven't seen him play recently?
Speaker 2: Oh I, I haven't seen Tiger play in person since the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament, Augusta, Georgia] a couple years ago. I went at the, the practice round on Wednesday, and you can get much closer to the players that way.  And really see, see them in their, up close and personal. Yeah, I recommend that actually to going to a golf tournament on the weekend where many more people show up.  And you can't get anywhere near as close. But Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday of the week, you know, that's the time to go and watch the pros particularly Tiger. He's not accessible in the sense that he'll stop and chat with you, but just being around him and being able to see him very close gives you a totally different impression of how good he is. I mean you think he's good, but when you're up close to him, you know, he's really good and he is.  His father must be commended as being a great teacher.  I've listened to Earl describe to people what they should do just by watching them for a few minutes. And he's usually right on the money.
Speaker 1: Where have you heard you make these presentations? What were the occasions?
Speaker 2: Primarily at golf events where I was playing with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The venue, the first venue was John Merchant's country club. I'm trying to remember the--it's not Stanford, but it's I'll think about it in a second. But anyway it was at his country club that I rode in the cart with Earl. And listened to him as he described to one of the senior editors of Golf Digest.  A woman who wasn't playing very well, but he just kept giving her pointers and the second round she played the best nine holes she'd ever played in her life. And I know it was because Earl had just gave her enough information. And at the point she got to the ten holes, she was nailing the drive hit the second went on to green (laughter) putt for birdie (laughter).  The first nine she wasn't even doing anything, so I know he really has that feeling he never gave me any pointers, though.  I'm still waiting for him to tell me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well maybe you don't need 'em.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No I needed 'em.
Story_ID: 382637
Speaker 1: Speaking of teaching and you mentioned that Earl Woods, being a great teacher.  You're doing some teaching now is that right? Tell us about the teaching that you're doing and where?
Speaker 2: I'm just teaching the fundamentals of golf to the seniors from the senior center here in Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts.  And some folks have never played golf, this is their first experience, they've never touched a club before.  So they're real beginners, and its just fun to see them--I did the same thing last summer to see them make progress. And to go from not knowing anything at all to be able to hit the ball every time they swing at it is, you know, a sea change in a sense. And I, I really enjoy teaching the fundamentals of the game. I'm not anywhere near expert enough to help you if you're an intermediate player or a good player.	I don't think I'm that good, but I'm, I'm good at teaching the very basics.
Story_ID: 382638
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for our youth, our young people who seem to be interested in golf and want, want to be golfers?  What advice do you have for our young people today?
Speaker 2: If you're really young, I think you should seek out The First Tee organization.  I think they are becoming large enough now so that they are located in lots of places, because The First Tee organization not only teaches you the fundamentals of golf and helps you get the equipment.  They have a place for you to play and that you can afford, and that's really important.  Because the cost of golf is--has gone up dramatically since I was a kid.  In addition, to that, there are some local organizations that are like The First Tee.  For instance in Providence, Rhode Island, there is an organization called Button Hole [Button Hole Golf], and it's very similar to First Tee.  If you're a kid who wants to learn golf and you go there, and they'll have the equipment, they have balls, they have shoes and gloves, and they also have a place for you to hone your skills. Then the second thing that I would recommend you to do is to try to find some kind of work in golf.  I know that there aren't as many caddies as there were when I was coming along.  But there is still caddy programs if you can find one get in one. There's nothing that teaches you quicker than being a caddy for excellent players. Because you're watching them and learning from them every minute of the time you're working, and you can't beat that.  You work, you know there are jobs around golf courses. You can work in the maintenance world, you know, go out and mow the grass. Fix the divots, rake the bunkers and do things that again will allow you to be around golf working in the shop.
Speaker 1: Coming back to The First Tee, who sponsors that? I mean is that a national program?
Speaker 2: It's a national organization, and the president of it is Joe Louis Barrow's son, that's his name, Joe Louis Barrow [Joe Louis Barrow, Jr.]. But the professional boxing champion heavyweight champion, Joe Louis was a golfer.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And integrated golf, helped Charlie Sifford and Ted Rhodes, Bill Spiller and some of the real pioneers get to play golf.  I mean he brought them to the San Diego Open [Farmers Insurance Open, San Diego, California], and I think that was one of the first places that they played the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association], the African American golfers.  But his son is a golfer, manufacturer of golf products and also is the chairman of this organization. It's heavily subsidized by the USGA [United States Golf Association], the PGA, the LPGA [Ladies Professional Golf Association] all the major organizations help The First Tee. And there's a lot of corporate sponsorship in it but just to look for that term, First Tee.
Speaker 1: So the quickest way maybe for a family or a father or young person to find out about First Tee in the area just go to the Internet perhaps?
Speaker 2: Go to the Internet and see whether it's in your locale. If it isn't trying to find something comparable. Very frequently recreations programs for your city or your town have free or very inexpensive golf lessons.  I know some youngsters in Newport [Rhode Island] are being given an opportunity in the next week or so.  I mean these kids are, you know, in their early years, they're four, five, six, seven years old. I mean, and they're learning their rudiments and the fundamentals of golf even at that age.  And the price is very inexpensive. I mean it's affordable.  And if you look hard enough there are those I--you know, if you a member of the country club obviously you don't have to look too far. There are programs for juniors in your club. And they encourage all juniors. But go to the public golf course nearest you and ask.  And sometimes even if they don't have a program, you know, you are the person who gets them to think about starting one. And then while you're there ask for a job.
Story_ID: 382639
Speaker 1: During the last ten years of your retirement, you've been retired about ten years now.  You've increased your involvement in golf in so many different ways as you just described.  What else you been doing besides golf in your retirement years? How have you been living your life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My hobby, my hobby and avocation is really golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love it and I continue to love it.  I spend most of my winter now in Florida, primarily because of golf, but also because it's a nice place to live.  I am not heavily involved, but I am involved in some nonprofit organizations, and I would like to continue to do something with, but I, I try to relax as much as I can. I think I've earned some time off from the job.
Speaker 1: Now Sir, any boards or directors at the present time?
Speaker 2: No I, I--if you look at my list of boards your see that during my years of involvement in the community, I mean I just worked tirelessly for a lot of organizations.  The Red Cross [American Red Cross] probably is the one I spent most of my executive time working for and eventually became the chapter chairman for greater Hartford [Connecticut] and for the blood services region for the State of Connecticut.  That was exciting and interesting and wonderful, but I know it's someone else's turn.  I don't think it's a good idea for me to just do it forever.	But for about fifteen years I worked hard at it.  I've worked at the Hartford Hospital [Hartford, Connecticut]. I was a corporator, as they call them, folks from the community who lend their name and financial, as well as community support to the organization and hospital.  Eventually became a member the board of directors and the secretary of the board.  I was a trustee for the St. Francis Hospital [St. Francis Hospital and Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut], or corporator for St. Francis Hospital.  Trustee for Mount Sinai Hospital [Hartford, Connecticut], I worked for the Urban League [Urban League of Greater Hartford] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Started an organization I'm very, very proud of called the young executives for a week.  Brought young primary African American folks together and taught them as much as we knew about how to get along and ahead in the corporate world.  While we ask them to use their efforts and energy to raise money for nonprofit organizations in the Greater Hartford area.  Oh, I had one other great opportunity I was the head coach of the midget's football team for about ten years that was exciting as could be.  And some of my former players who still call me coach are now very successful people in their own right, and that really, really was absolutely, wonderfully satisfying.
Story_ID: 311808
Speaker 1: A few last questions.  Is there anything else you'd like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: You know, I start to talk about my midget football experience, and that really was an important learning experience for me.  And I know it was for the young players that we had.  And it started because my downstairs neighbor, I lived in a duplex house, a guy named Tilmon Dubose.  And he had just been cut from (laughter) the New York Giants, he was a good ballplayer, and he and I were computer programmers together.  He worked for the Kaman Aircraft [Kaman Corporation, Bloomfield, Connecticut] while I was working for the Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut].  We had ways of communicating 'cause we were both programming this IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] 650 computer, which was just not easy to do.  So we swapped a lot of information, he tried to get me to go work for Kaman (laughter) that never happened.  But he said you know, "Why don't you come out and help me with these kids.  'Cause I'm gonna coach the midget football league," and the field was right up, not far from where we lived.  And Brian [Brian Peterson] was about six years old, my older son, you know, it'd be a good experience for him. (Background noise) Oh God, someone is mowing my lawn.
Speaker 1: You were talking about the midget football.
Speaker 2: Yes the, the way that it started was my good friend Tilmon Dubose asked me to help him.
Speaker 1: Could you spell his last name for the record?
Speaker 2: D-U-B-O-S-E, Dubose.
Speaker 1: First name?
Speaker 2: Tilmon T-I-L-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: The nickname was Tilly and what we did was we went and found friends I think we had right at, maybe eight coaches, thirty-three kids (laughter), but that meant that we didn't have to be there every day.  I mean, you know, four of us were there each time that would be great.  And we became so interested in this projects, because the kids when we started out were--what's the word--they were at risk (laughter).  And we had some pretty tough cookies.  However, each year it got easier and easier.  And what we learned was, discipline is something that everybody needs, particularly the kids who think they don't need it.  And we worked harder during the week at practice than anyone else therefore on Sunday we were pretty good.  And while we didn't stress winning as much as we stressed getting it right and getting your timing right and getting your plays in your mind correct, making sure you're going where you're supposed to when you're supposed to be there and that sort of stuff.  After about the third year we were known as the champions.  We had coaches coming to our practices with their team to show them how we practice (laughter).  And one thing that surprised me when I, I guess maybe had five years into it, I came in late because I was at work, you know, had something to do and could leave that on time.  I not very happy because I was fifteen minutes late, when I arrived, the three tri-captains of the team had already organized the offense, defense, and special teams.  They had already gone through their exercise and their laps, and they were ready for the game plan.  I mean, they did this all on their own, you know, not one coach, not one adult (laughter).  But they started feeling themselves like they were--if you had a leadership role then you had to be just like a coach. You had to be the disciplinarian make sure you gotta make these lineups, and we were fortunate enough through year after year have great teams and great kids. And some of them went on to do great things.
Story_ID: 311809
Speaker 1: The most surprising thing that ever happened to me, I was in town, oh God, you know years after I was a coach.  But I was invited to speak at midget football banquet by whoever was running the league in those days.  As the executive director of the Civic Center [Hartford Civic Center; XL Center, Hartford, Connecticut] and there, you used to coach so, you can talk about your coaching days.  And as I was walking through Hartford [Connecticut], doing something, guy came up and tapped me on the shoulder he says, "Hey Coach how are you?"  I said, "Great, how you're doing?"  I didn't remember this kid's name.  He was one of the guys, he said, "You remember me I played on, I only played on the team for eighteen months. I moved to Bloomfield [Connecticut]?"  Most of our kids came from Stowe Village [Hartford, Connecticut], and that was, there, you know, some places where, kids are pretty tough. Anyway he said, "My name is Brown, Bob Brown [Robert Brown]. You know coach, you know, I was on your team for eighteen months." And I said, "Oh you played guard, number sixty, right?"  He said, "Yeah, yeah, you remember me," I said, "Yeah, you were good, you know, all--everybody was good."  I said, "What you're doing back in the Hartford?" He said, "I'm glad I'm back. I went to school, you know outside Hartford, I've been trying to get back for all these years."  I said, "What you're doing?" He said, "Well I'm going to work for Hartford Hospital [Hartford, Connecticut]. I'm a resident in surgery."  I said, "You mean medical school?" He said, "Yeah, I'm a doctor (laughter)."
Speaker 2: Wow, great story, you know.
Speaker 1: And I mean, we didn't, I mean all the stories didn't end that way.  We had some kids that, you know, that didn't do very well, you know, we agonized about that, but we had so many successes and the kids stayed together. Very frequently, you know, they're the same friends now as they were when they were nine, ten, eleven, twelve years old, even though they lived in different parts of the country some of them.  We had one other kid who went on to get an M.B.A. at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and went to California to be a controller of, you know, kind of a midsize corporation out there. I haven't seen him in a while, Bruce Fox [ph.].  But we had we had great success stories, you know, and some of them were, were fun stories.  There was one recently who never played in high school and his father was saying, "You know, when you played in the midget football, you were great. Boy, how come you didn't play in high school."  He said, "When I went out there in high school those guys were much bigger than I was.  You know, the midges, you know, we all were around the same size," he says, "Yeah, I guess that's right."  He said, "And the midges, I found out I could run faster than anybody else so, you know, I was making a lot of touchdowns.  But when I got a high school everybody could catch me (laughter). I didn't wanna play."  So we didn't have a lot of super football players, but we had some kids who really did well in life.  And that's what we were teaching really more than football.
Story_ID: 311810
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: I feel blessed, I feel very fortunate.  I think my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Crosby] was the biggest blessing I've ever had. She predicted almost everything that I've done.  I mean, I don't mean literally, but she would always say, you know, you gonna be very successful.  You gonna do very well you're gonna have a nice house, you're gonna have a nice car.  Now this is in the days when we had no car in the (laughter) family.  Our house was heated by coal you had to go down and put the coal in the furnace in order to stay warm in the winter.  Use the ashes from the coal to keep you from slipping and falling on your sidewalks. And I don't remember what my grandmother's income was but it was, it was not very much. But how can even congratulate someone more if you have limited income and still own your own home. I mean, my grandmother and [maternal] grandfather [Benjamin Crosby] owned their own home.  I mean, I--you know, I don't know how you do that. When you have a very limited income.  Well, I know that she was good friends of a lot of people who were very influential and wealthy because she worked for them and they became her friends. Even in her later years, they would come to pick her up or send a car to pick her up so that she could come and do their dinner party. And they would not even think about her being out there in cold weather or warm weather (laughter).  Or whatever the weather was because they knew that she would turn out such a spectacular event or a meal that it was worth doing everything for. But, but she was mostly my, my best mentor and I told one of my economic professors that she was the best economists I ever met.  She could make something out of absolutely nothing.  She knew how to look at resources and make decisions about them long before they were available to her.  She ran her own business on the side she made fruitcakes and pound cakes and plum pudding around holidays.  And I was her helper so I knew she knew how to buy the right ingredients because I would often shop for her.  I mean she told me precisely how much to buy of everything and that was never anything left over (laughter).  So she was absolutely the blessing in my life. And I'm really pleased I have two sons [Brian Peterson and Bradford Peterson] who are as close friends as any that I have, and we, we're on--in contact constantly and enjoy being with the each other and, you know, have genuine fun. Just fooling with each other and doing serious things together.  I am also blessed with the opportunity to live on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. I mean there are some places in this world that may be as good, as my father [Rufus Peterson] said, but none of them better than this. And have a nice wide circle of friends have a chance to travel widely, still have my faculties. I have a lot of books I still haven't read.  I'm still trying to get through some of those.
Story_ID: 311811
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you still want to do that perhaps you haven't done or quite done yet?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that I will find some things to do even in my later years that I haven't done.  Something that peaks my interest that has an opportunity to help others I would like to be involved in that.  I think I spend a fair amount of time at the senior center helping Jim Caron [ph.], who really manages as the chairman of the board of directors there, I enjoy that immensely. I have done some things for Nathan Mayhew [Nathan Mayhew Seminars, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts] folks only because Al Daniels is a good guy. I enjoy just helping him do whatever he needs to do. But yeah I'll find a project or 'cause.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you done so far that you might've done differently, any regrets surrounding dimension of your life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could've studied harder, been a better student probably, but then I'm not sure that I would have had the same opportunities. I'm not absolutely sure.  I think some of my opportunities, have come not because of my intelligence but because of my diligence.  I don't know whether, you know, that means you're smarter if you work harder. I have some regrets, but they're so minor I wouldn't even discuss them.
Story_ID: 311812
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Wow, I wish we would spend as much time as we can as my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Crosby] did describing the future to our kids and then helping them get to it.  And I don't mean making them do things and putting them in a mold, what I mean is understanding and listening to what they want to do and how they want to do it, but making sure that they have an excellent standard no matter what they do.  I said to my children [Brian Peterson and Bradford Peterson] and others many times I don't really care what you do.  I want you to do whatever it is the best you can do it.  And be the best at it if that's possible, and if there's a way of helping people and contributing to the greater good, then you get at it and do it.  It isn't about how much you have it's about how much you have helped.  And Muhammad Ali great poet said, "Service is the rent you pay in order to live on this earth and you need to be about serving" [sic. "Service to others is the rent you pay for your room here on earth"].  I don't care what it is, you make the decision, but there's a way that you can make a contribution particularly to the African American community if you happen to be African American.  And if that means helping some kids who aren't yours and giving them the right information and spending time with them and watching them grow.  And there's nothing more satisfying in this world nothing.  You know, and I know one of the great terms of endearment for me is when I run into one of my midgets, and they say, "Hey coach, how are you?"
Story_ID: 311813
Speaker 1: Last question how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be, I want to be remembered as being helpful. I would also love to be remembered as somebody who used some real modest resources in the beginning and turned them into a very successful life, I've had one of those so far.
Speaker 1: That's it, good, very good, excellent.
Story_ID: 311814
Speaker 1: Here's a picture of my brother visiting from California, this is oh about five years ago, six years ago.  And my father [Rufus Peterson] and me, my father passed away about five years ago.
Speaker 2: This is my son Brian Gerard Peterson, very fine golfer, looks like he's going out today to break par. He's a good golfer, he's about five or six handicap.
Speaker 1: When was that taken approximately?
Speaker 2: This was taken about four years ago.
Speaker 1: Here's a picture of my two sons, Brian on the left Bradford [Bradford Peterson] on the right, and the year about 2001.  They were out in the driveway laughing and joking, as usual, terrific guys, my friends.  And oh I can't remember the name of the place but it was in the driveway of the house.
Speaker 2: In Hartford [Connecticut]?
Speaker 1: In Hartford.
Speaker 2: Thank you next.
Speaker 1: This is my son Bradford's graduation photo from Parris Island [Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, Parris Island, South Carolina], and the year was probably 1996, and that's the year he graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: In 1969, I went to, or '65 [1965] forgive me, I went to work for the Plans for Progress program in Washington [D.C.].  And this was the photo that I was supposed to use back in Hartford when I was describing what I was doing at Hartford, in Washington, D.C., working for Plans for Progress.
Speaker 1: In 1978, July the Greater Hartford Open [Travelers Championship, Cromwell, Connecticut], my son Brian caddied for George Johnson who is a professional from Atlanta, Georgia.  And he fired a sixty-two in order to qualify for the tournament and attributed part of that wonderful score to the great caddy that he had that day, Brian Peterson.
Speaker 2: Here are two handsome young men, Brian and Bradford Peterson.  I think they may be eleven and four years old when this picture was taken, and they look like models for anything that you want to sell.
Speaker 1: In 1965, the Aetna Life and Casualty [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] was one of the first companies in the country to take their top level executives to IBM's [International Business Machines Corporation] Poughkeepsie [New York] facility to teach them about data processing.  And I was the coordinator of that program that is I made sure we invited the right people.  And contacted them and brought them by bus from Hartford to Poughkeepsie, New York to learn about computers and data processing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is this thing activated?
Speaker 1: Yeah it's about the same.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964] I was elected to the board of directors of the Aetna Men's Club.  This was a club of all of the male employees of the Aetna, and we had various social activities that we planned for all of the Aetna staff, and it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: That's '65 [1965]? That's the same as the--1966 working for Plans for Progress, I had the great privilege of making presentations to high-level executives who were members of the executive council.  And one ex officio member, the vice president of the United States Hubert Humphrey, and here I am giving a report.
Speaker 1: And here is a distinguished group of gentlemen listening to my report from left to right, Gene Madison [ph.] the vice president of industrial relations from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], vice president Hubert Humphrey, the president and CEO of Standard Oil of Ohio, Charles Barr, secretary of labor Willard Wirtz [W. Willard Wirtz].  And the--this point the XM bank [Export-Import Bank of the United States] director, the Export-Import Bank director, Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Jr.] and they are listening to me make a presentation.
Speaker 2: This is perhaps my favorite photograph that I ever was a part of, vice president of the United States, Hubert Humphrey, and I are sitting on the presidential yacht, Sequoia [U.S.S. Sequoia].  And cruising up the Potomac River Basin to have lunch and to meet with the executives of the Plans for Progress program, what a day.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966], I joined the staff of Plans for Progress.  This is a photograph of the staff members of the Plans for Progress program along with our leader the vice president of the United States, Hubert Humphrey.  The representatives here came from Eastman Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company; Kodak], AT&T [AT&T Inc.], Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], Rockwell International, Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation], and me from Aetna Life and Casualty.  Oh along with the CEO of Standard Oil of Ohio, Charles Barr. What a wonderful evening.
