Story_ID: 625177
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Toni, T-O-N-I, Toni Lynn Reed was my maiden name, R-E-E-D.  And the last name is Preckwinkle, P-R-E-C-K-W-I-N-K-L-E [HistoryMaker Toni Preckwinkle].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the origin of the, the name Preckwinkle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's my husband's [Preckwinkle's ex-husband, Zeus Preckwinkle] name.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I think it means angle worker in German.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  I often wondered.  Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 17, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: My usual joke on this subject is, you know, if you can't be an Irish Catholic politician in Chicago [Illinois] you can at least be born on St. Patrick's Day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And what is your place of birth?
Speaker 2: St. Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm president of the Cook County Board [Cook County Board of Commissioners].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is the 19th of April of 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my office which is in the County Building [Cook County Building], so I think 118 North Clark [Street].
Story_ID: 625178
Speaker 1: Now, before we get into depth there are five lightweight questions that, that we have to ask that are sort of a warm up, and they don't require much of an answer, just a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Strawberry shortcake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter) Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Actually in Chicago [Illinois] it's fall, it's beautiful in the fall.  It doesn't rain as much and it's nice clear, crisp days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My family has had a, a cabin in northern Minnesota since I was a little kid and that's where I go in the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  I don't think so.
Story_ID: 625179
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [Samuel Reed] side, but we'll keep 'em separate so we don't get 'em mixed up, then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E.  Her middle name was Inez, I-N-E-Z.  Her maiden name was Schuck, S-C-H-U-C-K [Beatrice Schuck Bailey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and my, my, I'll, I'll get to my father. So that's her--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's, that was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 12, 1920, St. Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I know more about my mother's side of the family than my father's side.  Let's see, so my mother's grandfather, who would be my great-grandfather, was a slave in Georgia and he left with the Union Army when he was eleven or twelve, when they, when Sherman's [William Tecumseh Sherman] army came through Georgia.  And he went back with a Minnesota regiment, somebody told him that he shouldn't keep the, the name of, I presume it was the folks on the slave plantation which was Myrick, I think it's M-Y-R-I-C-K.  And so he took the name of Jackson, Charles Jackson, which was the name of somebody in, in the Minnesota regiment that he went with.  They, he went to Washington, he followed them along.  In this, in the Civil War the Union Army kind of picked up escaped slaves as it marched along and they were called contraband and so he, he left his family, left his mother and his younger brother and went off with the Union Army, with Sherman's army.  And, and ended up in a Minnesota regiment and participated in the great parade that they had at the end of the Civil War in Washington, and then went back with the regiment to, to Stillwater [Minnesota], to Minnesota, to Fort Snelling, St. Paul.  The family story is that he got a job, I'm not sure what it was doing, after, after the, the Minnesota unit was disbanded at Fort Snelling.  Fort Snelling is, is an old, needless to say it goes back to the Civil War, before the Civil War but it's a, it's a military fortress where the Minnesota [Minnesota River] and the Mississippi River come together in St. Paul, Minnesota, it's right near the airport [Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, Hennepin County, Minnesota].  Anyway so it's been a military encampment for a very long time.  So the unit was kind of mustered out there and he worked for somebody in St. Paul who didn't pay him, so he heard there were jobs in, in Stillwater, so he walked to Stillwater, which is, I don't know twenty or thirty miles, and got a job there as a barber and lived there until he died at the very beginning of the 20th century, I think, I don't know the exact date of his death.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From his age, he, he, I guess he was born about 18--what, '50 [1850], '50 [1850], I, well, no, '50 [1850]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, around 1850, if he--
Speaker 1: --three [1853] or something, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --so by the time of the Civil War he was eleven or twelve in the middle of the war but I, I can't remember the date of Sherman's March to the Sea but, you know, it was '63 [1863], '64 [1864], something like that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '64 [1864], I believe, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was, you know, he was eleven, twelve something like that.  So he was born in the early 1850s.
Speaker 1: Born about 1852 or so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's, that's interesting 'cause a lot of people don't know anything about their, they can't, they don't have a story about someone coming out of slavery and it seems like that would be important, you know.  But so, so he, he established himself as a barber in, in Stillwater?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he worked there until he died at the, at the turn of the 20th century.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But he was, he was, you know, at that point he was in his mid-fifties when he passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Around 1900?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now he would be your great-grandfather, right?  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my maternal great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My maternal great-grandmother was free born, her name was Mattie Porter [Mattie Porter Jackson].  And she ended up at Fort Snelling which is where they met.  She ended up at fort, in Fort Snelling 'cause she was a nanny for some of the officers' children.  She was born I think in Washington, D.C. but she moved with the family to Fort Snelling and she and my, my great-grandfather married there and then, of course, they moved to Stillwater.
Story_ID: 625180
Speaker 1: So your, your mother's father was he born in Stillwater [Minnesota] then or?
Speaker 2: No, this, this my--
Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this is my maternal--so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your, your, your mother's mother.
Speaker 2: --but it, but let's see now, so that was my, her--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --her mother was Phoebe Harriett Jackson [Phoebe Jackson Schuck].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The youngest of four or five girls, let's see, Aunt Ellie [ph.], Aunt Era [ph.], Aunt Mattie [Mattie Jackson], youngest of four girls.  Phoebe Harriett Jackson, everybody called her Bea.  And so that's, so that's my maternal grandmother.  And she, she passed away when I was about three or four, so.  She died of, of what they called at that time malignant hypertension, nobody dies of malignant hypertension anymore because, of course, they have medications to, to control your blood pressure but that's what she died of when she was in her early fifties, malignant hypertension.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, did she tell any stories about growing up or--
Speaker 2: My mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So my mother was the, the second oldest of eleven kids.  Good Catholic family, six boys and five girls.  Actually there were twelve children born, one of the girls died in infancy.  I don't know, I don't know what the cause of death was.  But so it--Phoebe Harriett Jackson Schuck had twelve children who were born to her, eleven of whom survived.  And my mother was the second oldest.  And most of the, there's the way it worked out most of the oldest were girls and then all of the youngest are boys, so my mother was the second oldest of eleven kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now what about your grandfather, Mr. Schuck [Hugh Schuck]?
Speaker 2: He was born in Topeka, Kansas.  I don't know, I don't know much about his family the, the way I know about the Jacksons but he and his brothers all ended up in, in, in St. Paul, Minnesota.  I just remember early conversations with him about what a hard place Topeka was for black folks, so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Colored people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days.
Story_ID: 625181
Speaker 1: Can you remember a specific story?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No, I can't.  He [Preckwinkle's maternal grandfather, Hugh Schuck] just, they all decided that there would be more opportunity elsewhere and ended up in, in St. Paul [Minnesota].  Now St. Paul, St. Paul had a long standing, you know, sort of African American community, I think because it, because it was a river town and it was a railroad town.  So there were, there were jobs for black people. (Pause) I'm not sure exactly why they all, and I never did know exactly why they all ended up in St. Paul but I think my uncle, my, my grandfather was the oldest and I think he came first and the rest of his brothers, his uncles, my uncles followed, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was--
Speaker 2: My great-uncles followed, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Minneapolis [Minnesota] a destination for black folks too in those days?  I mean, was there a population size--
Speaker 2: Minneapolis, yeah, well there were small--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --about 10 percent of the population of St. Paul and Minneapolis was African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they didn't prefer one, one, one of the Twin Cities over another?
Speaker 2: No.  But in the rest of the state there were very few black people, pretty much the entire black population, there were a few black people in Duluth [Minnesota], you know, Duluth is a port on the Great Lakes but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --pretty much the only place you could find black people in, in, in Minnesota were in St. Paul and Minneapolis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: There's a large, you know, Native American population there 'cause Minnesota, unlike Illinois, well, it's true for Wisconsin too, they both have Indian reservations.
Story_ID: 625182
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] say about school?  I mean, did she, did she have a chance to finish high school and go to college or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm sixty-four years old and I'm sort of an anomaly because both of my parents graduated from college.  They were both, my mother was born in 1920 and my father [Samuel Reed] was born in 1917, but both of them went to college at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], both are University of Minnesota graduates.  My mother was a librarian, my father was a real estate appraiser.
Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Samuel Arthur Reed [Samuel Reed].
Speaker 1: R-E-A--R-E-I-D, right?
Speaker 2: R, double E, D.
Speaker 1: R, double E, okay.  Double E, D.  Go back and change that.  Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 15, 1917.  He was born in St. Paul too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both of my parents were born in St. Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, my paternal grandmother was born in California, Missouri.
Speaker 1: California, Missouri?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little town.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name of that town (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But she was raised by her great-grandmother who died when she was about thirteen or fourteen and then she was sent to live with an aunt in, in St. Paul.
Speaker 1: Now, now, was her, had, had her great-grandmother been a slave or was she free or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, her name was Amanda Woods [ph.].  Her name was Amanda Woods.  And I asked my grandmother to tell me about her.  She had a, Amanda Woods had a daughter, I think she had two daughters.  Her daughter, Lucinda, was my grandmother's grandmother (laughter).  And, and Lucinda had one daughter, Cora.  So and I don't know anything about the men.  The only thing I, sometimes what happens in our history is we only know about the women.  But anyway on that, on that side of the family it was a series of women who were not married to the men who fathered their children, so Amanda Woods, and then Lucinda Woods [ph.], Cora Woods [ph.], and my grandmother was Theoria Woods [Theoria Woods Reed], and she was raised by Amanda.  Her grandmother, so let's see, Amanda would be her great-grandmother.  Her grandmother, Lucinda, died early in her life of tuberculosis, Cora was just a teenager when my grandmother was born to her and was not on the scene, I don't know where she was but she was raised by Amanda Woods, and when a, as I said when Amanda died she came to St. Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So Cora is your father's mother then, right or is--
Speaker 2: No, her--
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: --Theoria.
Speaker 1: Theo--
Speaker 2: So, so the line was Amanda, Lucinda, Cora, and Theoria Woods.  All of them--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) are Woods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So none of them were, had a marriage to anyone in the--
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, is there a, a reason for that, a story behind that, that, 'cause it seems like it's too consistent to be happenstance?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's father was, you know, another teenage kid, his name was Theodore [ph.], and my, and my great-grandmother's name was Cora so, her, the, my grandmother's name was Theoria, which she hated so she just called herself Ora, O-R-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So. In those days I guess nobody ever formally changed their names, they just decided they would be called something else (laughter).  You know, I don't know, I've, I've often, the difference between my, my mother's [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] side of the family and my father's side of the family is sort of stark in that respect because people were actually married to each other and, you know, had families and, I don't know, my, my, my grandmother didn't ever talk very much about Amanda Woods.  And when I was younger I wasn't smart enough to ask her.  But she did, she did tell me some stories that Amanda had told her about being a slave and people being beaten and having salt put on their wounds afterwards and, you know, pretty awful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else about, about--
Speaker 2: About my grandmother growing up in California?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She, she, she, she didn't like white people very much (laughter).  And partly I'm sure it was the tale she was told by Amanda Woods, her great-grandmother, and I'm sure it was also how black people were treated in California, Missouri, in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, she came to, she came to St. Paul, Minnesota, in the, you know, in the early decade or so of, of, the first two decades, of, of the 1900s and that was still a pretty difficult time for black people all over the South and not so good in the North either but surely better in the North than the South.
Story_ID: 625183
Speaker 1: Did your fa- your father [Samuel Reed] grow up in St. Paul [Minnesota] basically or well, he was born in St. Paul so he grew up in St. Paul, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both my parents grew up in St. Paul (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.  So he, yeah, all right.  So he went to school in St. Paul and did they grow up in the same neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, my, my mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] grew up in the historically black neighborhood.  And my father grew up in the North End [St. Paul, Minnesota] in one of the few black families in the North End.  I don't know how they ended up there but that's where they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the, the, the traditional black side of town is called what?
Speaker 2: Rondo [St. Paul, Minnesota].  They still celebrate Rondo Days.  Rondo [Avenue] was kind of the main street of the black community.  And in the, in the, sort of historically destructive way that things have sometimes happened in this country, the street was taken as they built an expressway [Interstate 94] through Minneapolis [Minnesota] and St. Paul.  So they built an expressway through the black community.  And I, I haven't studied much about, you know, sort of highway construction policy but oftentimes the highways were built through areas where the land was cheap and the areas where the land was, was cheap was where poorer people lived and those poor people were often people of color.  So oftentimes the highways in this country and especially in the cities were built through, you know, African American or Latino neighborhoods 'cause that's where the land was least expensive.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But and who cared about whether or not their neighborhoods were destroyed, you know.  Anyway, so, it's, the kind of annual celebration of the African American community in St. Paul is called Rondo Days.  And Rondo was the, actually was the street my, my grandparents' house was on, 999 Rondo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, you, yeah, you're, you're right about, I mean, urban renewal as they called it, like did that in every city that I've talked to somebody about, you know, Kansas City [Missouri], my hometown, every city, pretty much has, has a similar story of the black business district being, you know, plowed, plowed over to make room for interstate highways in the late '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So any rate so that's, so is there, so is, Rondo Street is completely gone now, is, there's no Rondo Street left or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's gone, it was taken for the highway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That's, yeah, you don't hear that name much except for the basketball player, you know, Rajon Rondo, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 625184
Speaker 1: So now is there a story about how your parents [Beatrice Schuck Bailey and Samuel Reed] met?
Speaker 2: I think they met when--well it, with the, the black community was so small that everybody kind of knew everybody else.  And I don't know whether they met at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] or what but I, I don't know the story actually of how they met (laughter).  That's funny but it's true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But they, they got together about what time, what year?
Speaker 2: Well, they were married in 1941 or '42 [1942].  They were married before my father went off to the war [World War II], so it must have been 1941.
Story_ID: 625185
Speaker 1: So he served in World War II [WWII] and--
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Samuel Reed], my father and his brother, Dwight [Dwight Reed], two boys in the family, served, both served in World War II.  My grandmother [Theoria Woods Reed] did tell me stories about that.  She, she was worried to death about them, these were her only children and they were both in the war.  So she, she decided--she'd been a homemaker her whole life--she decided she would go to work in the ammunitions factory in Anoka, Minnesota, to help support the war effort, so she worked there all through the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And worried to death about her boys.
Speaker 1: Now, did they, they went overseas I take it to--
Speaker 2: Yes, my father served in North Africa.  My uncle served in Europe.  I don't know as much about his service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did, did your father talk about his service much?  Or did he say, did he have any good stories about serving?
Speaker 2: Most of the stories I heard about my father's service were terrible.  He, he had been in the [U.S.] Merchant Marine so he, he had done some service, I don't know if it was the [U.S.] Coast Guard or, or just as a, in a, as a Merchant Mariner.  And then he, he was back in the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota] as a, as a young man and was elected to, to be head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. It must have been the Coast Guard 'cause he had already, he had already served a couple of years in the, in the [U.S.] military.  And in, he--how can I say this?  He, he must have created a ruckus because the story in, in the family is that when, when the first troops were called up in Minnesota as the war began, the governor insisted that he be put on the list even though he'd already served in the Coast Guard because he wanted him gone.  And in the service he, he, he would work his way up from private and get busted down 'cause he was continually complaining about the way the colored troops got treated.  And actually at one point they put him in the brig because he, they accused him of, of not following the chain of command in his complaints about how black, sorry, they were called colored troops at the time, how the colored troop were treated.  He never talked about his military experiences very much just only occasionally.
Speaker 1: We hear, we hear some really, some bad stories about those days so, so okay.  So he comes, he, so he, they kept busting him down from whatever rank he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: He was smart and talented, he'd work his way up and then they'd bust him because he would complain and they'd, you know, they'd punish him for complaining basically.
Speaker 1: Okay. So then he comes back in what, 1946 or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  And, and you were born in 1947?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 625186
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have and where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of four children.  I have a younger brother, Jan [Jan Reed], I'm sixty-five, so he'll be sixty-four in May.  I, I have a sister Renee [Renee Reed] who will be sixty- who was, let's see, he's sixty-four, she'll be sixty, she was sixty-two in March.  And my younger brother will be sixty in November.  So it's, it's myself, I'm the oldest, my brother, Jan, my sister, Renee, and my brother, Marc [Marc Reed], he's the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So three boys--two boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: So your household growing up would have been your mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] and father [Samuel Reed] and, and your, you and your siblings.  Did any of your grandparents or uncles and aunts live with you?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in, but my family on both sides was in, was in St. Paul [Minnesota] and I, you know, I could ride my bike to, to anybody's house, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a sense of a lot of relatives in a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, you know--
Speaker 1: --close--
Speaker 2: --my father's brothers all lived in, my, my grandfather's [Hugh Schuck] brothers all lived in, in St. Paul.  This is on my mother's side.  My, my, my maternal grandmother [Phoebe Jackson Schuck] her, her brother passed away early but her sisters were all around so I had great-aunts and great-uncles, lots of aunts and uncles on my mother's side.  My father's brother lived in Missouri so I, I, I didn't see them very much but on my mother's side there were just goo gobs of relatives.
Story_ID: 625187
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their talents, hobbies, traits, and looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I look more like my father [Samuel Reed] but I, you know, in terms of public service, I think I'm more like my mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] in, in terms of having chosen to be a teacher.  She was a librarian and I, I'm, I'm a--so a helping profession.  And, and my mother was always involved in lots of organizations and activities, her sorority and lots of community organizations and professional organizations as a librarian.  And I've always been involved in a lot of organizations as well so.
Story_ID: 625188
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) it's a story that my, my mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] told about me.  We're up at the cabin and we were, we were doing something, I must have been, I don't know four or something. And I was playing some game or something and I refused to pick up the cards or something and I played and so she said I couldn't have dinner, and so I went to bed without dinner.  So the story, she always told me that story because I, I was always a very stubborn kid (laughter).  I don't, I don't have a lot of early memories.
Speaker 1: So you hear this one as a story but you don't, you're not sure that you remember it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it's a story that was told about me (laughter).  Yeah, but I don't remember it.  Yeah, I, I always remembered growing up sort of riding herd on my, my, my, my brothers and my sister so I'd be in charge of the kids and, you know.  The, the way that, that the oldest child a lot of times is given responsibility for younger siblings, so.
Story_ID: 625189
Speaker 1: We were talking about growing up and one question we always ask is we ask you to, I want you to describe your neighborhood and describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: So we lived in the North End [St. Paul, Minnesota] which is where my, part of the city where my father [Samuel Reed] grew up.  In my elementary school [Gorman School, St. Paul, Minnesota] there were only two African American families.  You know, we, we did okay in our block and stuff but going to grade school we had kind of a hard time 'cause it wasn't just the kids on your block anymore.  And so my, my most distinctive memory about school is two things, one that I did well, and the other is that I spent a lot of time fighting my way home from school.  And that (laughter) I'm, it's hard to explain the impact that has, has had on me.  First of all, we went, we had a school that went only to sixth grade 'cause in St. Paul [Minnesota], Minneapolis [Minnesota] they have junior high school so they put the seventh and eighth grade kids in junior high.  It's kind of like the middle school concept.  But anyway, and then there's high school.  So you have, you know, seven years of elementary school including kindergarten and then three years of, of junior high and four, three years of high school.  So what I remember about elementary school is as I said I, I did well and spent a lot of time fighting my way home from school.  That was a, a formative experience in a lot of ways.  One of the things I learned, by the time I got to about fourth grade and my younger brother [Jan Reed] was in third grade, we were as big as the sixth graders so we didn't have to fight our way home from school anymore.  I mean, the thing I learned about bullies is that they want massacres and not fights. So it's a good thing to remember about them.  And so if you give a bully a fight and not a massacre they don't really wanna fight.  I mean, they just wanna beat people up, they don't wanna (laughter) fight.  And fortunately I grew up at a time where people fought with their fists and not with knives or guns so.
Speaker 1: So even as a girl, you know, in--
Speaker 2: Well, they, they--
Speaker 1: --in Minnesota you had to like fight your way home and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because there would be, there would be a group of little, you know, thugs waiting for us the way we walked home.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: My memory of it, my memory of it, of course, is it happened all the time, I'm sure it was less frequently (laughter) than all the time but clearly it made an impact on me.  No, you know, kids would call you nigger and they wanted to beat up my brother, they really weren't, when I was in kindergarten they pretty much left me alone but when my brother got in kindergarten and I got in first grade, my brother is a lot darker than I am and besides he's a boy but I wasn't gonna let 'em beat up my little brother as much as we fought (laughter) I wasn't gonna let 'em beat up my brother.  So, so the two of us got in fights on the way home.  And as I said it pretty much ended in fourth grade 'cause we were pretty tall and big and the sixth graders didn't wanna fight people who were as big as they were so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How, how big is your brother now?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm 6 feet tall, he's five- about 5'11".  You know, people in this country have gotten a lot taller, better nutrition and, and but we were pretty big for our age when we were kids so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I just wondered, I was tempted to ask this, I, so, so your brother is darker than you, are your sisters the same color as you?
Speaker 2: Well, my sister, you know, my sister [Renee Reed], my younger brother [Marc Reed] and I are about the same color, my brother is darker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was just wondering.
Speaker 2: You know, in, in lots of black families, you know, there's a sort of color gradation--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --and not everybody's (laughter) exactly the same color.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered how that, in a place like Minnesota if they were really sure who you were, you know, all the time, you know, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: --they--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, believe me they were sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I know, you know, in Chicago [Illinois] they, there were ways, I mean, it, well, it depends on where you are sometimes as there's a hint, sometimes they don't know what (laughter) to think, you know, depending on, you know, what your color range is, you know.  So I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in a city, in a city like Chicago where there are, you know, lots of Latinos and lots of Southern European folks who are kind of, you know, caramel colored, it's, it's sometimes hard to figure out but in St. Paul, Minnesota, where just about everybody was Scandinavian or German, it was pretty easy.
Story_ID: 625190
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I loved to go visit my grandmother.  My, my paternal grandmother [Theoria Woods Reed], she lived closest to us, she lived about a mile away, that was an easy ride on my bike, I could get there in about ten or fifteen minutes or less on my bike.  And I would always, I would go visit my grandmother a lot, she was one of my favorite people in the world.  She lived at 1221 Rice Street and which was kind of a busy street.  And she had, she had an old white shingled house and with a nice porch in the summer and peonies in the backyard, I guess that's the most distinctive memory of my grandmother's house is the wonderful smell of peonies in July and August, peonies and ants (laughter).  Anybody who grows peonies knows that they attract ants (laughter) so if you brought 'em in the house you had to be sure to try to shake off all the ants before you brought 'em in, but anyway.  So what, and what else do I remember about my grandmother's house?  That was, that was about it, the, the wonderful porch and the backyard and it was a real old fashioned house, I don't know when it was built but a really old fashioned house, so.
Story_ID: 625191
Speaker 1: What was the housing like, I mean, in, in the neighborhood where you grew up [in St. Paul, Minnesota]?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was growing, for most of the time I was growing up, we were pretty poor and we ended up, we lived in a basement which my father [Samuel Reed] finished when I was a teenager, so most of my childhood I lived in a, in a basement house.  And but most of the houses around us were just regular, you know, shingled homes, so.  It was a pretty much working-class neighborhood.  We lived at the top of the hill and down at the bottom of the hill there was actually a factory that some of the people still worked in, although it, it closed when I was a teenager.
Story_ID: 625192
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Gorman [Gorman School, St. Paul, Minnesota], G-O-R-M-A-N.  It doesn't exist anymore, they, they tore the school down and built housing on the site.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a, it was an old school, the new building for the school was built in 1920, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the old building was built sometime in the late 1800s and it was, you know, what, what's ironic is, you know, the, the, the, the old building of the 18--late 1800s was probably built better than the new building in 1920 in terms of, you know, it would have lasted forever if they hadn't decided to tear it down, so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember it, remember the old one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Okay.  All right.  So, now did, did you like school other than--
Speaker 2: Other than fighting my way home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the fighting?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was always good in school so I, you know, I, I liked it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Not, not, not really.  When, when I was in, when I was in high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota] I really began to love history.  But I, I always liked history and math, those are the two things that I liked the best.
Speaker 1: Now, the, the other black family in the school, were, were you all close to them?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, we knew them but we weren't really close.  They lived a long, well, not a long way, but they lived a mile away from us and we didn't, you know, we, we knew 'em in school but that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now, well did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Miss Billings [ph.] my first grade teacher, she was really great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember getting in trouble in her class though and getting sent out in the hall which was pretty rare for me.  She got mad at Jack Schmidt [ph.] because he, I don't know, he, I don't know what he had done he was smarting off or something, and she, she was so mad at him that she turned red and I started laughing so I was the one that got sent in the hall for laughing 'cause she got mad.  And Jack Schmidt (laughter) is sitting in the class.  I was (laughter), I wasn't mad, I was just sort of embarrassed.  I thought (laughter) how did, how did I, a good student get sent into the hallway for this but anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you avoided getting in trouble, I guess then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I wasn't in a lot of trouble, no.
Story_ID: 625193
Speaker 1: What did you like to do growing up?  What kind of activities?
Speaker 2: Oh, we used to play in the street all the time.  So we played, we played kickball, we played softball, we, you know, played cowboys and Indians [Native American], we ran around in the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about movies, or radio, TV, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: On Sunday afternoons, I don't know how old I was when she, my mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] let us do this, but she would let me, probably 'cause she wanted the afternoon off, but she would let me take my brothers [Jan Reed and Marc Reed] and my sister [Renee Reed], we would walk about four or five blocks to the Dale Street bus and take the bus to the movie theater in the black community.  So it was right off the bus line on Dale Street.  And we could, we could take the bus, as I said walk four blocks from our house, get on the bus, and go, I don't know if it was on Rondo [Avenue], I can't remember, no, it was on University [Avenue], so go to the theater on University and so I could, we would go and go to a double feature and, and then I would take the kids back home so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So all right.  So Rondo Street had a, a black theater or is it--
Speaker 2: Rondo Street was the main street in the black community but University was where the theater was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Which was, you know, four or five blocks away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that, this is like so many little black business districts have a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --movie theater--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some other things there, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did they bring in like the live acts, you know, in--
Speaker 2: No, this was just movies.
Speaker 1: Just movies?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you could, you know, we could go in the afternoon and see a double feature and, you know, it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, in, let's see.  Now your mother was a, was she a school librarian or--
Speaker 2: No, she worked for the Saint Paul Public Library [St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did you spend a lot of time in the library or, or did she bring back books, I mean, did she encourage you to go to the library?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  My mother was always reading something.  And she always encouraged us to read.  And I've always loved reading.  You know, it's the way you educate yourself.  So I, I've always enjoyed reading and, and I'm sure I got that from my mother since she was the one who was reading all the time and not my dad [Samuel Reed].  My dad read the newspaper, that was about it.
Story_ID: 625194
Speaker 1: One thing I remember about Minnesota in the 1960s was the Minnesota Viking [sic. Minnesota Vikings] football team.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you all Viking fans?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, the Purple People Eaters.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Those were, yeah, those were, I, I think three of the four were black of the--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --Purple People Eaters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there were a lot of black, there were a lot of black players on those teams.  And actually one of the black football players, Carl Eller, became a lawyer and a, and, and eventually a supreme court judge in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Alan Page I think finished law school too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I believe, yeah.  And Jim Marshall he was known for running the wrong way on the field but he was an all-star, as well so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's--
Speaker 2: And maybe you're right, maybe it's Alan Page who ended up being the supreme court judge, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: I know he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But one of the football players was sort of a, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a unexpected that an African American football player becomes after his career a lawyer and then a judge and then a supreme court judge so.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I know Page became a lawyer, I don't know if he's a, I don't know what happened to Eller.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure but I know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Page was on public radio for a while, you know, commentary and that sort of thing.  A very bright guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 625195
Speaker 1: So, was the black community, I mean, you know, as, as it was in Minnesota, I mean, now, how did you, did, was there any sense of community with the black community?  I mean, with, well, with your family in relationship to the rest of the black community since you lived in sort of a isolated--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --part of town?
Speaker 2: --but, but we were always, we were always over there.  I mean, we always, in the first place my, my family was always there so we were always, often on Sundays we'd visit either my grandparents or some of my great-aunts and uncles or whatever, so we spent a lot of time visiting family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the historic, you know, African American community in St. Paul [Rondo, St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Now, did you all go to church?  Was your, was your mother still a Catholic at that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my, my parents [Beatrice Schuck Bailey and Samuel Reed] joined the Unitarian church, Unity Unitarian Church [Unity Church Unitarian, St. Paul, Minnesota] so that's, that's the church in which I grew up, the Unitarian church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's different from a lot of people.  So you're, so they're in the Unitarian church, are there, was the university a big part of growing up, University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and--
Speaker 2: No, when I was a teenager I spent a lot of time there in the coffee clubs and stuff on the, on the West Bank [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  But no, I mean, it, it was where I hung out when I was a teenager because I, I liked the music and the coffee houses and the rest. But I, but I wanted to go away from home when I went to college and, and I never really wanted to go to the University of Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But the Unitarian church though, that, this is an experience, a lot of black kids growing don't have, they experience the Baptist church and we've interviewed a lot of people that are in the Church of God in Christ or speaking in tongues or a lot of different things.  What, what does the, did you have, what was the Unitarian church like growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the theology of the Unitarian church is very different from Catholicism but the, the services are not so different.  That is they're very sort of clergy focused and very sort of somber.  You know, there isn't a lot of being possessed by the spirit.  I mean, there's none of that (laughter).  In the same way that Catholicism is like that, you know, there's no, no spirit possession, there's no, you know, there isn't the same sort of joy and abandon in a way that there is in a lot of Baptist or Church of God in Christ or, now there's some African American denominations like, you know, African American Episcopal [African Methodist Episcopal] or African American Episcopal Zion [African Methodist Episcopal Zion] which are more sober ceremonies as well.  But so the Unitarian church is, is about as far as you can get from Catholicism and theology but the, the sort of sense you get in the service is quite similar.
Speaker 1: They're very formal--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, dry kind of service.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know, there's a, there's an order of service and there's the, you know, it's, anyway, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when, when, so when you were growing up, and so it's not a lot of, was there, there any music in the church when you were growing up or--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, my mother sang in the choir but it wasn't, frankly, it wasn't the music that I've come to love out of the African American (laughter) church.  You know, I, I really started going to a lot of African American churches when I got in politics and, and, you know, the music is just wonderful, even if the, the sort of nature of the service is quite different from what I grew up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, now, did you have any positions of responsibility growing up in the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was one of the leaders of the Liberal Religious Youth which was the youth organization in the church.
Story_ID: 625196
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to get a sense for anybody watching this how different this might be from growing up in some other kind of a situation.
Speaker 2: Well, so, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it's, it's a--
Speaker 2: --so first of all the joke I--
Speaker 1: --this is different.
Speaker 2: --the joke, the joke I tell about myself is that, you know, I'm the only black elected official in Chicago [Illinois] who came here from the North (laughter) because usually people of my generation and older, again I'm sixty-five, my generation and older came here from some place along the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], you know, so it's Mississippi and Louisiana and Arkansas or they grew up here in, you know, in, in Chicago.  I think Freddrenna Lyle, former aldermen Freddrenna Lyle and now a judge, moved here from Ohio.  But when I was on the city council [Chicago City Council] for, for twenty years, nineteen years, pretty much everybody was either a Chicagoan or had, who's family had come from, you know, again some place along the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad.  So I was sort of an anomaly along with Freddrenna.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so the, the, there are a number of ways (laughter) in which I guess I'm an anomaly one is that I grew up in Minnesota and came to Chicago.  And when, and believe me when I came to Chicago I felt like I had come to the South.  Partly because, you know, there were just, and, and this was 1965, and there, you know, you could walk across the street and you'd be in a completely different neighborhood, and it was very, you know, what, what struck me, there was a black community in St. Paul [Minnesota], but black people also lived all over and, and my sense of Chicago when I came here was that was not the case.  This was a pretty, you know, there weren't exactly barb wire fences around neighborhoods but you, but psychologically that was how you felt a lot of times.
Speaker 1: Well I, I've heard, we all know the stories about going under the wrong viaduct and what can happen to you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and what can happen you get beat up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was going on in the, you know, when you got here, I'm sure.
Speaker 2: Right, oh, sure.
Story_ID: 625197
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school.  Now, now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Well it-, you know, I went to public school so I went to Gorman elementary school [Gorman School, St. Paul, Minnesota], I went to Como junior high [Como Park Junior High School, St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Washington High School [Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota].  And Washington High School--
Speaker 1: Como Junior High School.  Okay.  Let's, let's--
Speaker 2: Como Park.
Speaker 1: --we, we didn't do junior high school, yet.  So Como Park (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, junior high school, so junior high school, the, the curriculum was divided by subject area, you know, so it was like high school in that respect.  And, I was also placed where I did pretty well, that you had to test into what they called the D program, the developmental program.  This was, this was at the time when America was trying to catch up from the shock of Sputnik [Sputnik 1] and put a lot of emphasis on trying to identify talented kids and put 'em in, you know, math and science and train 'em up.  So I got put in those programs even though I, I loved math and wasn't very good at science.  But it sort of, because you, because your math and science classes were in this D program, all the rest of your curriculum sort of fell into place so you were with a lot of the same kids all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, so you had to test to, to get into this--
Speaker 2: They tested you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) school or into the program?
Speaker 2: Into the program in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: No, I think every, every school had these D programs, that's what they called it.  But it was developmental and it was focused on getting talented kids to, to be, to have special math and science classes.  But that drove the rest of your, you know, five, five course day, you had the same math and science program so you ended up with a lot of the same kids all the time.
Story_ID: 625198
Speaker 1: While you're growing up the mission to space, I mean, the, the U.S. space, the space race, with, with Russians that's going on, the Cold War--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is going on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Civil Rights Movement is going on.  And you're in a Unitarian church, you've got a mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] that's a librarian, your father [Samuel Reed] is head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so--
Speaker 2: When he was younger, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there's a lot of information that's coming--
Speaker 2: --yeah, but he was, he was always--my mother, my mother was more of involved over time, he was involved when he was younger.  He worked at the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] as an appraiser but, yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it just seems like, you know, so, so what was your, did, were you politically aware as a kid growing up of what was going on around you, you think more so than maybe some others or--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was always, always interested in current, what we used to call current events, you know, international affairs.  And the Minneapolis Star [Star Tribune] had a contest every year to see how much you knew about sort of current events.  And when I was in high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota], I would take that test all the time, I never got any more than an honorable mention but (laughter) that's what I, I really enjoyed and cared about.  And I was, I was president of two things when I was in high school, one was the Girls Athletic Association organization and the other was the world affairs club so.
Speaker 1: Now, did, so, so your mother was involved in you said a lot of civic activities?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Like, like, like what for instance what was she--
Speaker 2: Well, her sorority AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  She was, you know, the booster club at our local park.  And she was always involved in library, American Library Association stuff too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: ALA.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so she, okay.  So, did, did you go, attend meetings with your mother at all or--
Speaker 2: No.  I would go visit her at the library [St. Paul Public Library, St. Paul, Minnesota] a lot though.
Story_ID: 625199
Speaker 1: Do you remember what things were like when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were in our math class, one of these D classes, developmental classes.  We had a test and Mr. Kernick [ph.] who was one of the best teachers I ever had, was our math teacher--basically we're in the middle of this test and, and, you know, I don't know, somebody came into the room and told us that the president had been killed or something and nobody really, I mean, it was like, you couldn't believe it.  What I do remember is he made us finish the test.  But yeah, we were in math class taking a test.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of those things like you can remember where you were on September 11th [September 11, 2001], you know.  So I can remember where I was when, I can remember where I was when Kennedy and, and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got assassinated too but anyway.
Story_ID: 625200
Speaker 1: Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota was a big--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was our senator--
Speaker 1: --a big po- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for many years.
Speaker 1: --a big politician.  And--
Speaker 2: A liberal Democrat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was known as the, as Mr. Civil Rights.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Actually, that was his nickname.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what was your sense of him as a kid growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned more about him, of course, as I became an adult.  But he was a revered figure in, in Minnesota.  And, you know, served for many, many years in the [U.S.] Senate before Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] tapped him to be vice president.  And then, of course, ran unsuccessful for the presidency in 1968 in a terribly close election.  You know, I, he was, he was a, you know, sort of iconic figure in Minnesota.  And, and, and ironically so was Eugene McCarthy, although, I think, Humphrey was, had, was the person who was seen to have the most gravitas and the most, was the most popular of the two.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eugene McCarthy but he, he came out against the war in Vietnam War before a lot of people and--
Speaker 2: Right.  And then ran for president--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in 1968.
Speaker 1: Yeah, on that platform.
Speaker 2: Right. Antiwar.
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  So there's a--
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and tried to mobilize support after, well, tried to mobilize support all the way along but particularly after Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we can talk about that a little later 'cause you're actually in college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] when they're, like--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --running, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was in college from '65 [1965] to '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 625201
Speaker 1: Let me me go back to high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota].  So in, in, when you were I guess in middle school [Como Park Junior High School, St. Paul, Minnesota] or well, in high, or early part of high school, I guess, the March on Washington took place.  Was your, was your father [Samuel Reed] involved in that or your mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey]?
Speaker 2: No, no, neither of them were.  I just remember, what I remember of the Civil Rights Movement is watching everything on the evening news.  And just being appalled especially by the police turning dogs on kids or fire hoses on kids. It just seemed like, yeah, it, I'm sure I wasn't the only one who felt that way.  You know, it made you ashamed of the country in which you lived so it was not a good feeling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and at the same time impressed with the courage of the people who were willing to, to stand before the fire hoses and the dogs.
Story_ID: 625202
Speaker 1: So in, in general other than, than having to fight your way around the school, I mean, how did, how are, how were, what, what were race relations like in, in St. Paul [Minnesota] when you were growing up?  I know we, most people think of Minnesota as more of a liberal state and, you know, and I've even heard some say, well, there are not enough black people in Minnesota for them to dislike, you know, 'cause it's not, but what's--
Speaker 2: So I have a different take on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, my standard bitter comment about race relations in this country is there are niggers everywhere, except who gets to be the niggers varies from place to place.  So in my home state the people who were the most discriminated against were Native Americans.  And it was, you know, common to hear, you know, sort of awful prejudicial things about Native Americans.  The Native American community in, in, in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and St. Paul was pretty small.  There were a lot of Native Americans on the reservations further north.  But a, you know, alcoholism in particular plagued the urban Native American community and so there was a lot of derogatory comments about drunken Indians and stuff like that.  But, you know, in terms of who had it worse in my home state it was clearly Native Americans more than black people.  And it was the Native Americans both because they had land and because there was so much resentment of them, the, who I think had it, as I said had it worse than we did.  Although I'm not saying there wasn't discrimination against black people, there surely was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I was in St. Paul last summer and just noticed all the iconography depicting American Indians in downtown St. Paul.  There's one public building with a huge statue of a--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Native American and--
Speaker 2: It's the, it's the, it's the, it's the courthouse or whatever [St. Paul City Hall and Ramsey County Courthouse, St. Paul, Minnesota].  Yeah, and it's, it's a huge statue of a Native American.  It's art deco, that beautiful art deco building and there's a--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --huge statue.  I forget who it is but anyway, yeah, right in the lobby.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't, you know, there's (laughter) there may be that public honor that but it doesn't obliterate the, the sort of day to day prejudice and, and discrimination.
Speaker 1: Were, were, were Native Americans in school with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, the Native American population was much more in Minneapolis, it wasn't very many native, there weren't very many Native Americans in St. Paul.
Story_ID: 625203
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we were, I was just talking about the Native Americans, you said they're not, weren't that many in St. Paul [Minnesota]--
Speaker 2: There was a larger Native American population in Minneapolis [Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually there was a small African American population, again about 10 percent, a much smaller Latino population, although the Latino population has grown over time.  It was pretty much, you know, Scandinavians and Germans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: It never, it never really had the ethnic diversity of a place like Chicago [Illinois] even for Europeans.  And I don't--you know, Wisconsin is sort of like that too, it's Scandinavian and German.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you know, [HistoryMaker] Matthew Little of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, we--
Speaker 2: But you have to remember that I left when I was eighteen. And that was more than forty years ago, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I just mentioned him because we interviewed him back in 2002, and he was retired, you know, head of the NAACP but he had been there for a long time.  But so, okay.  So in, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Washington High School [Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Washington High School.
Speaker 2: It's the same high school my father [Samuel Reed] went too actually, my father and my [paternal] uncle [Dwight Reed].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  It was, did they leave a legacy behind (laughter)?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: My father was a golfer and a swimmer.  My uncle was a star athlete.  He went to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and made All-American and ended up as a football coach at Lincoln University [Lincoln University of Missouri, Jefferson City, Missouri], so.
Speaker 1: So what, what--
Speaker 2: Lincoln University in Missouri.
Speaker 1: So what, what did he play, what position did he play in football?
Speaker 2: He was an end.
Speaker 1: An end, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I've heard, I've read newspapers not so much heard stories from him about, you know, teams that refused to play if he was on the field so there were some games that he sat on the bench because the other teams wouldn't play a team with a, a black end, you know.  This is the 19--must have been the 1930s, late 1930s 'cause he was born in 1915, so.
Story_ID: 625204
Speaker 1: Do you remember the football team that the, the, the Golden Gophers went to the Rose Bowl I think around 1960 or so or '61 [1961], they had a black quarterback?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that Sandy Stephens, is that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Anyway, how did the community feel about that?  I mean, were they--
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody was proud of him.  You know, it was one thing, (laughter) you know, as well as I, it's one thing for black players to be on team, it's quite another for them to be the quarterback.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.  There are some positions that black people don't get to play and quarterback historically was one of those in football even when black people, you know, got to play in the, in the NFL [National Football League] they weren't quarterbacks, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Well, I think, that's, that's part of the, the, you know, the rest of the country's view of Minnesota being liberal.  You got Hubert Humphrey then, here's this black kid playing quarterback for the Golden Gophers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, we saw that from Ohio, we saw that, you know, our people saw it from all over the country, you know, and they said wow, 'cause we, we, we couldn't see it where we were (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: No, I mean, you know, it was quarterback was a position for somebody who was smart, not just a good athlete but smart, you know.  And black people may be good athletes but are they really smart, you know, that's the, and, of course, it's just a reflection of the racism, it's not about our talents, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I don't know if he was even from Minnesota himself but--
Speaker 2: I don't know where he was from.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But he, he was our quarterback, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, 'cause the Big Ten teams [Big Ten Conference] recruit all over the country but they let him play quarterback.  You know, a lot of what happened is, young men who were quarterbacks in high school they got to college, they couldn't play quarterback so they get to be, you know, receivers or something, you know, if they've got good hands they're receivers, they don't get to play quarterback 'cause quarterback goes to the white guys.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, that's right.  So I thought I'd ask you about that because that was like big news in the '60s [1960s], I guess.
Story_ID: 625205
Speaker 1: But you like sports yourself, right?  And you were, you were president of the, you said the--
Speaker 2: Girls Athletic Association (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Girls Athletic Association.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I played the, I played, in high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota] I played volleyball, I played basketball, I played softball and, and I high jumped.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's, that's a lot of 'em.  That kept you busy I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I earned letters in athletics when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: I still think of myself as an athlete but I'm pretty creaky (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, when you were, when you were involved in sports did, how much support did the, the girls' athletics get from the schools?  Did they--
Speaker 2: You know, not nearly as much as the boys, of course.  But I was just lucky, I mean, I felt lucky to play.  I loved, I loved sports and I always did.  And I only, I only stopped being a, a student athlete after my first year in college 'cause my grades were so bad that I had to figure out, I had to figure, I couldn't do everything I was doing.  And so what went by the wayside was sports.  And I don't regret it but I, I did love sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So now in, so you're the president of the, the world affairs council?
Speaker 2: World affairs club, yeah.
Speaker 1: World affairs club, okay.  And the Girls Athletic Association.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what, what else did you do in high school?  Did you run for any other office or--
Speaker 2: No.  I never--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, in retrospect I never ran for any, I never ran for any like class offices or school offices because, although I probably wouldn't have said it at the time, no six foot tall black kid was gonna be elected to those things.  I mean, now that isn't to say black girl, one of the black boys, Jerry Lewis, who was on the football team and was a star athlete, he got elected to class offices but, you know, I knew I wasn't and I didn't, so I, I stuck to the areas where I knew I was good, current affairs, current events, things I cared about and knew about, and, and athletics where I was strong.
Story_ID: 625206
Speaker 1: When you're a senior in high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota], what was your plan?  What, what's, had you selected a school or had you--
Speaker 2: I had a friend from church who had applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], didn't get in but told me all about it, so I applied there.  I applied to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania].  I guess I did apply to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  I got in at University of Chicago and it was, you know, four hundred miles away so I could get home pretty quick and it wasn't too expensive and, and I loved going on the rail- railroads.  So I picked the university without ever having visited the place, nothing I would recommend to young people these days, always go visit the college you wanna attend, but anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you think had you visited the school ahead of time would you have been as likely to go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure but I, it's a bad idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, I liked being in the city.  I liked the idea of going to Chicago and I, you know, and Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] is a beautiful neighborhood.  But the college at the time that I was there, the college, there were ten thousand people at the university and two thousand people at the college so it really wasn't a, a college focused environment, it was a graduate school focused environment.  So in, in, in the respect that if I had to do it over again I'd go to a college rather than a university because the university's emphasis was on research and not teaching so I got some good teachers along the way but it was sort of accidental.
Story_ID: 625207
Speaker 1: Now, before we leave high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota] completely, was there anything special about graduation?  Did you get any honors or anything or special recognition or did something happen that stayed with you?
Speaker 2: So I was voted by my classmates as the smartest girl in the school, even though I didn't have the best grades and also the best athlete.  But the yearbook advisor decided that it wasn't fair for one person to have two honors, so they gave the best athlete to somebody else.  I guess she figured I cared more about being smarter than being the best athlete (laughter), so anyway.
Speaker 1: That's terrible.  Why would they have a vote and then decide that you don't deserve to be both of them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know that's what the yearbook advisor decided to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They told me about it afterwards, I said oh, this is interesting, anyway.
Speaker 1: Did you have good counseling in high school?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't enough counselors, there still aren't enough counselors.  In our public schools that's one of the big problems, you know, there aren't enough counselors to really give the kids a sense of, of what the opportunities are for them and to encourage them to go to school beyond high school.  That's, you know, it, it's very hard to support yourself in this economy if you don't have at least a high school education and better yet a college education or some postsecondary, you know, training.  And no, I mean, I, I, the reason I went to, I applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was because my, of my friend and what I heard from her about the place, it had nothing to do with anything the counselors told me.  I mean, you know, it's, anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at least they didn't discourage you from going to college, right?  So.
Speaker 2: No, I was too smart for them to discourage me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: The only discouragement, it's really funny, the only discouragement I ever got from a teacher was when I was in junior high school [Como Park Junior High School, St. Paul, Minnesota] and it was an odd discouragement. It was that I shouldn't be so vocal about basically what I thought about the country and about the way black people were treated and whatever because people are gonna think I was a communist.  And she did it as, out of love, you know, what I mean.  "Don't put yourself in the position where people decide that you're, you know, because of your criticisms of this country and your, you know, comments about what's going on that people decide you're a communist 'cause that's gonna be bad for you."
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, you really recognized that she was concerned.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it wasn't, it wasn't mean and it wasn't, you know, what I mean?  She was worried about me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, afterwards I thought about it as an adult and I'm sure it was because her own, you know, sort of progressive views had probably gotten her in trouble in her own life, you know.  Because, you know, in the '50s [1950s], so this was in the, that was in, it was in junior high so that was early '60s [1960s], you know, in the '50s [1950s] there was all this sort of anticommunist hysteria in the country and all kinds of people who were progressives and who, they didn't have anything to do with the Communist Party had, you know, were persecuted basically, so.
Speaker 1: This is true, this is true.  And the other McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] was responsible for that.
Story_ID: 625208
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1964?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965], okay, from high school, okay.  Now, all right.  So, so you go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and what, what was the, you said it was kind of a somber place, I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it wasn't, (laughter) my husband [Preckwinkle's ex-husband, Zeus Preckwinkle] insisted a couple of years ago when he saw one on somebody running around in the neighborhood that I get him one of these T-shirts, it said, the University of Chicago where fun comes to die.  So (laughter) he wears his, his hooded sweatshirt proudly.  And I, it's a, it was a very serious environment, full of geeky people.  And many more men than women, it was about 60 percent guys and maybe 40 percent women, lots of nerds.
Speaker 1: Now, I heard once and I don't know if it's true but it, I heard that the, the highest suicide rate amongst undergraduate students was the University of Chicago at one point, somebody just said that, I don't know if it's true or not but I know it's a serious, yeah, it just seemed like a serious place.
Speaker 2: So one of the deans at the school, I remember from orientation week, said to us, so we're eighteen year old kids coming to this college, "Look to the right of you, look to the left of you, one of you won't be here at graduation."  Now, why would you tell eighteen year old kids on their first week at the school that a third of them are gonna drop out, transfer, whatever, why aren't you saying encouraging things to them, you know?  But that was, it was like, it was a matter of pride at the university when we went there that, you know, not everybody made it, you know, it was, we used to say that the attitude at the university was if it doesn't kill you it'll make you strong, now what kind of a way is that to treat young people (laughter) you know what I mean? Anyway.
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I survived, barely but I survived.
Story_ID: 625209
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is 1965 in Chicago [Illinois], Richard M. Daley is the mayor--Richard J. Daley rather is the--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) mayor.  What, what did you have any observations about the political life of this city as a freshmen [at University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: So I'd, so I'd worked in my, in my first political campaign when I was in St. Paul [Minnesota] when I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was that about?  Okay.
Speaker 2: My high school social studies teacher, Richard Harmon [ph.], who I still talk to occasionally, he lives in California now, invited me to work in the campaign of Katie McWatt who was the first African American woman to run for the city council in St. Paul [St. Paul City Council].  And so, you know, we made phone calls and I got my grandma and other people to put signs in their yards and, you know, we licked envelopes.  I remember going to her headquarters on election night, she didn't win it was really sad but I decided I loved politics.  And when I came to Chicago to go to school I got involved in political campaigns, particularly in 1968, Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey], of course, was the candidate for the president, but Paul Simon was running for treasurer of the State of Illinois and one of my college professors invited me to work in that campaign so I did that too.
Speaker 1: So did Katie Watt win did you say?
Speaker 2: Katie McWatt.
Speaker 1: McWatt.
Speaker 2: McWatt.  No, she didn't win and actually--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --actually passed away, I think last year, spending, and having spent a life as a community activist in St. Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she was running for what again or--
Speaker 2: For city council.
Speaker 1: City council, okay.
Speaker 2: In those days you didn't run by districts you run city, you ran citywide.  They've since broken the city council down into districts 'cause it's very, you know, it's very hard for, for people of color to get elected when you have this sort of, you know, whole city election, you know, it's, it's easier if you divide it up in, in Chicago's case into wards or, I don't know what they call 'em in St. Paul now districts or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it seemed like you'd never have a chance to get elected in that situation.
Speaker 2: Right, well I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --think, I think black people only got elected when they changed it to districts so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in St. Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in high school [Washington High School; Washington Technology Magnet School, St. Paul, Minnesota] and your, your high school teacher was he, was he like a mentor to you in high school your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: This is Richard--
Speaker 2: Harmon.
Speaker 1: --Harmon, okay.  Richard Harmon.  All right.  And you still keep in touch with him, huh?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  So, yeah, so that's something about high school we missed.  But now we, I'm glad we went back to get it (laughter).
Story_ID: 625210
Speaker 1: So here you are at the University of Chicago, you're at this big, this political City of Chicago [Illinois] and, and you get involved in some campaign stuff.  I mean, what, what was the, what was the political environment like at the University of Chicago in terms of the voices that you were hearing and the organizations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, a lot of student activism.  It was a time when there were, you know, sit-ins at universities all across the country.  And in my last year there was a sit-in that went on months because the university decided it wouldn't send the police in to rouse the kids out and they kind of let the sit-in peter out.  But they also had sort of tribunals and disciplined the kids.  In my view they disciplined the people who were unapologetic of what, for what they did.  And the kids who were mea culpa, you know, didn't suffer the same consequences.  But it started out about denying tenure to one of the women on the faculty [Marlene Dixon] and it just sort of ballooned into a protest against everything I guess, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in 1969?
Speaker 2: No, it's so, it's, it's, I, I don't, it started in January I think of '69 [1969] something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was right before I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a member of any organizations on campus when you were, any political organizations?
Speaker 2: No, you know, my political involvement was in the larger community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I said things like the campaign for Paul Simon for treasurer in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I, I was president of my dorm in, in the second, in my second year and then I was a resident assistant for my third and fourth year.  So that, that kept me busy.
Story_ID: 625211
Speaker 1: The campaign for Paul Simon, how did you get involved in that?  It's, it, it doesn't seem to be, be on the surface something that would attract, you know, students to do anything.
Speaker 2: Well, I was invited by a teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was involved in the campaign.  It was one of the women in the athletic department [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I can't remember who.  The head of the athletic department, who knew I guess about my interest in politics and invited me to work on the campaign.  So, you know, I would go downtown and work in the campaign office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The, what did you, did you get, well, I, I, I know you got a chance to meet Paul Simon at some point but what--
Speaker 2: No, actually I never did.
Speaker 1: You d- really, okay.
Speaker 2: Not until much later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he's from downstate Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He, he was a congressman from, eventually from the Springfield [Illinois] area, you know, where Dick Durbin was the congressman after him--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and then, you know, succeeded him in the [U.S.] Senate as well.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Okay.  So what were the issues at stake in that campaign, do, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I just remember that I liked Paul Simon and what he stood for, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a, you know, a progressive Democrat and clearly a very smart and talented guy.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Now, were, were your family Democrats in Minnesota, I, I suppose (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I just remember the 1960 election and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --my mother [Beatrice Schuck Bailey] was a long time Republican and voted for Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] and my father [Samuel Reed] voted for Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  But after Kennedy became president I know my mother never supported any Republicans again.  You know, there was still, still a lot of black Republicans in the 19--well a lot of black people became Democrats under FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], you know, but in terms of consistently voting for Democrats I think pretty much after the 1960 election if you look at the demographics in this country African Americans have been Democrats, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right, that's a watershed election.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] versus Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] and everything after that.
Story_ID: 625212
Speaker 1: Were you, were there any people at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] going to, going south with, did, did you know anybody that was going south to work with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or, or any of the civil rights organizations?
Speaker 2: No, I was poor and I spent my summers working so I didn't, even if it had occurred to me I couldn't have afforded it (laughter).
Speaker 1: But did you know anybody that went down there?
Speaker 2: No, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I know people were going from all over the country, not--I don't know, you know, not great volume but there were people from northern universities going down south so I just wondered.  Now was, okay.  So your political involvement basically was in the community you said?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In these campaigns.  And your, what was your major in at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I usually say I had a dilettante's major.  It was general studies in the social sciences, so I took a lot of history and political science and economics.
Speaker 1: And who were some of, what are some of the courses that you remember the, the most?
Speaker 2: Well, Gerhard Meyer, who was a wonderful guy, a refugee from Germany in the 1930s, came to the University of Chicago to be a professor.  So he was the head of the general studies and the social sciences program and so I, I had a lot of, I took a lot of classes from him.  One of my favorite classes was by Richard Wade [Richard C. Wade]. Richard Wade was a urban historian.  So Gerhard Meyer and Richard Wade are the ones that I remember the best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, by the time I got to be a senior, you know, third and fourth year student, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin had left the university and gone south so I didn't get to take any classes from him.
Speaker 1: And yeah, you just read my mind, that, that was the next question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I, I didn't and I, it's too bad that was the, that was through, the trajectory of both of our lives but anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you take anything from William McNeill [William H. McNeill]?
Speaker 2: No, he taught Western Civ, and I had somebody else for Western Civ, so Western Civilization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I've pretty much exhausted my University of Chicago--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --historian list now so.  And he's famous for 'Plagues and Peoples' [William H. McNeill] and some of the other things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you take any courses over at the Oriental Institute [University of Chicago Oriental Institute, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ancient history or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. My interest has always been in American history and modern history.
Story_ID: 625213
Speaker 1: When I left the, you know, the joke was, at least when I was in school, that that going to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] as a college student prepared you to go to graduate school and that was about it.  So I went into the master of arts in teaching program and then I, I ended up getting a degree in, in, in history.  A master of arts in teaching degree in history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's what I did for ten years, I taught history.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so you stayed another two years to get your master of arts and--
Speaker 1: Right, well, I, I did the coursework, I never finished the paper until the mid-'70s [1970s] so I got my degree I think in '77 [1977] or something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I, I was there from '69 [1969] '70 [1970], and then we did our internships in '70 [1970] and '71 [1971], so I went, I, I started teaching in, in the fall of 1971.
Story_ID: 625214
Speaker 1: What was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: William Dawson [William L. Dawson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's, this is interesting now.  Tell us, tell the, whoever is watching this in the future who William Dawson was?
Speaker 2: William Dawson was a congressman from Chicago [Illinois] and he started out as a Republican because black people in the 1930s were Republicans.  He ran for office several times unsuccessfully as a Republican.  And then made the switch to the Democratic Party as the Depression [Great Depression] progressed and black people and white ethnics and working class people basically turned to the Democratic Party.  He was elected to [U.S.] Congress in the early 1940s, I think or 1942 or something I remember.  And he served in Congress until he died in the 1960s.  So he had a very long tenure and when he was in Congress he was the most powerful black congressman in the country.  He was the person that presidents went to when they were looking to appoint black people to federal posts.  He was head of the committee in charge of the postal service.  He was a, a fascinating person and somebody I had always, as a student, always been interested in, so he was the person I decided to write my paper on.  And the most fun I had was, I went around to everybody who would talk to me who knew him and interviewed them.  So I have a whole box of tapes of interviews of, and that's how I met c.  And I would just call people up and say, you know, I'm a student, a graduate student at the university.  So what happened was, I, I taught for four years and then I decided I wanted to get my degree so I took a year off and worked on my paper.  And so I just called up people and asked them if they would talk to me about Dawson and, and I got to talk to some amazing people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And among them John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what did John Stroger have to say about him?
Speaker 2: Well, he talked about the way in which he'd provided opportunities for younger black elected officials, people like him.  And, and John was particularly helpful to me because at the end of the interview, I said, you know, are there other people that you'd recommend that I talk to, and so he gave me a long list and said can I, you know, can I say that you suggested that I call them, and yes.  So I was somebody he didn't know, never met, called him up out of the blue, he spent an hour talking to me and then he helped me with the names of other people who might be helpful to me as well, I thought it was very generous of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Dawson when he was in Congress, I think the only other African American congressperson was Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Adam Clayton Powell, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And they were both, by the way they were polar opposites, Dawson was go along get along behind the scenes, very powerful man, and we all know Adam Clayton Powell, you know, a, a race man if there ever was one.  You know, very outspoken, flamboyant, kind of thumbing his nose at, at the powers that be.  So, they were quite a contrast and they did serve together.  And, and as you point out, for much of their mutual tenure, they were the only black Congressmen in, in the, in the House of Representatives.
Speaker 1: Did they have a working relationship that made any sense or--
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  Most of my paper was about sort of what Dawson did in Chicago and kind of how he rose to his position.  And the irony is, he was not elected to Congress until he was sixty-four years old.  So he spent a life in politics basically before he achieved what had always been his goal which is to be the black congressman from Chicago and at that time there was only one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he took the place of a Republican, Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest], right, I think?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: He didn't?
Speaker 2: --Arthur Dawson.
Speaker 1: Arthur, Arthur Dawson, okay.
Speaker 2: Not Arthur Dawson, what was his name, Arthur Mitchell [Arthur Wergs Mitchell], I think.
Speaker 1: Arthur Mitchell, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Arthur Mitchell.
Speaker 1: So Mitchell took the place of De Priest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --was, was Mitchell a Democrat or a Republican?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I think he was a Democrat.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Oscar De Priest, so Oscar De Priest was a congressman in the, in the 1920s.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was elected in 1920.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And he was at that time the only black congressman to serve in the House [U.S. House of Representatives] since Reconstruction.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And so he was, he was the titular black political leader in the country as congressman.  And he was, he was again a race man and a very flamboyant and outspoken person.  He, he, he got defeated and I think it was, I think it was Arthur Mitchell who defeated him and then, then Dawson, so I think that was the, the succession.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this like signals also the rise of the Democrats in Chicago, I guess, when, you know, Mitchell being a Democrat and then certainly Dawson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.   So they, that changes the, from what I've heard from some of the people we've interviewed it kind of changed the whole political tune of black politics in the city.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, black people had been Republicans since the Civil War and Reconstruction.  And it was really, you know, [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt that turned the black community around and more and more black people became, became Democrats.  But I think in Chicago it wasn't until the 1940s that the majority of the black community even was, was Democrats so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think some of the old time guys like A.A. "Sammy" Rayner [A.A. Rayner] and other people were still Republicans, very strong Republicans.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was in the '60s [1960s], yeah.  Yeah, so it was still, I think it's, it's, black people, black Republicans are such a clear minority now it's hard to remember the time when there were very prominent African American elected officials who were Republicans.
Story_ID: 625215
Speaker 1: So you, you're teaching in Chicago Public Schools, right, teaching history?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I taught at--
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at Calumet [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois], at 81st [Street] and May [Street].  I spent a year there, it was a very tough year.  And so I decided to take a different job and I went to work at Visitation High School in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], it was a Catholic girls school, and I loved it.  It was a great place, wonderful colleagues and great kids.  Then I took a year off to finish my master's [degree] paper and then I spent four years at Aquinas Dominican [Aquinas Dominican High School] in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], again a Catholic girls school.
Story_ID: 625216
Speaker 1: Around 19--I guess '72 [1972] or so we're at right, now, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--
Speaker 1: Oh, well, tell me about the, I can't, well, I know one thing, I'm, I'm slipping by and I shouldn't, the events of 1968, so many events in '68 [1968], the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], riots on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], what were, as somebody who's politically astute, a young person, what was your take on, on first the assassination of Dr. King and the, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it was devastating 'cause he was, you know, he was clearly an American hero.  And what I remember, my boyfriend at the time, now my husband [Preckwinkle's ex-husband, Zeus Preckwinkle], and I had tickets to go to the ballet, he was a big ballet fan.  I, I was not brought up in a family where you went to the ballet but anyway he was.  So we had tickets that night and we couldn't decide whether to go, we finally decided we would go although I, I spent the whole time thinking this is weird I'm at, you know, I'm at, sort of public event and it, it just feels out of place in time, you know, what I mean.  Anyway, I just, I remember that night, it was, it was awful.  And then in June, you know, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated and I was a supporter of Robert Kennedy not Eugene McCarthy because I believed that Kennedy was able to attract to his campaign the kind of diversity that he was gonna need to win, it wasn't just white college students like McCarthy, but it was black people and white ethnics and, you know, Catholics.  And, and that he, he was willing to challenge the entire establishment and particularly to challenge the comfortable, to comfort the afflicted and afflict the comfortable in a way that Eugene McCarthy, I, I thought Eugene McCarthy was sort of an elitist and all he really cared about was the war [Vietnam War] and, and the country faced so many more challenges that Robert Kennedy spoke to than just the war.  So both his assassination and Martin Luther King's assassination made it a very, very difficult year.  And then I was here in the summer of '68 [1968] because I had, I was behind and I needed to catch up and take some courses so that I could graduate the following June, and so the apartment that we lived in some of, some of my roommates brought, had friends who came in for the Democratic convention and so they stayed at our place and then went down to the demonstrations every day, which I didn't do, first of all because Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey] was my senator and I believed he was a good person, even though he was on the wrong side of the war issue.  And secondly, because it just seemed like at least the folks who stayed with us were looking for trouble when they went down there, which, you know, I'm, I wasn't, so I watched it on television.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you saw what everybody else saw, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, but I heard their stories too about how badly the police treated them and the provocative way in which the police treated them.
Speaker 1: And so you, you heard what most people did not hear, the people who returned telling the stories about what happened?
Speaker 2: Right, and getting beat up and, you know, just, you know, anyway.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--I know throughout your career as a politician you've been against police brutality and spoken out against it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was this the, I don't know, this is a early, I guess, this is a gross example of it, that it's always, you know--
Speaker 2: No, it--
Speaker 1: --focused on (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, no, it wasn't that, it was, my concerns about police brutality related to all the things I'd heard about how black people got treated not about how--although it was illuminating that the police were prepared to behave just as badly toward young white people as they were toward black people except that what happened in this city on a day to day basis was that black people were treated badly.  This was an extraordinary circumstance for these young white people to be treated this way by the police.
Story_ID: 625217
Speaker 1: Now how did you meet your hu-, your husband?  Now, he, was he a fellow student or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we were, we were students.  We, we, we worked together in Student Woodlawn Area Project it was a tutoring program.  So it was a student run organization and we recruited students to tutor kids from the high schools and they would come to campus and we would provide tutoring in whatever classes they needed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your husband is, is white, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did this, did this 'cause you any trepidation in terms of dating him and--
Speaker 2: Well, I liked him.  I, I always took some abuse for it but--and we've been married for forty-two years so it turned out okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have to say that, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now did, now I have to ask this question, when I first heard his name, somebody told me his, his name--
Speaker 2: Zeus [Preckwinkle's ex-husband, Zeus Preckwinkle].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: How did, how did this happen?  How did he get his name Zeus?
Speaker 2: So his name is Harry Zeus Preckwinkle.  When he was a little kid they called him Zeusy.  When he got old enough to go to school they called him Harry.  When he came to the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] he decided he didn't like Harry, he had never liked Harry, so he just told everyone his name was Zeus which is his middle.  So anybody who knows him from college on, knows him as Zeus, the people he grew up with in, in, Salem, Oregon, know him as Harry.  His father's name was Harry August [Harry Preckwinkle], his name is Harry Zeus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So was there like a, is, was his father a classist or something or--
Speaker 2: No, he had a friend whose nickname was Zeus so they gave Zeus, they gave Zeus that middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's makes quite a combination as you well know so.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It's unforgettable, it's unforgettable.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you've been married a long time and it's worked out, so I guess, that's all right.
Story_ID: 625218
Speaker 1: Okay.  19--I'm trying to think of when it was that Ralph Metcalfe got it, do, do you remember the incident with Ralph Metcalfe?
Speaker 2: Sure, he got in trouble 'cause one of his friends got, you know, pushed around by the police--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --so was a victim of police brutality, he spoke out against it and--
Speaker 1: And Doc Odom [Herbert "Doc" Odom], yeah, Doc Odom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And found himself in hot water with the powers that be in the Democratic Party for criticizing the police.  You know, Richard J. Daley didn't take criticism lightly wherever it came from.  And Metcalfe got himself in a lot of trouble.  And I think he was running for, for Congress and the regulars put up a, a candidate against him and so that was a campaign in which I worked hard for Metcalfe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, kind of explain to--Chicago [Illinois] is basically a Democratic city, all the elected officials are Democrats, pretty much.  But there's, it doesn't mean it's all, you know, monolithic; right?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came to Chicago there was sort of two parts of the Democratic Party, it's the, the lines have blurred a little over time but there was sort of the regular Democratic organization which was Richard J. Daley and all his allies and friends.  And then there was sort of the independent progressive Democrats.  And it's, now some people had a foot in both camps like Harold Washington but it was a pretty clear distinction.  And Metcalfe had always been on the regular organization side but basically got kicked into the independent progressive side because of his willingness to stand up for his friend who he felt was a victim of police brutality.  And then he got challenged in the Democratic primary, what was the guy's name, Erwin, Erwin, Erwin, and who was put up by the regulars to challenge Metcalfe and Metcalfe beat him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that, I know that was a big deal at that time.
Speaker 2: Right, Erwin France--
Speaker 1: Erwin France (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was his name.
Speaker 1: Right, Erwin France, that's right.
Speaker 2: Erwin France, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Erwin France.  So, so the regular Democrats put up a, challenged a sitting congressman in a Democratic primary which was extraordinary as retaliation for his willingness to stand up on the, on the issue of, of police brutality.
Story_ID: 625219
Speaker 1: Did you know Leon (pronunciation) Despres?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Despres.
Speaker 1: Despres, Despres.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Leon Despres. He was the alderman of the 5th Ward [Chicago, Illinois], and for a very long time the only alderman willing to speak up on civil rights issues even though there were black aldermen on the city council [Chicago City Council], they were, a part of what was called the Silent Six, and they never spoke up on anything, especially civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so Despres who represented an integrated ward on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] and Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], or maybe it was only Hyde Park and Woodlawn in those days but anyway, was the kind of thorn in the side of Richard J. Daley on many civil rights, human rights, housing issues.  And he was the conscious of the body.
Speaker 1: And now did you live in the 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] when, in, when you--
Speaker 2: No, I lived in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were teaching?
Speaker 2: --I lived in the 5th Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I lived in the 5th Ward.  The boundaries changed as a result of the 1980 election and then I ran in '83 [1983] and '87 [1987] and lost before I won in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was gonna mention that the predecessor of Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans] who is one of the most silent of the Silent Six--
Speaker 2: Claude Holman.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah, what, what did you know about him in those days or--
Speaker 2: Not much I, 'cause I lived in the 5th Ward and so I sort of paid attention to 5th Ward politics.  But, yeah, Tim Evans was his protege and when Claude Holman died Tim Evans I think it was in twenty-eight or something like that, was elected alderman.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, and I've heard an old timers say that Claude Holman was really silent as in terms of the Silent Six, he was the, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, it, you know, there was a lot of pressure on black aldermen to stay in line if you wanted, you know, if you had an opportunity to put people in jobs or to get contracts for people, all that was jeopardized if you stood up on civil rights issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: It's understandable, that doesn't mean it's excusable.
Story_ID: 625220
Speaker 1: Now you taught school, you, you--now, how did you make the transition from, you, you, you, you stopped teaching school at a certain point right and what did you, what did you do?
Speaker 2: My son [Kyle Preckwinkle] was born in 1981 and I stopped teaching.  I, I needed a job that was sort of nine to five [o'clock]. Jobs--you know, when I was teacher you not only, not only do you teach during the day but you'd grade papers at night and I always thought it was important to support my students in, in extracurricular activities so I was a debate coach and I tried to go to the basketball teams and--games and cheer on the girls since I had been a basketball player.  So after my son was born I, I left teaching so that was 1981.  And had a series of, of part time jobs until I ran for, for alderman in 1983 and lost.  I ran for, I, I, I came on board let's see and I, I worked for a neighborhood, the Hyde Park Neighborhood Club [Chicago, Illinois] helping do development work, raise money for a big building project.  And then worked for the City of Chicago [Illinois] under Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's not speed past these things (laughter).
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: The first, the big thing is, I guess '83 [1983] this running for, how did you decide to run for--
Speaker 2: Well, I'd worked, I'd--
Speaker 1: --and what made you decide to run for alderman?
Speaker 2: --I'd worked for Larry Bloom [Lawrence Bloom] who was alderman, who got elected alderman of, of the 5th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] in 1979.  I was very involved in his campaign.  I was the precinct coordinator so that means I was in charge of field operations.
Speaker 1: So Bloom succeeded Leon Despres?
Speaker 2: Well, there was an, there was an intervening person--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whose name I can't remember at the moment, who served for four years and then Larry Bloom defeated him.  So Len Despres retired and didn't anoint anybody as his successor and there was a bitter, brutal battle about who would succeed him.  And, and as I said I can't remember the guy's name but he was elected for four years.  And then challenged by Larry Bloom and Larry Bloom, I think there was a feeling in the community that this guy wasn't sufficiently independent given the, the legacy of Len Despres, and so Larry basically portrayed himself as a, as the better heir to the, to the legacy of, of Len Despres and was narrowly elected in 1979 and served until I think 1995.  So I worked in his first campaign and I decided that I would run myself if I had an opportunity.  And then there was redistricting as a result of the 1980 census, and I found myself although I was still living in the same place in the 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois], so I ran for alderman.  I got into a runoff and I lost.  And in 1987 I ran again and I, as I said I was elected in 1991 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 625221
Speaker 1: Now, all this is true but I wanna go back to '83 [1983], this is the election of Harold Washington.  So did you play any part in the Harold Washington campaign (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We worked hard for Harold in both the primary and the general election.
Speaker 1: And how did you come into it, you know, 'cause we were discussing a few minutes ago about the plebiscites that were held on black community, in the black community by Lu Palmer's [HistoryMaker Lutrell "Lu" F. Palmer, II] wife, Jorja [HistoryMaker Jorja Palmer], and the drafting of Harold Washington and other potential candidates at a certain point and then--
Speaker 2: You know, when--when was it?  Seventy-seven [1977], when Richard J. Daley died there was a special election to elect the mayor.  Harold Washington was a candidate then for mayor, so I worked for him.  And that's how I got to know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I thought he was smart and talented.  And then in--
Speaker 1: He was a state senator then I think, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then I think in '78 [1978] he ran for [U.S.] Congress, was that right?  Seventy--
Speaker 1: It was '79 [1979].  I think he came in in '80 [1980] with [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage, they both came in at the, no, maybe, yeah, you're right, I think, you're right '78 [1978], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he came in in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was there before Gus Savage (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause they would have been sworn in in January after the election.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So he w- so he ran, he was a state senator, he ran for mayor in the special election in '77 [1977] and lost but in my view he was clearly the best candidate so I worked for him.  And then in '78 [1978] he ran for Congress so we supported him then.  And then '79 [1979] was the aldermanic election, '80 [1980] he ran for reelection, and '82 [1982] he ran for reelection right before the '83 [1983] mayoral election.
Speaker 1: Right.  'Cause I think he and Gus Savage both won in '80 [1980], I guess when they, you know, that, that sound right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think he, I think he won in '78 [1978].  I think--
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 2: So, so he was a congressman--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --like for four years, so four and a half years and then he--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --became mayor, I think that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So maybe (unclear) yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because if he was elected in '78 [1978] he would have come on board in '79 [1979].  See I don't think he came on board in, in, in '80 [1980] 'cause then he would have come on board in '81 [1981], he would only have been a congressman for a couple of years, I think he was a congressman for a little longer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Okay.  All right.  And I'm trying to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that was a watershed election and, you know, he was clearly the best candidate and won a bitter Democratic primary and then, you know, the general election which shouldn't have been anything 'cause this is a Democratic town, was also, you know, extremely bitter.  Bernie Epton who was a state representative from, you know, my community, the Mid-South Side [Chicago, Illinois] was the Republican candidate against Harold Washington and they ran these commercials which I'll never forget, you know, Bernie Epton, before it's too late.  You know, and what is that supposed to mean?  Too late before a black man gets elected mayor of Chicago [Illinois]?  I mean, that's the implicit message.  It was pretty, pretty clearly racist.  Anyway that was the way the whole campaign was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, people have said that Bernard Epton really wasn't so racist a guy and it haunted him the rest of his life that he was involved in something like that.
Speaker 2: No, he was actually pretty decent and he was a moderate Republican, a pretty decent guy.  And but he let himself be used in a way that is pretty reprehensible.
Story_ID: 625222
Speaker 1: When you ran for 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] alderman did, did the Harold Washington group support you or--
Speaker 2: So there's an interesting and unfortunate story about that.  In the summer of 1982 I went to see Harold and I told him that I was gonna run for alderman and he knew me because I had worked for him in '87 [1987]--I had worked for him in '78 [1978], I had worked for him in '80 [1980].  And although I wasn't an elected official, I had a lot of friends in the 4th Ward and we had kind of our own kind of rump organization so I asked him for his support and, and he said, of course, he would support me.  And as I turned to walk out he patted me on the behind and said, "Good luck, honey."  And I thought, this man is a United States congressman and somebody I've known and admired for a long time and you've just behaved extraordinarily badly.  And I was young enough not to turn around and tell him he was a jerk but that's what I thought (laughter).  And it turned out that he didn't support me, he supported Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans].  Although he never did it publicly, his people supported Tim.
Speaker 1: Worked for Tim Evans?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  'Cause a lot, so much was going on and such excitement, so much was rolling in those days.  I wasn't even sure what happened.  I was, I, I worked on the Harold Washington campaign but I'm not even sure what the, those dynamics were, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, it--
Speaker 1: You just-
Speaker 2: --I think there were decisions made locally about how resources got allocated to particular aldermanic candidates and not everybody who worked on the campaign knew that.  I was going around on precincts in, in the, in the runoff, the general election in '83 [1983] and I found one of my students outside a polling place, one of my former students from, from Aquinas [Aquinas Dominican High School, Chicago, Illinois], and she had come back from college to work in the election and didn't realize that I was a candidate and she had had, she had literature for Harold Washington and for Tim Evans, so anyway.  But, you know, they basically out of, out of Operation Push [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] they sent people out into the 4th Ward to work for Tim Evans and Harold.
Story_ID: 625223
Speaker 1: So, between '83 [1983] and '87 [1987], what, what, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Hyde Park Neighborhood Club [Chicago, Illinois] which was a neighborhood social service agency on their capital campaign.  In '85 [1985] I went to work in the Washington [Harold Washington] administration.  I worked there from '85 [1985] to '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: And how did that come about, the, you just get a--
Speaker 2: I told him that I'd like to work in the administration so I was hired as a low level planner.  And I, I'd worked as a planner for the State of Illinois between teaching jobs in the '70s [1970s] so I had some experience there.  I ended up working in the Department of Economic Development [City of Chicago Department of Economic Development] from, which doesn't exist anymore, it got folded into the Department of Planning and now the Department of Housing and Economic Development [sic. City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development] but it, it, it focused on job retention, attraction, working with manufacturing, particularly looking at the steel industry which had always been a, a strong sector in the Chicago regional economy.  And then apparel, I was working on an apparel task force to look at how we could support the apparel industry in Chicago [Illinois] because it was a time when we were bleeding jobs in, in, in clothing manufacturing where we--we'd actually been in the '50s [1950s] the sort of housedress capital of the United States.  And most of the housedresses in the country were made in Chicago but of course as women entered the work force and people changed the way they dressed, women didn't wear housedresses anymore and so that industry kind of collapsed.  And we were trying to figure out how the city government could be supportive of clothing manufacturing in the city and how it could be supportive of steel making and related industries.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was South Works still open, the big, the big plant on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I know, I wasn't involved in the steel task force but I know that there was a lot of concern about the diminishing role of steel manufacturing as opposed to steel related industries.  Chicago is a great producer of springs for example which are made out of steel, everything from, you know, pens to springs in your car or truck, so it's, they're an important part of a lot of mechanical equipment.  And so there, there was a focus not just on making of raw steel but all of the steel related manufacturing that went on in the region but I don't remember whether South Works was, was open then or not.
Story_ID: 625224
Speaker 1: Were you thinking during this time I'm gonna run again for alderman when I get a chance, I mean in '87 [1987] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I ran in, in 1987 'cause I figured I needed to be seen as somebody who wasn't gonna give up, and the loyal opposition.  And then, of course, Harold [Harold Washington] died in November of 1987 and I ran in 1991 and Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans] did not have the benefit of the mayor's support and frankly I think that made the difference.  I won by a 109 votes.  If Harold had been alive and was mayor, I never would have been elected because Tim Evans was his floor leader.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what did you see in the 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] that needed to be done that that Alderman Evans wasn't doing or, or, what was your, what was your vision for the 4th Ward?
Speaker 2: The 4th Ward has always been, there's been a real dichotomy between Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and, and South Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] which were university communities and racially integrated and economically diverse.  And then the Grand Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois] and North Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] and Oakland [Chicago, Illinois] and Douglas [Chicago, Illinois] parts of the ward were, the communities had been devastated by fires and demolition and gang activity and drug activity.  And I felt that it was important to put a lot of energy into trying to stabilize and rebuild those communities.  And to do that you needed to be a full time alderman and focused on, on that revitalization vision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So implicit in that is that Tim Evans wasn't focusing on this full time, you know?
Speaker 2: He was a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he practiced law full time and was an alderman part time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is this largely true in the City of Chicago [Illinois] do, do aldermen--
Speaker 2: In 1991 when I was first elected there was kind of a seat change.  There were more than twenty new people elected out of the fifty members of the body and almost all of them were full time, were full time aldermen.  And previously, partly because the pay was so low, when I first came there the pay was fifty five thousand dollars a year but when Len Despres was a aldermen in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], the salary was like six or seven thousand dollars a year.  So virtually everybody had to have a different job and, you know, they were a part time aldermen 'cause you, the pay wasn't enough to survive on.  So people were lawyers or they sold insurance or they did something besides being a aldermen.  But in 1991 the salary was raised and, and almost all of the new class was, was full-time aldermen.  And over time, by the time I left, virtually, there, there was only a small percentage of people who did something else I would say, you know, there, maybe a dozen people who had other jobs but just about everybody was a full time alderman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the time I left, that was twenty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again over time we'd raised the salary so that people could be full time aldermen and support themselves and their family.
Story_ID: 625225
Speaker 1: Now, back, back to '87 [1987] for a moment 'cause being a Chicagoan I have to ask you this question.  Can you remember what you were doing when you heard Harold Washington passed away?
Speaker 2: I, I was working for the city [Chicago, Illinois] at the time, it was hard to believe, so it wasn't, you know, it was, by the afternoon the word came down that he'd passed away.  And so I was at my desk, 20 North Clark [Street].
Speaker 1: What was the mood around the place, I mean, what--
Speaker 2: It was really somber because the department I was in was, you know, there--there were a lot of old timers who resisted Harold Washington in the city bureaucracy but the department that I was in, the Department of Economic Development [City of Chicago Department of Economic Development; City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development] was created by Harold Washington so it was full of people who were loyalist to him so it was very somber and discouraging.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] Aldermen Evans [Timothy C. Evans] was the floor leader for Harold Washington at that time, right, in '87 [1987], and there was a move to, you know, well, the death of Harold Washington eventually generated a campaign for mayor on his part, right, against--
Speaker 2: Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Gene Sawyer, right.  Did, did you have an analysis of, of the Sawyer/Evans race?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all I had known Gene Sawyer for a very long time.  His, his kids went to the school where my, his grandchildren went to school where my husband [Preckwinkle's ex-husband, Zeus Preckwinkle] taught so I got to know him in that way.  And, you know, the irony is in, in the way in this, history has treated this, Gene Sawyer has been made out to be a villain.  But, but the interesting thing was in 1983 when, when Harold Washington was elected he was the first Democratic African American committeeman, Gene Sawyer, to support Harold and to support him strongly when lots of other Democratic committeemen equivocated.  You know, John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] supported Daley [Richard M. Daley], Tim Evans had Jane Byrne on his election day passing materials.  So the black committeemen were not all on board for Harold.  Harold won not because he got support from the regular Democratic organization but because he got support, overwhelming support from the black community with or without the support of Democratic committeemen.  But Gene Sawyer was one of the stand up people who supported him from the very beginning.
Speaker 1: Well, how do you, do, do, do you have any analysis of how he and I think there were six black aldermen switched from the, what was called the Harold Washington coalition to the Ed Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak], Ed Burke [Edward M. Burke] side.  How did that, that, you know, people in the community perceived it like that that they jumped ship for some, for some reward, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I think that that Ed Vrdolyak and Ed Burke definitely didn't want Tim Evans who had been Mayor Washington's floor leader to become mayor, they wanted somebody who they thought they'd have more influence with and that turned out to be Gene Sawyer.  And they didn't think they could get away with supporting somebody who wasn't African American so the question is, of the African American aldermen, and, and the choice had to be made out of the body, those were the rules, who would they support.  And, and Gene Sawyer took the job.  I'm not sure, given what happened to him afterwards, I'm not sure that was the best choice for him.
Story_ID: 625226
Speaker 1: We were just saying in the break that [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer told, told us that Addie Wyatt [HistoryMaker Reverend Addie Wyatt] really pushed him over the edge to take the position, you know, to be, become the candidate for mayor.
Speaker 2: Claude [Claude S. Wyatt, Jr.] and Addie Wyatt were co-pastors, I think it's Vernon Park [Vernon Park Church of God, Lynwood, Illinois] is that--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Baptist church?  And close friends of his, his whole life and strong supporters.  And I know they were down there that night.  And as you said and I was unaware, Addie really encouraged him to, to take the position.  You know, it was an opportunity. But the way in which it played out, I think crippled Gene in terms of his ability to draw support from the African American community and to be an effective mayor.  It was such a bitter, controversial process and, you know.
Speaker 1: I think it's what puzzles me and I don't know if you have any idea about it but why would he--
Speaker 2: Allow himself to be used (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) take that route to the, you know, take--
Speaker 2: Allow himself--
Speaker 1: --take, take that route, you know, to the, to, to, to be mayor because it, as you said it kind of crippled--
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: --his status and I don't know.
Speaker 2: --I think there are a lot of people in city council [Chicago City Council] who would like to be mayor and this was a, this was probably a once in a lifetime opportunity for him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, Anna--
Speaker 2: Langford [HistoryMaker Anna Langford]?
Speaker 1: --Langford.  There was like six that took the, you know.
Speaker 2: Bill Beavers [William Beavers].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know who else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just seemed like it was, I couldn't see the, I mean, a lot of people in the community just couldn't see the sense in it, I mean, at that point.  Well, we knew power was at stake but, you know.
Speaker 2: But I think, you know, I think from what I've heard from other people, there was a reluctance within the body to support Tim [Timothy C. Evans], he didn't have a, Harold Washington didn't allow anybody else to establish a power base, it was all focused on him.  And so even people like Tim who was the floor leader didn't, didn't really have any separate base from which to draw strength in that kind of circumstance, so.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, I know we often, I think those of us who are not directly in politics but think about, you know, who is really progressive in the black community when you see the body of people that supported Harold Washington.  We had a, all the black aldermen supported him at one time but it seemed to me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not all of 'em supported him willingly.  Some of them supported him only because that's what they had to do for their constituents.  It's wasn't that they had any respect for Harold or his politics, it was just brutal political reality.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I'm getting at and I just, you know, you just, you just confirmed it, you know, basically that's what, yeah, so.  So, in, so Eugene Sawyer as mayor though it's, a lot of people say he tried to implement the policies of Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: Of course, he did. For which he'll never get any credit but, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And but the general public doesn't seem to realize that.
Speaker 2: General black public.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (laughter). So why do you say it like that, the general black public doesn't realize it?
Speaker 2: Because, because I don't know how, I don't know he's seen in the white community but I surely know how he's seen in the black community and as I said his, his reputation as a good and effective public servant was forever harmed by the way in which he got to be mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's somebody, I, you know, I liked and supported when he ran.  You know, the decision of, of Tim Evans to, to run for mayor ensured that neither of them would get elected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his election of 1991, I guess, right, when--
Speaker 2: No, 1989.
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay.
Speaker 2: There was a special election (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) that's right, that's right, special.
Speaker 2: So Harold died in November of--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of, of 1987 and there was a lawsuit which said that because he had just been there in office for six months there should be a special election to replace him and that went through the courts.  And there was a decision by the courts that yes, there had to be a special election.
Speaker 1: That's right, you're right, you're right.  Okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So the election was in the middle of the four year term that Harold would have served.
Story_ID: 625227
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did you continue to work with the Department of Economic Development [City of Chicago Department of Economic Development; City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I worked with the Department of Economic Development until 1988 and then I took a job as head of the Chicago Jobs Council, which was an advocacy organization that focused on employment issues and it was an organization that I'd worked with when I was in, when I was in city government, that's one of the organizations that I worked with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you, can you kind of--how did Chicago [Illinois] politics change during that period?  Now, this is a big transition period it seems to me.
Speaker 2: The 1980s?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, late, yeah, the '80s [1980s] and then the '90s [1990s] it kind of does another kind of flip--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Well, you have to understand the national situation is that Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is president, you know, a really conservative--and I didn't like Ronald Reagan very much so. A really conservative Republican, you know.  These are the days in which ketchup is a vegetable in school lunches and that kind of stuff, you remember?  I mean, it's a tax on every social program that you can think of that benefits the poor and since black people are disproportionately poor it benefits us, you know.  And tax on welfare and the implication that everybody who is on welfare is a crook and, you know, welfare cheats and, you know, I mean, crime in the street, I mean, attacks on black people sometimes overtly racist, sometimes covertly racist, just an awful environment.  And I think there was a deliberate effort on the part of the federal prosecutors to, to destroy Harold [Harold Washington] and so there were federal investigations of the city council [Chicago City Council] and a lot of city council members went to jail in the '80s [1980s] and I think it was all an effort to try to get Harold.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I remember the first, the first group included Cliff Kelley [Clifford Kelley] and some others (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were mostly black aldermen.  I mean, you know, the black aldermen were a very small percentage of the whole body but, you know, disproportionately they're the ones that went off to jail in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And, well the way things are done in Chicago you'd, you'd have to find that suspicious, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my view is they were trying to get people so they could flip 'em and get 'em to turn on Harold, I mean, that's what I thought.
Speaker 1: Now, Harold himself was never really found guilty of anything though I'm sure they were investigating him, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the 1977 campaign when he first ran for mayor, you know, he hadn't paid his taxes and so, you know, he got into trouble for that.  In my view that was a reflection of his own disorganization and whatever but, you know, so that was held against him.  But he, he never, he never abused the public trust.  But I think, and as I said, I think the, the federal prosecutors were all Republicans, right, you know, this is Reagan years and Reagan appointees, you know, I think they, they, they were coming after Harold and they tried to do it by, by getting black aldermen and seeing if they could flip people, 'cause that's their favorite strategy.
Story_ID: 625228
Speaker 1: So, so you were working for, for Chicago Jobs Counc- Council [Chicago Jobs Council] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eight--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --nineteen eighty-eight [1988] to '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about, now, now you had a working relation with, with Judge Pincham, right, [Historymaker] R. Eugene Pincham?  Is he someone that's important in your--
Speaker 2: In 1991 he was running for mayor, we supported him.  Two days later he came out and supported Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans] for reelection so (laughter) I had an interesting relationship with him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, this is, this is a recurring, this is almost like with Harold, the same thing.  So how do you, well, how do you account for that?  I mean, is there any way to analyze this?
Speaker 2: How do you account for it?   I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --people are responsible for their conduct that's how I account for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  All right.  Well, yeah, Pincham didn't, he, he didn't have--no black politicians in those days could, could seem to muster the same kind of support that Harold Washington had (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, what, what I think what happened with the black community after the, the Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]/Evans split is that it was divided and there was so much, acrimony and finger pointing, you know.  A black elected official was mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois] and because of the fight over his succession, there hasn't been a black mayor since, so.
Speaker 1: Not even a serious candidate in some ways in terms of having a chance to win.
Speaker 2: No, I mean, and the, you know, in the last couple of elections no, no prominent black elected official was even, even ran against Daley [Richard M. Daley].  I mean, early on, you know, Congressman Rush [HistoryMaker Bobby Rush] and Congressman Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], you know, were candidates so they were people of stature whether they had organized campaigns and money is another story but, you know, as time wore on, no prominent black elected official was willing to run for mayor.
Story_ID: 625229
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the election of, in 1991, now this is where you're elected alderman of the 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois], you, you said earlier that the difference was that there's no Harold Washington to back--
Speaker 2: Well, I only won by a 109 votes and it's very hard to beat an incumbent alderman and if, if that incumbent alderman had also had the support of Harold Washington I don't think I would have won.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Because Harold Washington was so popular in the black community that virtually everybody he supported got elected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did, now what, what was your grass roots support like in the 4th Ward?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I had, I had very strong support in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and South Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I had lived there for, since I was a, a college student so I came here in 1965 and I lived in, I've lived in Hyde Park since 1965.  So I, I, I knew a lot of people, I had been involved in community organizations.  I didn't know a lot of people outside of Hyde Park and South Kenwood, so in Grand Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois] and North Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] and Oakland [Chicago, Illinois].  I did really well in Hyde Park, I lost pretty much every precinct outside of Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: I'm just guessing there's a high voter turnout in Hyde Park?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we won because there was a higher voter turnout and I got one of the newspaper endorsements, the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] endorsed me and the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] endorsed Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: So I got a little bit of newspaper support, I had a lot of support from having lived in the community and knowing lots of people in community organizations.
Speaker 1: So what was your, what was, what was on your agenda in, in the 4th Ward after you were elected?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said earlier, you know, the Hyde Park and South Kenwood communities are racially diverse, economically diverse, and, and historically have been pretty healthy.  But during that campaign and actually during both the previous losing campaigns, one of the things I said was that there was just a great disparity in the, in the ward between those healthy communities and the struggling communities that were to the west and to the north, and those communities were almost entirely African American.  They had virtually the same housing stock, same access to the lake, but they were communities that had been devastated by, you know, arson fires and demolition, so you'd go down a block and maybe there are only two or three houses left standing or an apartment building left standing and everything else is, you know, green grass.  Gang and drug activity, there was a lot of gang presence in the 1991 elections.  So my view was, what I, what I said from the very beginning is I was elected by the people who would elect me but I was gonna serve the people who needed service the most.  And the people who needed service the most were clearly not the people of Hyde Park and South Kenwood but the people in these other struggling communities.  So what I, what I decided I would do would focus my attention on rebuilding and revitalizing the communities in the western and the northern part of ward and that was my mission for nineteen years.
Story_ID: 625230
Speaker 1: So in 1991, now, now were you the alderman for the, what was the, the old Oakland Theatre [Oakland Square Theater, Chicago, Illinois] in your ward?
Speaker 2: You mean, the headquarters of the El Rukns?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that became, yeah.   Which at one time it had been the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] at one time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and, and--
Speaker 2: It, it, it was demolished before I became alderman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A big, a big ceremonial event which the alderman of the ward did not attend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, were, were the Darrow Homes [Clarence Darrow Homes, Chicago, Illinois] in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in your, okay.
Speaker 2: The Darrow Homes were part of Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  And in the, in the middle of the 1990s we began a community planning process around what should happen with Ida B. Wells that resulted in the new community that's coming there now called Oakwood Shores [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 19--I guess it was 1991 or '2 [1992], the public radio here in Chicago [Illinois] did a piece, and I think, well, I can't think of the, the producer of it, I think it was Ira Glass [sic. Dave Isay] that did it but I think he, he gave like some kids some recorders and they went out in the neighborhood and just recorded what was going on.  And the resulting tape was 'Ghetto Life 101.'  So this is broadcast all over the country and so people are focusing on your ward as the heart of the ghetto, you know, basically for America.  They even made a, a made for TV movie about it, a book, and everything else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they wrote a book 'Our America' ['Our America: Life and Death on the South Side of Chicago,' LeAlan Jones and Lloyd Newman] or something like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Our America,' right, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I've forgotten, remind of the two young men involved?
Speaker 1: LeAlan Jones and I can't think of his friend's name [Lloyd Newman].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, LeAlan Jones is still around.  I don't know about his friend.
Speaker 1: Le and, I can't think of his friend but that's, but the, so this is, I know Hyde Parkers were aware of that, you know, and, and what was going on over there, and, and so I'm, did that like, that and the, the, the kid that that was dropped out of the window (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was thrown out of the window.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In the same neighborhood and which was a, a follow up report by LeAlan and his friend, you know, covered that, they, they interviewed the kids and the people in the neighborhood around that incident.  The, the kid, the kid's name was Eric Morse, right, right, he made the cover of, I think Newsweek or something, you know, and thrown out of a window.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he, 'cause he refused to steal.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, so I mention these to say this, this is a rough area and it even gets national attention for being rough.  So what was your plan for the people that live there?
Speaker 2: So there was public housing in, in the 4th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] along the lake front, along Drexel Boulevard.  There were some scattered sites, and there was Ida B. Wells.  There were a lot of good people in, in public housing but basically the, CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] leadership had abandoned them for decades.  You know, Charles Swibel, ran the public housing authority and he ran it as his personal fiefdom and basically bled it in every way that you could bleed it.  And Vince Lane [HistoryMaker Vincent Lane] became head of the housing authority, I don't know if it was late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s] and tried to focus on making them better places.  But--so I'll give you, I'll give you an example.  In the high rise public housing buildings, in many of them it was the gangbangers and the drug dealers that controlled access to the building.  What I found for the high rise buildings is the only way you could get control of them was to assign police there twenty-four hours a day and have 'em walk the buildings.  And city government was not prepared to do that so when somebody got killed, we'd get that kind of attention for a while and then it would stop and then it would be the gangs and the drug dealers that controlled the buildings again.  And the good people just tried to keep their heads down and stay out of the way.  And, of course, there were people who were involved in that gang and drug activity.  So, I mean, we condemned our very poorest citizens to what I called high-rise concentration camps, places where people were denied personal safety, you know, opportunity, schools that served them were terrible, what public housing became in the City of Chicago is a disgrace and a terrible reflection on everybody who had anything to do with the public policy decisions that were made.
Story_ID: 625231
Speaker 1: So, I, I got to the point where I decided that the only way to make change given that there was no commitment to put the resources in to make them, first, I mean, it's hard to work with people when they don't, when you don't feel safe, the first thing you gotta do is provide people with a safe environment and they weren't willing to invest the police resources to do that so the only thing to do is take the buildings down and try to build a different kind of environment in which there were, first of all it was mixed income, so there were market rate and working families as well as public housing families.  And secondly, they weren't, these high rise buildings which had just been, I mean, it's possible for, for families to live in high rise buildings but many of the high rise buildings in this city are not occupied mostly by families but by young singles, by older people, and, we, we put our, some of our largest families in these high-rise buildings, as I said, concentrating and isolating the poor.  So I said we're gonna, you know, basically I, over time I came to the conclusion that we had to take down the high rises and try to build mixed income communities on, on that, on those footprints and so that's what we've tried to do.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, the area, that area over there is, it looks beautiful now.  And it's--
Speaker 1: Oakwood Shores [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it looks beautiful.  But I wondered, I, I, 'cause I don't know, you know, like where, where did the poor people go? Are they still there living in some of the, the housing or--
Speaker 1: Some of them have their Section 8 vouchers and live in the community.  But large numbers of public housing residents within Chicago [Illinois], not just in my ward [4th Ward, Chicago, Illinois], but along the State Street corridor and the 3rd Ward [Chicago, Illinois], moved either further south or into the south suburbs, like Robbins [Illinois] or Harvey [Illinois] or.  What I, what I often said is we had, we had a reasonable policy for taking the buildings down but we didn't have a reasonable policy for relocating the residents and distributing them around the city so they, instead of having vertical poverty, we had horizontal, we substituted horizontal poverty, that is some neighborhoods were disproportionately impacted and ended up with a lot of public housing residents which destabilized them because there were no services for them and no special, for example, police, police protection or other support for them, for those communities.  So we had a reasonable policy to dissemble public housing, we did not have a reasonable policy to relocate people and to provide them the supports they needed to be successful in other communities.
Speaker 2: Now, was there a, was there a struggle in city council [Chicago City Council] around, over that kind of thing?  'Cause I know in Chicago the housing issues (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, a lot of, there were, there were a number, there were a number of black aldermen who were resentful of the fact that they were now gonna have public housing residents in their communities and they were perfectly happy to have a relatively hand- small number of African American wards impacted by the very poorest of the poor.  So I got into it with some of my colleagues who didn't like the fact that they were getting public housing residents into their communities.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know like quite a few public housing residents went to, some went to Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois], some went to South Shore [Chicago, Illinois], I know, I, I hear them mentioned a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, South Shore.
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: But, you know, as I said, suburbs like, like Harvey, you know, Robbins, you know, or, you know, communities around Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, illinois], Roseland [Chicago, Illinois], so the, so as I said we substituted vertical poverty for horizontal poverty 'cause people were now concentrated in a handful of neighborhoods but, but across the neighborhood rather than in the high rises on the State Street corridor or in my ward.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, so this, this development takes place throughout the '90s [1990s], you know; right?
Speaker 1: Well, it started, we started talking about revitalizing public housing in the '90s [1990s].  The official CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] transformation plan I think was, was begun in 1999 so or about 2000 so it's about a, it's a little more than a decade old now.  It was ten-year plan for transformation.  And what I had said at the time was this is a great idea except ten years is too short of a time frame, it's like twenty or thirty years and that's surely what it's gonna be.
Story_ID: 625232
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994], I'm just trying to go chronologically here, there was a big scandal in the city [Chicago, Illinois] in regards to Mel Reynolds, the congressman from the 2nd district (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congressional district [2nd congressional district].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: The successor to [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, he was accused of taking advantage of a young woman.  It's pretty reprehensible behavior.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think, I think they pretty much proved the case.  There's, I know he was--
Speaker 2: On the other hand if every man who would, took advantage of young women was prosecuted in the way he was, our jails would be full, so, you know.  I, the question is whether he deserved to be prosecuted for what he did but the question is whether he was singled out because he was a prominent black elected official for, you know, what I'm saying?  I'm not saying that he didn't do what he was accused of, he was convicted, you know, and he went to prison, but the question is, you know, I'm sorry, but I believe there's selective prosecution in this country and that some people are more likely to be prosecuted for the crimes they commit than other people.
Story_ID: 625233
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, this is like 1994, I guess, when this happens.  In, okay.  Now, his, his seat being opened set in some, set some things in motion and they, some of them they involved [HistoryMaker] Alice Palmer, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], a lot of people so, do you have any thoughts about what, what the aftermath of all that Mel Reynolds?
Speaker 2: Well, as you're probably aware, Alice Palmer was the state senator for my community and further south and she decided, rather than run for reelection as state senator she would run for Congress and it was a time when she had to choose, her term was up, she had to choose.  So she decided to run for [U.S.] Congress.  She was unsuccessful in that effort.  And actually in November of the previous year she was at a press conference where Barack Obama announced his intention to run for her seat and she endorsed him, I was there.  She gave him her blessing.  He won the Democratic primary in that March, she lost the Second congressional Democratic primary to [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr., she wasn't the only one in the race, you know, Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] was in that race and, you know, it was sort of a--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Monique Davis, right.
Speaker 2: Monique Davis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, there were a bunch of very prominent black elected officials who were in that race and who were not successful.  Anyway, so Jesse Jackson, Jr. won. She decided that Barack Obama should step aside for her so she could run for reelection to the state senate, he refused.  She tried to be a third party candidate, in the November election unsuccessfully.  So he was elected to the state senate and that was the beginning of his remarkable political career.
Speaker 1: Now, Alice Palmer is one of the beloved black politicians on the, and seen as a progressive and everything and that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --seemed like really a shame to lose her in that, that way but the, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my, my position then and now is the same.  She made a choice.  I didn't encourage her to run for Congress.  I thought actually, not that she would have listened to me, but I thought, you know, I thought it was a fool's errand, you know, there are half a dozen candidates, your chances are, are not very good of being elected especially since they're all elected officials, it's not just, you know, half a dozen people off the street who decide they're gonna run for this race, one of whom is Jesse Jackson, Jr. who can draw on a, on a national fundraising base as a result of his father's work.  I mean, this is a, a very difficult proposition at the very best but she decided she wanted to do it and I don't begrudge her that choice.  It's just that afterwards when she came back to me and asked me if I would support her, I said, "No, you, chose to do this, you blessed Barack, I promised to support him, I'm not gonna, if he wants to step aside for you that's one thing but I'm not gonna encourage him to do that," and of course he refused.  And I don't think she's ever forgiven me.
Speaker 1: I hate to hear that.  But in terms of Jesse Jackson, Jr. the, how, how much do you think name recognition played a part in his election?
Speaker 2: Well, name recognition and the resources of his family upon which he could draw made all the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I believe a curious, I, I vaguely remember a curious case where they, Republicans tried to run a, a man named Jesse Jackson against him (laughter) on the ballot to confuse the voters.  Did you, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the Shaw brothers [William Shaw and Robert Shaw] put somebody up to that.
