Story_ID: 360536
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And this should, goes also for Mrs. Powell's [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] interview which we did earlier.  Anyway, I would like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us?
Speaker 2: Michael Kevin Powell [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], M-I-C-H-A-E-L, K-E-V-I-N, P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the Kevin, came?
Speaker 2: As best I know it's the name of the son of some good military family friends of my parents.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 23rd, 1963.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location where we are at?
Speaker 2: We're in McLean, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Chairman of the M.K. Powell Group, a consultancy firm.  And recently, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission [FCC].
Story_ID: 360537
Speaker 1: I want to ask five questions, some People magazine-ish.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Cape Cod, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, not many people--purple.  See, this is what I'm saying (laughter).  This is not--[HistoryMaker] Michael Powell is a mystery.
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I like being a mystery.  That's good.
Story_ID: 360538
Speaker 1: I want you to tell me about your mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] and what you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: Wow.  My mother, to me, is an extraordinarily special person for reasons I think most people may not immediately grasp.  You know, when you grow up the son of a military man [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], who goes to war two and three times in your lifetime, there are these huge periods, year-long periods, where you never see your father.  And those are formative moments of your childhood.  And your mother is your everything.  And my mother taught me how to throw a baseball.  My mother was at certain events.  And so she's always considered this, this anchor point in our lives, and when you sort of never know what might happen in the next military conflict or excursion, you know, she's, she's sort of that part you almost look to, to be permanent.  So she's really, really special to me in the way that only a military child might appreciate.  I also think she's the finishing school in our upbringing as children, meaning, I--you know, whenever somebody says, well, if you had one word for your mother, I would say grace.  And I think it's a word rarely used today when people think about people.  But I think she's a woman of grace who sort of has a, a quiet elegance about her and a, and a certain calm serenity, and a sort of stability in a storm that I really, really admire.  And, you know, she's dedicated her life as, you know, being the other half of my father's world, but I don't think he'd have a world without her because I think she contributes in an incredibly significant way these attributes that keep things balanced and stable and egos in check and humility appropriately persevered.  So that's really important to me.  I also think in some ways we had really two really interesting family traditions.  And my father saw it as the kind of immigrant story, you know.  It's the, it's the Jamaicans that come from another country, who come to New York [New York] searching for a better life.  And his world derives principally from that experience.  My mother's in some way is my connection to the African American experience in the United States.  Her, her lineage goes to Birmingham, Alabama.  I mean I'm born in Birmingham, Alabama in 1963, you know, where--while my father's in Vietnam, where three months after I'm born, you know, the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] blows up while we're in church three blocks away.  And we used to go every summer to Birmingham.  And my grandfather [Robert Johnson] was the principal of the only black high school [A.H. Parker High School] at the time in Birmingham, Alabama.  Her mother [Mildred Bell Johnson] was a pioneer for black girls in Birmingham.  So a lot of my experiences with civil rights and race and the American experience that is so popularly understood by people, really comes through her connection to me.  So that's really special too because there's certain things I derive only from, from her upbringing, her experiences.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any of her stories about growing up?  Did she tell, talk about that?
Speaker 2: You know, not as much as I wish she did, which I think is kind of a (laughter) attribute of that generation.  I would encourage them to do so more.  I think as she's gotten older, and we've gotten older, we hear a little bit more of them.  I remember very clearly 'cause I'd gone with my cousin, my mother's niece.  We got to go to see the day view of Spike Lee's '4 Little Girls' documentary about the Baptist church bombing.  And suddenly connections started surfacing that somehow I had not made.  One, the sudden realization, wait a minute, we were there.  Two, that one of the little girls' fathers was a famous photographer in Birmingham, and all of our pictures have his name on 'em.  And I suddenly remembered the name on the little corners of every family photo I've ever seen.  I remember coming home, saying, you know, what do you know about this?  Where were you?  She goes, well, we were there.  And all of a sudden, all these things I had no idea that--how close her connection was.  She knew every one of the little girls.  She knew their families.  She was--we were downtown when this happened, her and I, me as an infant, trying to get out of town just after this has happened.  I said, what--where did all this come from?  But I think that her generation, or at least her view--and maybe this is part of the military experience too, was to protect you and to keep your life happy and joyful and unencumbered.  And I think sometimes that gets taken to the point of not sharing experiences that have pain laced in them.  And we were always moving.  So, you know, there wasn't this sort--what might, people--some people might call a tradition.  You know, we, we were a very, you know, pick up and go kind of family; you're here today, gone tomorrow.  So there wasn't as much of that kind of lineage or permanence or a location you thought of a home.  And I think that undermined the storytelling a little bit.  And my father's side is very gregarious about storytelling, very, very Jamaican, very--big parties when you're in New York or every relative you've ever heard of.  And, you know, they sort of were the dominant part of the storytelling.  And her family's smaller and you had less inter- you know, fewer points of interaction.  But I think most of that's been corrected.  I mean she's, she's told me a lot now.  I'm sure there's a lot more I could learn.
Story_ID: 360539
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about your father.  Can you--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --and what you know about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's Colin Luther Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].  He was the son of two wonderful people [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell], who had immigrated to New York [New York], separately, as they would tell it, as I last remember them, to find a better life for their child in a country they thought would give them more opportunity.  And they met and married in New York City [New York, New York] and raised him, the classic story, on the streets of New York.  I think the most interesting part of the story is how much of a screw-up he was (laughter) when he was young in the sense that it's so different from the man he ultimately became.  Marginal in academics, a kid who liked the street, a kid who had friends, and, you know, barely got through this and barely got through that, and went to--as he likes to tell it, went to City College [City College of New York] in New York 'cause it was the only place that had to take him.  His mother used to tell stories of having to drag him out of a bar to make him go to his own college graduation, you know.  Just, you would have never, probably--I certainly wasn't there, but ever had marked him for somebody who was gonna achieve what he achieved.  But I think that's the beautiful lesson on the, on that side of our family because I think the values of education and betterment and intellectual curiosity and not embarrassing the family and, you know, ambition, that was, I think, very characteristic of that immigration class, were inside of 'em.  You know, and even though they hadn't seen it yet, they had done their work.  They had pushed these--these things were certainly deeply imbedded inside of him, and it's fun to watch his career because I think, you know, and he met, married and had kids young.  And so we watched a lot of this.  At different points in his life, when these little boxes would get unlocked and opened up and some new dimension of him would blossom.  And I think to his credit, when they did, he would recognize them and, and pursue them very hard.  I mean I think he became a brilliant intellect in a way that you would have never suspected.  But I, I, I can see him now in a study in the '70s [1970s] in a master's [degree] program working really, really hard to understand, to get better, and then to want to be the best, and started being the best, started graduating one and two and three instead of, you know, at the bottom of the line.  And it just kept growing and growing, and the [U.S.] Army is a very insular family.  You know every other officer.  Ultimately, you cross paths a lot, and people start talking, you know, who's, who's go the mojo?  Who seems to be moving?  And I remember, probably by the time he was a lieutenant colonel, we'd hear those stories.  You know, wow, watch him, watch him, you know, and, oh, he's competing with this guy.  These two are heading some place.  And, you know 'cause he really blossomed really late in our childhood.  You know, I like to tell people, we're not a famous family from day one.  I mean my, my father wasn't even a--my father was a general as I was senior leaving high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia].  So by the time the world came to know him, we were almost adults.  So this is not a family who grew up in--we grew up a normal, pedestrian, middle-class Army family the whole time, until, you know, this all of a sudden took off right at the edge of that.  But I, it was so distinct I could watch this transformation, and even as a child, throughout my life.  And he had found a calling.  It's a calling.  The [U.S.] military was a--which I think then morphed into a commitment to public service.  It was a military calling that blossomed into a calling about your country.
Speaker 1: So did he choose the military or did the military chose him, and how--
Speaker 2: Well, it's got to be a little of both, right?  I mean one, you have to have it available to you.  It sort of calls to you at some point, and I think--you know, when he went to college, the academics didn't grab his attention or his passions, but he had joined ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  A lot of his friends had, and it had a fraternity flavor of it.  I think people think of it as you join the Army.  You--I, I think he joined a fraternity that turned out to be the Army (laughter).  I think it was a school in which there was a lot of tradition and ceremony and brotherhood.  That's what pulled him.  And dear friends and families, the--what we call the Army uncles, people who are not related, but, you know, they go back to that class to this day.  And I think he found a belonging, and I think somewhere in the spit and shine and the uniforms and the ceremony, there was something familiar and comfortable to him about that structure.  And so, it, it certainly called him.  But I think that it didn't take long before he was giving back what he was getting, meaning as he, he came to know it and love it and start turning into someone who wanted the Army to be a great institution, him be a part of it, even as a junior officer, I think he started turning around where he was gonna do more than just be its recipient.  I think at a early age, I always felt like he had made a decision that he was gonna contribute as much as he was gonna take before it was all over.  He certainly did.
Story_ID: 360540
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember him [Powell's father, HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] sharing any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell some of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's pretty boisterous about that, although you don't get a lot of that early childhood.  To this day, I'm not so sure what it was like when he was seven or nine.  I mean we tend to hear a lot about it in sort of high school, college kind of level.  And a lot of it used to be his parents [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell] who would tell ya, more than he would tell ya.  But family story swapping in that house was pretty big.  And it was mostly generalized.  I mean there are just sort of stories about the, the kind of culture that existed in, in those little neighborhoods in New York [New York] in those days, in which you had extended family, you know.  You know, I probably can't tell you a story he hasn't told a million times in his own public life, but the strong stories I remember was always the stories of, you know, you thinking you can get away with something on the street.  And there're twenty aunts in windows all around you who (laughter) start, with a phone network, starts calling around.  And, you know, you can't get a block before you're busted.  You know, stories like that.  You know, my grandmother used to tell the stories about, "Yeah, you didn't show up at your graduation [from the City College of New York, New York, New York].  You were in the bar, had to come pull him out."  But, but not a, you know, not the way some families do, I mean because I always felt like the Jamaican ethos.  And my mother's [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] family had the same thing, it was, you know, our focus was all about tomorrow.  You know, there wasn't--there was not a lot of patience for excess dwelling on the past.  You can get a lot of stories about the hardship or the--they were always--that's the thing I have a powerful recollection; don't want to have to--what are you gonna do for the world tomorrow or today.  You know, there's very forward-looking ethos in that family.  And so I think the stories also suffered a little bit for that because there wasn't a lot of dwell--you know, most of the energy was about what are we gonna do tomorrow.
Story_ID: 360541
Speaker 1: Now, you're a product of a mixed marriage essentially, meaning, you know, foreign American--I mean foreign American, yes, and southern American.  And, you know, I was asking your mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] about was there any conflict or did the, you know, families say, you know, "Why are your marrying this person [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]?"
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But do you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: A little bit, but it probably was largely well controlled by the time the--(laughter), and anyways don't kids fix everything in certain ways like that, right.  I mean a husband and wife are still ultimately one-time strangers.  Their child never is.  You know, once, once the bloodline mixes and run to the next, it seems that all things go away.  And I think probably by the time, you know, those two gave my grandparents grandchildren, then something takes over.  Now, the family's joined in a permanent kind of way.  But there's no doubt about it.  I mean--and there's very different forms of race identity, right.  And I think in Jamaica, as I had always heard and seen the story, you know, it's a fairly brown island, but let's be candid, there were big distinctions between whether you were this color brown or that color brown or whether you got these opportunities.  And I wouldn't say that I ever thought my father's parents [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell] had any kind of racism as we would understand it.  But did they have a certain sense of hierarchy about who they were, even though they had no money?  From the Jamaicans, per--yes, they certainly did.  And I think they were always uncomfortable being in New York [New York], being perceived as what we would call the black African American experience.  The South to them was a foreign country to which they didn't know anything about, didn't want to and didn't necessarily want to be associated with.  And so, when, you know, their son brings home, you know, even a beautiful girl from Birmingham, Alabama, and remember Birmingham, Alabama, you got to be kidding.  What do you mean the wedding's in Birmingham?  We're going to Birmingham, Ala- my parents tell the story that, you know, they wouldn't, they didn't want to go.  "We're not going south of the Mason-Dixon Line for anything."  And I remember, we've always had this picture at house.  There's a picture of my, both sets of grandparents with my parents in their wedding outfits, which is about the only picture I know of where they're all together because that world rarely did cross except for that event.  And both sets of grandparents look oddly stunned and some funny way.  I've always thought that the Jamaicans looked, not particularly happy to be in Birmingham (laughter), and the other ones [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Johnson] weren't sure what was going on.  But that didn't last, that didn't last.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you spend more time with your Birmingham family than the New York family or--?
Speaker 2: I think it was pretty even.  We, we didn't spend that much time with them, with either of them in the way that you might today because we were moving a lot.  And we never lived where they lived.  You know, my sons [Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] know my grand- their grandparents 'cause they live thirty minutes away and always have.  We had nothing like that.  I mean they were always very far away for the most part.  And so, you know, maybe once a sum- maybe once in the summer, we would go to Alabama.  But we had cousins our age in that side, so that was fun to us cause my mother's sister always stayed down there.  And then we usually--I just have memories of being in New York at Christmas so, you know because it's divided.  But it was at most, maybe one, maybe two, but usually one trip a year to either destination.  And that would be basically it.  And sadly my grandparents, all of them ultimately had passed away at a fairly early age at our, the siblings' level.  So I, I'm trying to remember when the last one passed away, but certainly before I was out of high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia].  And my mother's mother died when I was still in elementary level.  So there wasn't as much time as I would have liked, but they were all terrific for the time that we had.
Story_ID: 360542
Speaker 1: Now, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know I, it's, it's sort of a vaguery, but, you know, the, the [U.S.] Army life is very, very distinct to me.  It's very, very distinct, playing in the backyard of the house, being in a room--I always have memories of us moving in, even, even young memories, you know because for people who grew up in one place like my sons [Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] are doing, they know what their house is.  This is my home, this is my house.  I know where every inch.   You know, we were always on an adventure.  We never thought of our house really as our house.  It was a lodging for the next--so, there was always this sort of sense of discovery about, you know, where are we now?  Where are the rooms, where's the bathroom?  What does the yard look like?  Is there a woods in the back?  Is there someplace to play?  Who lives next door?  Huge part of our early life was always consumed with these things that people usually only have to do once.  You know, we had to do it all the time.  And I just sort--I don't know.  I have vague memories of just being with my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], and she would always make the home.  And in our house, the home is very different than the house.  The home is when my mother put the stamp on it all, but it was almost like a, a wrapping, like the layer that she would put on the house made it the home.  But the layer was coming down and going with us.  The house was staying here, if that makes any sense.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it does, but can you explain that a little bit more?  I mean the home--what was, what would you consider the home?
Speaker 2: Home is when, for us, you know, when you have a feeling of, of sort of safety that, that the struct--the structure--there's enough of the elements of interpersonal relationships with the ones you love.  I mean its--one reason me and my sisters [Linda Powell and Annemarie Powell Lyons] are close, is they had to be your first friends.  And, you know, once the room is set--what, what's gonna be the room that we play with my sisters in cause we always have that, but we don't know what it is here.  And until, you know, mom creates that space or whatever, you feel these elements aren't there to make you comfortable living together in a way that feels comforting and warm and, and, you know, enduring.  But I always found it interesting 'cause it never felt like, the way my house now does.  It was--again, it was something we put up.  The home was in a box that got spread out and got taken down, wrapped up in a box, put in the moving van and taken to the next place.  It was always--I remember moving day as a memory being always monumental.  In the Army, moving day is a big deal.  The huge truck comes 'cause this happened to us a lot, huge truck comes, and watching your bike go on.  And, you know, watching your furniture go on and the plants go on, and the excitement of then leaving, getting to a new place and waiting for that truck to return and watch the door open and the bike come out and the plant come out and the furniture come out; and then another couple of years and watch it all happen again.  I mean we, I used to be thrilled the day the truck was coming.  You know, we've been here for two days, and waiting for the moving--and when that big, you know, United Van Lines thing pulled up, it was just--it was, oh, here comes our stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: So it was never traumatic for you?  Was it ever--?
Speaker 2: Not for me.
Speaker 1: Never?  Were you--what about friends that you had gotten attached to and--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the early years, it, it was the service.  Your friends did it too.  It was harder when you were moving from a place where you lived in an--you know, maybe we didn't live on an Army base.  We lived in town somewhere, and those families didn't move as much.  But even when we lived in a normal, you know, a neighborhood off-post, we usually lived places where other military people lived.
Speaker 1: So this was, this was part of the environment?
Speaker 2: It was part of life.  Peo- and, and the other thing is, there is a certain--you'll probably see 'em again, maybe five years from now, maybe three years from now, maybe one year from now, but you'll probably see 'em again.  But they had to it too, so it wasn't like you were leaving friends.  Sometimes they were leaving you.  I, I don't know, and I, I should say fairly that we got lucky and that we had long structures in places when I was a child.  So, you know, my elementary years, seven years of my elementary years was in one place [Bel Air Elementary School, Dale City, Virginia].  High school I had in one place which is pretty rare.  Now, my sisters got hit harder with this.  I actually went to college before the worst of the moving.
Story_ID: 360543
Speaker 1: So now, the seven years, what, what age, what age were you in seven--?
Speaker 2: For me that was first to seventh grade.
Speaker 1: In one place.  So you were, and is that?  Where were you?
Speaker 2: Dale City, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But it changed a lot 'cause, you know, we had gotten there and my father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] had just gotten back from Vietnam.  And the early years are one thing.  Then he went away to Korea for a year.  That's a different period.  So we were in the same place, but I have to say it was in very distinct two to three year chunks.  Things were very different.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the young [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell like?  What were you like?
Speaker 2: What was I like?  I, I think I was--you know, all three of us were good students, good troopers, you know.  We, we moved without complaint.  You know, we--there was a sense of you, you know, you make your interests secondary to what the family has to do.  I always really had a passion for my sisters [Linda Powell and Annemarie Powell Lyons], which I still do.  I think two of the greatest women I know.  And they were then.  And so they were my friends.  And so I was--I'd like to think I was a really conscientious big brother, meaning I was the only male and I was the oldest.  So that, you know, that had a certain uniqueness in the family.  And I took that pretty serious (laughter).  So rather than it being conflict with my sisters, it tended to be a bonding, you know, that these are my sisters.  You know, so I remember that being a big part of my daily life, was my interactions with them and role as big brother and, and only male to them.  I was pretty average.  I mean we, you know, we were kids who loved--I was a kid who just loved to play in the background.  I remember in Dale City, we had these huge woods.  I mean my average day would be, come home, go to the woods.  You know, everything happened in the woods.  We'd build forts, we'd live out there (laughter).  You know, we--curiosity, playful, a good student.  I wouldn't say a scholar or anything, but it was very much expected that you would do well.  And my parents weren't the sort of doting, study your report card, (unclear) you--I mean they had somehow instilled in us, that's your responsibility.  I even think by the time I was in high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia], it wouldn't be that uncommon that my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] never saw my report card.  And they probably got lucky and didn't have to, meaning we would be more upset than they would about a bad grade.  And the way you see parents dote on kids today, it didn't happen at our house.  We--school was your--I mean, you know, they watched out for it, but, an F?  You're the one who's cheating yourself.  And we felt that.  So we did our work, and not 'cause anybody yelled at us.  We did it 'cause we thought you were supposed to, and we wanted to.  All three of us were that way.
Story_ID: 360544
Speaker 1: What I was trying to also understand, were you a dreamer, like you said, "I spent time in the woods."  Were you a dreamer?  Were you adventuresome?  Were you--I mean what--were you all boy?  I mean what, what kind of kid were--you know, did you live in your, did you live in your mind or--?
Speaker 2: I was fairly outgoing, you know.  I played sport, and in that sense, I think I was a boy's boy.  But not, not as far as that phrase might suggest, you know, all macho.  I think my sisters [Linda Powell and Annemarie Powell Lyons] and my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] had put inside me a kind of feminine side, a sort of the spirituality.  I like to think--I have memories of being fairly spiritual at a young age, and, and sometimes that meant quasi interested in religion, but more interested in how it all went together, right?  I mean you might call it religion cause I enjoyed--you know, I was an acolyte.  I liked being a senior acolyte.  I actually enjoyed that a lot, but I loved that whole sort of trying to understand the universe and what did it mean.  And me and my mother used to talk about it, and I remember at an oddly young age, that that stuff intrigued me.  But I was also a little and conservative in a very odd way which is I was adventurous, but not a big risk taker.  I mean I was extremely conservative in that regard, which is--it took courage to go into some new environment where you didn't know anybody.  It took--you know, you could easily seek to avert conflict or confrontation.  I mean I didn't like that.  I don't particularly like it today.  You know, so, you know, I wasn't the kid who was, yeah, I want to be on the swim team, let's go.  And, you know, you have to wrestle over that, that you really want to.  That's where I think the moving helped cause you were so forced to confront new situations, it broke down what could have been a really, averse kind of kid that got nervous about doing things, who didn't.  But this kind of made you.  So, in that sense, I would say I was adventurous and liked sports and stuff, but, but with a little resistance.  It took, it took some overcoming.  I would say cre- a little creative.  I mean we all--I mean I liked music.  You know, I played violin for six years and was always in the band, and always, you know, I went to dances and enjoyed that kind of expression.  And my family was big into musicals.  So we always got excited when some musical was out, and my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] would bring home the record, and we'd all memorize the--we'd all memorize the music and singing in the car and the eight-track tapes (laughter), and, and then, usually my dad some time that year would take us all to the, to the musical.  You know, you'd go down to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and see, you know, 'Guys and Dolls' and 'Purlie' and, you know, 'The Wiz', we saw, you know, with Stephanie Mills and, you know, these were big experiences.  They were our--this was our big thing out.
Speaker 1: So what was your favorite musical?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see when we were young, I remember--well, I think the two that I loved the most when I was young was 'The Wiz,' which we got to see when I--it was certainly in the '70s [1970s], I guess, and 'Evita,' which we saw when we were a little older, we loved, I loved and we all, we always loved the same things (laughter).  But we saw 'Evita,' 'Purlie' with [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore and 'Guys and Dolls' I liked and, you know, 'Carousel' [Richard Rogers and Oscar Hammerstein II]--my dad liked all the corny ones, right.  So 'Carousel,' 'My Fair Lady,' that whole thing.  You know, when you're moving twelve hours in a back seat of a station wagon, you hear a lot of musical (laughter) scores.  And eight tracks just played them over and over and over again.
Story_ID: 360545
Speaker 1: I want to go back.  You've done a little bit of this, but can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the first one that comes to mind actually is cut grass.  You know, we always lived--you know, we were kids who always lived in a house in some kind of classic suburban community cause all [U.S.] military posts are built that way.  And all neighborhoods that you'd likely be able to afford a buy a house were like that.  And I just remember sort of the strong sense of that early morning Saturday, waking up and hearing every (laughter) lawnmower on the street.  And, you know, that's the first responsibility often that you have as a kid.  You know, I remember that became my job.  And so that's kind of meaningful.  You--I can smell the gas and the, and the smell of it, and again, the cut grass.  I also have that memory of honeysuckles, which my, my mother's [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] parents [Mildred Bell Johnson and Robert Johnson] lived on a pretty big plot of land in Alabama.  And my grandmother could--she was just this amazing woman.  She always had these big gardens and peach trees and stuff in the back.  But the fences were all covered in these honeysuckles.  So my memory--you know, it's the first thing I--that would hit my nostrils when you pulled into their house, was the honeysuckles, you know, from one end of the fence to the other.  And the taste for that area were like blackberries 'cause there were wild blackberries over the fence.  And when we were old enough, and she'd let us, we'd be allowed to climb over the back fence into kind of the wild area.  And you'd go pick as many blackberries--that's where the purple comes from, as many blackberries as you could get your hands on.  And the promise would be, if you brought enough, she'd make the pie.  Right.  So you were, you were competing to get that blackberry pie that night, which we usually got.  And so I have a big, I have a big memory of that.  I can smell lots of different houses.  I can almost have an impression of the smell of every house I've ever lived 'cause, you know, again, when you're at a house that you've always known, that kind of recedes.  But when you're always in a different structure, it has a different feel and smell.  And I can smell the house right now in Colorado.  I can smell the house in Dale City [Virginia].  It was really something different about it, so believe it or not, I have that.
Speaker 1: So these smells, are they musty or are they--?
Speaker 2: Sometimes they're musty.  Sometimes they're oily-ish, you know.  Sometimes, the very pronounced cleaning products cause, right, you have an [U.S.] Army house that people move in and out of, it's gets cleaned, scrubbed.  Sometimes there's always new, fresh paint cause every time someone moves out, they come in.  They repaint all the white, and they leave again.  And you come in, and you smell fresh paint, fresh carpet, is a distinct smell to me because you're always getting the, the surface stuff redone to move in.  So I have a lot of memories of the smells of those things.
Speaker 1: How about sounds?  Sounds?
Speaker 2: Well, I have a lot of Birmingham [Alabama] sounds.  Again, my, my grandparents were the only ones who had a big dog, only relatives who ever had an animal.  So I can hear that dog, a dog whose name was Peaches, a big German Shepherd.  I can hear the barking of that.  I have a strong memory of cars starting because my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] always liked to work on cars.  And so a very common sound on a, on a day when--it meant dad was home when cars were running in the front yard, you know 'cause he would be out there, changing oil, spark plugs.  You'd see hoods up.  I have these images of--it always meant he was home, which was cool.  And that was always something, you could go, like can I help?  So I can hear cars, you know, cranking up in the morning, you know, while he plays with them.  I can hear lots of vacuum cleaners, you know 'cause the Army also has a certain--you're expected to maintain a certain appearance (laughter) in your house.  And very common to have people over, very common to host parties.  I could--I just have the sights and sounds and smells of these parties my parents would have to have.  And we'd be--back when kids weren't allowed to come to the parties, you'd be upstairs spying on the whole thing.  But I just remember this constant sense of always getting ready for something like that.  The vacuums running, the bathrooms are being cleaned, the food's being made, sort of all mixed together.  But that was a very, just a very distinct set of things that was always happening.  It's funny when you say sights and feeling--you know, I don't know why, but I almost only have impressions of warm months in a kid.  I, I can hardly even conjure up a winter in my mind, though you must have had one every year.  And there were plenty of places that had snow on occasion.  I like to think it's just--that's, that that's my sensation of happiness.  And we also almost always were moving in the summer, which was always a very big event.  And so maybe that's a big part of it.  And we were out of school, and so you're more carefree, and, and the summer was when you would go to your grandparents or your other grandparents [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell].  So a lot of all of your experiences would take place in the summer.  I remember a couple snows, but it seems to me it's always warm whenever I think about it.
Story_ID: 360546
Speaker 1: Now, your elementary school, can you give its name?
Speaker 2: Bel Air Elementary School, Dale City, Virginia.  The Bel Air Panthers.
Speaker 1: Was that the team?
Speaker 2: I can still sing the song (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter), well, maybe we should have you sing it (laughter). Go on, let me have a little rendition.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Bel Air is the school we love for all the world to see.  We are the Bel Air Panthers with colors all so blue. (Unclear)."
Speaker 1: Wait, did it really go, with colors all so blue (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was just colors all so blue.
Speaker 1: That doesn't work (laughter).
Speaker 2: Doesn't work.  I knew then it didn't work, but that's what we sang.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your experience at Bel Air.
Speaker 2: Fairly uneventful.  It was, it was a great little public school, classic suburban public school, with a great mix of kids.  You know, a mixed school, though, you know, I remember when we were young, and my sisters [Linda Powell and Annemarie Powell Lyons] used to--and I talk about it, we were often a un- somewhat unique group cause while the school was certainly integrated--how do you put this correctly?  You were the kids--you were the sons of, you know, senior officers or something or a fairly senior officer, which kind of, in one sense had you sort of in--it, it manifested in schools 'cause it, schools back then used to almost, often have tracts.  So like, these are the smart kids, and these are the so-so kids, and these are the kids who aren't doing well.  I'm not so sure they were always very accurate about true academics if they weren't quasi social.  But, you know, we were always put in that upper group 'cause we were kids--you know, but so, while there would be lots of black kids in the school, for example, not in your space, which created for us anxiety sometimes and tension so, you know because sometimes that space got resented by other spaces, no matter what color you were.  And if you happened to be black in that space, and one of the few--you know, sometimes even with other black children, and it was like, well, who are you to--who are you? (Laughter)  And why are you in that space?  So I do have that, that was all through, I think, our public education.  But it was a school where the teachers were hard working, they were great.  They took an interest.  My sister was a great student, and her teachers always just fell in love with her.  I can remember my--certain teachers I remember very distinctly.  I never remember it being particularly hard.  I never, I, I never have a memory of struggling, tough academics, stuff--it was mostly like, follow the system and you get an A (laughter).  Keep up with the program, and you'll do all right.  But, you know, it's funny, a few years ago that school had like its fiftieth anni- fortieth anniversary or something.  And me and my sister decided to go.  And it was great 'cause half (laughter) the teachers we had were still there, and they recognized us.  And it was really pretty neat.  It was really pretty neat.
Story_ID: 360547
Speaker 1: Give your sisters' names.
Speaker 2: Linda Margaret Powell [Linda Powell], who is two years younger than me who lives in New York, New York and Annemarie Powell Lyons, who is seven years younger than me, also lives in New York, and is married and has a new baby.
Speaker 1: Now, this is what I--Annemarie doesn't have a middle name, right?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Well, she, she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what--is it because her name is Annemarie?
Speaker 2: She technically has no middle name.  Her name is Annemarie, but sometimes it's Anne Marie.  Sometimes she writes it that way.  Sometimes she doesn't.  Sometimes she's Annie.  That one gets a little tricky.  There's a funny story 'cause I think my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] wanted to name that child Suzie [ph.] or Susan [ph.], up to the last minute.  And somebody had a new dog, and they named it Suzie, and she hit the roof.  So I think Annemarie got substituted rapidly, and I'm not quite sure where it came from (laughter).  I'm not so sure they were ever clear whether it was supposed to be one name or two.  That might be the confusion.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--so your sis- now, Linda, Linda is how many years younger than you?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two years, and then Annemarie is?
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven, okay, so there was a five--okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty big break.  And it's interesting 'cause we're all really close, but me and Linda are--I don't want to say closer cause that implies--but we had more contemporaneous experiences.  Anne had a whole period where she was almost an only child.  We weren't, you know, we just weren't part of that.  Anne has more experiences in the more famed part of our parents' life, right.  When my father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was a four-star general, she's still in high school.  We were long gone.  So there're all these very different experiences.  And the two of--you know, Anne doesn't know Alabama, and we do, you know.  So there's, there's some interesting differences because of that.  So, but they're great.
Story_ID: 360548
Speaker 1: Now, Dale City [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else?  Like I'm trying to also understand either, you know, memories from that time period, which you've shared quite a bit, but things that were important in your formative years?  You know, as you--you know, other things of--cause your father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was away pretty much, that you said the time that he, you know, came back like, do you remember when he was a White House Fellow?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that affecting you at all or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I do.  You know, depending on what you pursue you could easily extrapolate what you took from these things.  I mean the, the him being away thing had a very dramatic input, which is, you know, an intense insistence on personal responsibility and self reli- I mean you, you know, this was the kind of old-family household that would say, well, you know, you're now the man of the house.  And, and, and they mean it 'cause, not only are you absolutely going to have that responsibility, whatever it means, for the year I'm gone to be perfectly macab [macabre], it--there's not promise he's coming back.  You know, unlike a business person traveling, which, you know, you're relatively assured, this was a profession where you weren't positive--you weren't positive when you said goodbye whether you'd ever say hello again.  And we were never all that conscious of that risk, though, I've always sort of--as an adult, have new admiration for my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] 'cause, of course, she was.  But she sure did a good job of keeping her own fears from us, but God, she must have had them.  And, but when you--even if you just have a loose understanding of that, that's a whole other level of being ready to take, you know.  So nobody has any patience for you not pulling your side of the load or--so that, you know, this sort of intense, independent personal responsibility, I think, was very strong in that kind of environment.  The [U.S.] Army also is a place of honor.  And, and I think this is sort of really important because I don't know that I feel there is many institutions today that are like this than there should be, which is--it was a place with tradition and honor and ceremony and sort of a code.  And I didn't find anything oppressive about it, but you were fully expected to live up to it, whether you were the husband, the spouse or the children, you know.  If your father's a colonel, you're the son of a colonel.  And, and with that came a certain--you know, everything from what do you look like.  You weren't allowed to just go look like what you want to look--I mean there were kids who would, and, you know, and everybody would talk about it (laughter) because it--you know, this was that old, almost southern like, and I think some comes from my mother, you know.  You know, who's your family.  And if I go to Alabama and nobody says, "What's your name," they say, "Who's your granddaddy?  Who's your mother?"  Like everything you do reflects back on them.  So there was this funny kind of southern aspect to that in our house, but then there was this Army version of it. So it was pretty--you know, and, you don't pick up--you know, if my dad ever heard, the phone ring, "Hello."  "Excuse me?  No, Colonel Powell's residence, Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] speaking."  If you didn't do that, now, it's gonna be trouble (laughter).  So we had lots of, you know, and lots of ceremonies you went to where you--so I think there was a certain amount of decorum and honor and upholding family name.  That was really, really important.  I think also an extract from that is a sense of duty, meaning, being a person of principle, I think at a really early age was very heavily drummed.  The Army's not a place people make money.  It's not a place where hierarchy is created by virtue of the trappings of, you know, whatever.  It's, you, you, you are higher in the hierarchy because you are better at being self serve--selfless and dedicated to duty and country.  I mean it's a, it's an interesting dynamic where the rewards are unrelated to the kind of things most people are rewarded by.  And so (background noise) you, you chase an ideal, right.  I mean you're, you're serving, you know.  So that you had to believe in principles that were much bigger than yourself.  No one can off and risk dying if they don't, if they don't have something to believe that's bigger than themselves, right.  Duty, honor, country at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], you know, God and religion if it's something else, but we, you know, so we always had that ethos that we served something much bigger than your own personal--and that creates a whole lot of belief in principles.  And when I give speeches about leadership, I always start with being a principled person and an (background noise) ethical person.
Story_ID: 360549
Speaker 1: So you were just saying how there was basically this tremendous sense of responsibility and obligation, but not, not, not as something that you rejected, you know, but sort of structure that--with expectation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I have to say, I, I never had any kind of resentment or displeasure about it.  If anything, I, I, from the earliest days, a hundred percent embraced it.  I, I thought it was spectacular.  We have this home movie of me.  I mean one of my favorite things used to be my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] would take me to Arlington [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia] to see the changing of the guard at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.  And I, it's just still to this day one of my favorite things to watch, where, you know, the guy, tall guy, 6'4", in perfectly starched, blue uniform, you know, rifle with glistening bayonet stands perfectly still on guard for a tomb of a soldier for whom--whose name we no longer know, but had died in service.  There's something just so magical to me about the symbolism of, you know, us committing someone to stand in honor, purely in honor, of the sacrifice of an unknown soldier.  And then when they changed the guard, there was just this wonderful ceremony where the new one would come in, and they would--and it's all structured, you know, always twenty-one--everything is done in twenty-ones cause of the, the number of honor, the twenty-one steps, twenty-one seconds between each turn, twenty-one everyone.  And they change and they flips weapons and they leave.  And we have this great home movie of me in the front yard with my little air rifle, you know, doing the thing, you know, back and forth on the street, like for hours, like at the age of six.  So that stuff was always, for me, really important.  Salutes, you know, remember you're, you're walking with your father somewhere, and all of a sudden people salute.  This, this is a sign of respect and honor, and I remember once being with my dad when we were older, and I think he was a general.  He was the deputy commander, and we were coming up to the post, the PX [post exchange], we call it, and he saw some young captain making a young soldier, private, salute him over and over again, which did not set well with my dad.  He wanted to what the--so he marches up to this young captain and says, "What, what are you doing?"  "Well, Private So and So failed to salute me when I came out.  So I'm making him salute me a hundred times."  And so he said, "Oh, I see.  Well, as long as you salute him back all one hundred times, that's fine."  I'll never forget the exchange because that, that is, in a nutshell, right.  This is a sign of mutual respect, not your hierarchy.  All right, the soldier is paying respect to you, but you owe a just--that's another powerful lesson, taking care of your soldiers, taking care of the people who make those sacrifices is about the most important thing and officer does.  And I just--that story, the, the young kid was wrong, but the respect goes both ways, and I just never forget that.  So we had lots of things like that, that were really meaning to me, that I carry still to this day. I think it's--I was at a friend's house in New York last week, and they, they always laugh at me cause when I get into a room, I got to iron my shirts.  I got to clean my--I just still have that kind of, it matters.  It just matters.
Speaker 1: That's good though.  You know, it's interesting because your--on your mother's [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] side which was not a [U.S.] military side, there was structure.
Speaker 2: Same thing.
Speaker 1: A lot of structure in the family and expectations.
Speaker 2: That's a good truth.  And then they, and it came from different things and so were his parents [Maud McKoy Powell and Luther Powell] in a certain way.  I mean I happen to believe those things are more important than they seem to us, that they, they teach a certain level of respect and personal honor, ethical and in behavior, integrity.  And, you know, we touched on it, and, and the caring of those in your care.  I never--I was always taught watching the military life that the officers were really--they were important people, but they were extremely secondary to the three hundred lined up on the field who were nineteen years old.  Their work was to employ them effectively, but safely, and bring them home to their mothers.  It, it--when I became an officer, the day I left for Germany as a brand new second lieutenant, I remember waking up early in the morning.  I was gonna catch a plane that night.  I'd never been overseas, about to move to Germany.  My father, who's this general, comes in.  He kind of kisses me, he kissed--Jamaicans, we kiss.  He kisses me on the check, and only word was, he said, "Have a good flight; take care of our soldiers."  That's all he said, cause that's all that mattered in our work, you know, that's what you're going to do, take--and it was our soldiers.  And I thought that was great.
Story_ID: 360550
Speaker 1: Let's go back to--so from elementary [Bel Air Elementary School, Dale City, Virginia], you go to middle school, right?  And is that Godw--?  Is Godw--
Speaker 2: Godwin [Mills E. Godwin Middle School; George M. Hampton Middle School, Dale City, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Although briefly cause then we moved to Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: After the first year of Godwin.  So I don't have all that many experiences at Godwin cause we picked up and moved.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you ended up going where?
Speaker 2: Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: And you were there how long?
Speaker 2: Just a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the moving around time.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I didn't even put that one in because it's--but it was a great year, but back then the [U.S.] Army's changed this, but you could move every year.  Now, they tend to--you get an assignment, they're almost always at least three years, but back then we--it was very common to go from summer to summer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, even--I think you mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] said one time that you moved--she moved three times in one year?
Speaker 2: The funny thing is people--when, when you become a general, believe it or not, you move more because there's only, by law, there's only so many of them.  So in the entire U.S. Army there might be four hundred generals or maybe there's more, one to four stars, one moves, they all move.  And, and basically 'cause there's a cap number.  So they're basically all constantly rotating around the system, and so you really were always just one move away from being pulled off what you were doing.
Story_ID: 360551
Speaker 1: Now, so how old, how old were you when your father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] became a general because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably, sixteen.
Speaker 1: Sixteen, okay.
Speaker 2: Seventeen, when he became a one-star general.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: God, I remember that day.  It was really cool.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it?
Speaker 2: My father's mother, my grandmother [Maud McKoy Powell], was visiting us.  And--which was perfect.  And I remember he came home from work, and she was sitting on the couch.  And we were all--he, he said, you know, which was kind of rare, he kind of said, "Everybody come to the kitchen."
Speaker 1: Now, where were you based at this point?
Speaker 2: This was in Burke, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia], and so me and my sisters [Linda Powell and Annemarie Powell Lyons]--
Speaker 1: But you had left Fort--where was it?
Speaker 2: Fort Campbell [Kentucky], yeah.
Speaker 1: Fort Campbell.
Speaker 2: He was a full colonel then, and we came back to Washington [D.C.] and had been there a year or two.  And he walked in, and he everybody come to the kitchen.  And we're like, why, what do you, what do you want?  (Laughter)  And my grandmother didn't get off the--'cause she sitting in the family room, you know, twenty feet away.  And he just said, said abruptly, he said, "Well, I just want to tell you today, the president [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] said I could be a general."  And we were all like, "What?"  Any my grandmother just went berserk.  And it was so great cause he used to--always had told us this story that she, they came to New York [New York] cause they thought there'd be more opportunity.  And somehow that the star was the culmination of why she had done it all, and she was just in tears, and we were all--'cause it's a big deal.  I mean the [U.S.] Army's--every rank is a big deal and for us, whenever there was a promotion, that was a really wonderful time to watch, and there's a ceremony for pinning everything on.  But this was crossing over to the big time, and to see her dream come true and his own work pay off was just really cool.  And it was great because they didn't live all that much longer.  I remember when he got it pinned on, it was very tear-jerking cause he said, you know, "I wish my father [Luther Powell] had lived to see this."  And it was all about how he should be here.  But he didn't see it, and unfortunately, I don't think she saw anymore.  I mean I'm sure they see it now, but I mean I don't they--they would just be--oh, my God, they would be over the moon.  I miss that.  I wish they'd seen it all.
Speaker 1: Pretty amazing.
Speaker 2: But she got to see a little, just a little.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the ceremony?  Can you talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're--the ceremonies are great because it was at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Was that your first time in the Pentagon?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: You had been there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pentagon, Pentagon was a place we had seen plenty of times.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start seeing the Pentagon?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm trying--I mean, you know, in the seven years we lived Dale City [Virginia], he was assigned to the Pentagon two or three times.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, as a young off--major, lieutenant colonel, we, you know, we'd been by there.  So now he was sort of in the big time, you know, he was in a, he was an advisor to the secretary of defense.  We're now in the E-ring, right.  This is the big deal at the Pentagon.  But, so, this was in the E-ring, I think in the office of the secretary--.
Speaker 1: Explain what the E-ring is.
Speaker 2: The Pentagon is actually a building with five concentric rings.  It's not actually a solid building.  Its buildings around buildings.  The inner part of the Pentagon is the A-ring.  And then the--so the E-ring is the outside ring.  If you drive by the Pentagon, you're looking at the E-ring.  You're looking at the building that goes around the outside.  There's a certain pecking order of prestige about where people are.  I mean the secretary of defense, his office is on the E-Ring.  The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff's office is on the E-ring, the--so, you know, when somebody says, "Oh, we're going to the E-ring," right.  That's usually you're going to--so, you know, he was on the E-ring as the military advisor to the, I think deputy secretary of defense at the time.  But it was all done in the secretary of defense's suite.  So it was really special that way.  But it's always the same tradition that your, your boss or your employer is pinning your star on one side, and your spouse is always on the other side while you--we've a great picture of this one actually.  In the old days, they used to pour champagne on it too, but they--now, when you're that rank and wearing that uniform (laughter).  When I used to get promoted in the Army, they'd pour--to make it grow, you'd say.  And I always thought it was great because it was a tradition in which somebody always gives the new officer a gift which is the next rank.  And as a little boy, I used to always want--I still to this day have this fascination you know, crawling through my father's drawers, right, cause he keeps these, cluttered stuff.  But always in his thing on his chest, if you opened his sort of jewel box, you would always see the insignia for the next rank sitting in the box.  You always had--so when he was a colonel, there was always a, a star in the box, right, that some day you were gonna put that on.  And if you were one star, there in was in there, somewhere, two stars.  If you're two, three, there was somewhere in there four.  And I always thought that was so cool as a kid that you--you know, you always, somebody had given you, now, this should be next.
Story_ID: 360552
Speaker 1: Now, were you ever a Boy Scout in all of this?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause I knew your--okay.
Speaker 2: I was a big time Boy Scout.  I should say I was a big time Cub Scout and Webelo.  And I'll confess a story that--and I was really good at it, and, you know, doing all the right things.  When it came time to become a Boy Scout--and at the time, Boy Scouts wore red berets, you know, not these baseball cap things.  Well, this was an age in which, you know, my hair was, out to here, you know, I had this great afro, and I was internally panicked about the ceremony where you become a Boy Scout and they put this beret on.  And I'm pretty convinced I quit Boy Scouts solely because I was panicked about this ceremony and this embarrassment of having to get this beret on my head.  I'm pretty sure that's the only reason I stopped.  My mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] kept saying, why do you want to quit?  "I don't want to do it anymore."  I can see it today, I was like, "I'm not putting that beret on" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now that goes back to the whole ceremony and obligation?
Speaker 2: No, but it goes back into that adventurous and taking, but a certain part of you that fears embarrassment and fears, you know, you know, being exposed in some way, and I just couldn't, I couldn't quite get over it (laughter).  I don't think I ever told them why.  I just kept saying, I don't really want to do it.  I didn't do it (laughter).
Story_ID: 360553
Speaker 1: Just talk about the, the--you said there's six.  What are the six of being a gymnast, the six--
Speaker 2: Of gymnastic events?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: There's floor exercise.  There's the pummel horse.  There's the rings. There are the parallel bars.  There is vault, and there's the high bar.
Speaker 1: And was there any one that you were better at than the other?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was very good on high bar and parallel bars, a good vaulter and not bad on floor, but not my strongest. Okay on rings, but not my strongest.
Speaker 1: But the training is much different than that, than in baseball.
Speaker 2: Oh, much different.  Well, you use so much more of your body and flexibility is a premium in which, you know, so, so in other sports.  You know, and it's a sport where your body mechanics have to do all the work.  You, you know, you don't just lift weights and get stronger.  You have to, you know, you have to be able to combine that with the kind of coordination that, that uses muscles that are--you really aren't accustomed to using.
Speaker 1: So way more intensive training with your body (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think so, yeah.  When you think about it, in some ways, the whole sport is just training.  I mean even the events are sort of demonstrations of your physical ability.  I mean the, the routine itself is a demonstration of your strength, your flexibility, how well conditioned you are, how courageous you are.  And that's why it's a very intensively individual experience.  You know, you're only competing against yourself.  You're, you know, you--if you get a higher score than that guy, you win, but you, you can only beat yourself.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what year did you become captain of the team [at Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Senior--yeah, and I think the captains are always juniors or seniors (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seniors.
Story_ID: 360554
Speaker 1: You're at Lake Braddock [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia], right, high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What was the racial compo- composition?
Speaker 2: It was pretty mixed.  And almost every school I went to was fairly mixed.  It was fairly mixed, but I, I think in high school I found, I found this problem of separatism even more dramatic and more traumatic because I think there's a lot of things you're adding.  Right, now, you're a lot more conscious of race than when you're little.  You're interested in girls.  The dating gets, you know, there's a, there's a--you know, that kind of relationship that goes on that adds complexity in those relationships.  And people are meaner, right.  I mean they're just older.  They're more--and they've got a better command of language and a better command of attitude and stuff could get rougher.  And I always--I, I never felt real, real terrible pain, but I, I've always felt that--I was always deeply hurt and disappointed that I felt like sort of race drove us, me--and I think Linda [Linda Powell] would tell the same story, away from them.  I, you know, I always wanted to sort of--I, I was comfortable in both worlds.  I'd grown up in both worlds.  I didn't see any reason to have to pick a team, but people tended to want you to pick a team.  And if you didn't pick a team, you're either a sell-out or you're not with us or something.  And I never could get my head around that.  I didn't understand why that had to be the price of entry that you had to forsake anything else, which was actually not viable for us.  I mean we, we, we didn't--you know, our, our house was in a place that that wasn't viable.  You know, we didn't live in an all-black neighborhood, and even if we did, we were gonna move in a year where you had to interact.  So it, it just never was an option that you could somehow separate yourself and only hang out with these kids and so that--I always thought that was a really unfair kind of litmus test.  And with race, you know, you know, light skin, speech pattern, I mean it's unbelievable what can become weapons to be coercive to each other.  And so, in some ways, you ended up, I think for me it was sad cause I don't think I really wanted--to, to this day, I sort of didn't want--you just kind of had to push further away from it than you wanted to.
Speaker 1: So you're saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your only real choice when you were done was to actually stay away from them.
Speaker 1: So this is the whole thing.  So, did people deride you because of your light skin?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But I think even that you could overcome, if you're willing to do the other things, right.  But, you know, it--again, even if you were so inclined, and you had perfect choices, it really wasn't that viable for the way our family lived, you know.  But I think light skin--I found speech and stuff to be, affect even more.  You know, if you could be light-skinned and you could, you'd adapt the right attitude, you could still be--but, you know, if you, you know, spoke a certain way and you had a certain affect and you dressed a certain, then somehow that stuff was much more, you know, much more troublesome.  And, you know what's interesting, is that I always thought it was unfair.  It really wasn't even a big swath of kids.  It's always sort of five who were on the hunt, right.  Everybody else is too intimidated to offer an alternative, right.  So, you know, you might see twenty kids over here, but it's not twenty kids who resent you.  It's three who won't let anybody else do anything different.  That's what I always felt like.  It was always some gang of three to five kids who thought they were the police men and women of, you know, everybody's relationships, and I always thought that that was really--everybody got hurt by that, except for those three who preserved their own power (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, we're talking about really the late '70s [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--mid to, mid to--mid and late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 360555
Speaker 1: Now, are you still active in theater, or are you really more in sports?  That's what--
Speaker 2: At this--in high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Certainly both, but I, I really got involved in theater, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when did you--
Speaker 2: --only sometimes a performer.  I, I was much more--
Speaker 1: A techy?
Speaker 2: A techy and a director.  We had a very formal theater program.  I mean it was first rate.  It was professional.  And we had an outstanding theater, very elaborate lighting and sound system, a program in which students became, were put in a program to be the directors.  Students directed all the plays.  Students were the stage managers, students were the lighting designers.  We were forced to get licenses for lighting design, you know, so I was lighting designer and a stage manager and ultimately, one of the few people who got to be a full director.  We actually had ranks in the theater.  Somebody was the superintendent stage manager.  And somebody was the supervisory stage manager.  So it, that's probably--I probably was attracted to that, you're right, it had a system and a hierarchy that--but I loved it.  I spent, everyday after school, that's where I was.
Speaker 1: Wait, and you were doing gymnastics at--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, get out of school, go to gymnastics, get out of practice, go to the theater 'til ten o'clock at night and go home.
Speaker 1: Not many people make that combination of creative and sports.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not many people--you know, it's, it's true.  Very few people did.
Speaker 1: Very.
Speaker 2: But, again, for me there's always--I always have two sides of my brain, and pretty--remember we were talking about childhood and a certain spirituality piece that's really important to me, theater took care of that while sport took care of something.  I, I don't really know what, but I, I don't think I'd been happy without one or the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there other things influencing you, other people?  Were you aware of, you know, that's one question.  Then I have another.
Speaker 2: Of, of course.  I mean I think really early in my life, I, I sort of fixated on the idea, which I still live by, which is jobs aren't important to me.  It's, it's who you get to work with or for that shapes your life.  You know, I'm a big believer in jumping from mentor to mentor on the way up your path.  I mean it's all about being under the wing of somebody worth being under the wing of.  And so I always had a craving for, you know, being attracted to those flames, people who just somehow to me inspired something that I thought was great.  You know, and the theater, the theater was all about a man named V.C. Pat Jones.  He was the theater director, teacher.  He was, in many ways he was kooky.  In other ways he was brilliant and he believed in kids, and he believed in their abilities.  And he influenced me a lot, a lot about--I, I give a speech today, I, I quote things he used to say.  And I always leave with stuff from these folks.
Speaker 1: So like what?  See you were talking earlier about quotes.
Speaker 2: Well, I've got those.  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: You know, I remember Mr. Jones always had this huge key ring.  It must have two hundred keys on it, and it opened everything, the cage for the lighting, the doors.  And he used to always go around huffing about how, you know, "My dream in life is I want to get to a world where I've got one key, I only want one key."  And we were like, what is he talking about?  But what he was talking about is, his vision of leadership--he used to say, "I'll know I've done my job when all I have to do is open the front door and go to my office, and you do the rest," right.  And that's my theory of leadership, that delegating of authority.  A leader's job is to make themselves indispensable--I mean dispensable, not indispensable.  And that's what he was saying.  I, I love wisdom in small stories like that, right.  So he was saying, my job--my work here is done when I'm down to one key.  When I can turn this world over to you, and then it's time to move on, you know.  So, great leaders to me are people who spend their careers making themselves irrelevant.  Unfortunately, too many people think it's the other.  And so I always tell the one--you know, that's my guiding principle, the one key.
Story_ID: 360556
Speaker 1: Are you aware of events happening?  I mean this is the 70--'70s [1970s], '80s, [1980s], any, any other things, news events, things effecting you, politics?
Speaker 2: Um (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  Not really political?
Speaker 2: Well, you--no, I should say teeny--my, my first strong political memory is the election of Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why is that?
Speaker 2: We were living in Fort Campbell, Kentucky.  We lived in the South.  He was a governor from the South.  I, you know, he was quite a character, right.  I mean we were all carrying peanuts around, and there was a certain--you know, and, and Watergate, right?  I mean this was the seminal event of our young childhood.  I mean Watergate was certain inescapable.  And I might not have understood all the twists and turns about it, but, you, you understood enough about what it was.  And Carter's election was this, you know, sort of portrayed and demonstrated as, you know, sort of this is the response to the breakdown of the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration.  And so, you know, we were all Carter supporters back, you know, Jimmy Carter.  Now, I didn't know anything about politics (laughter).  I didn't know what a Republican or Democrat was, but I was, was all for Jimmy Carter.  That probably came from the southern bias a little bit.  But I remember it really well--us being on the bus holding, you know, our little peanut signs.  I really remember when the space program was still alive, you know, I, I still remember early on, I don't know when all that ended off the top of my head, but, yeah, I do remember watching the launches, which I thought was the most awe-inspiring.  To this day, it gives me--I mean I watch every launch.  I don't care where I am.  I like, get to the TV.  It's just--to me, there's something ambitious and magical about heading to the stars.  So I remember I was a kid, I'm like ah, they're gonna send this--you know, Apollo [Apollo 11] is going up.  That was always a big deal.  And I remember my parents [HistoryMaker Alma Powell and HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] were sort of rising in the hierarchy, and, you know, I remember once they got invited to go.  We thought that was so cool.  They were gonna go down to Florida [to the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida] and watch a night launch, and we thought they had, we had--they had made it (laughter).  Somebody had asked them to go.  Definitely remember that.  But, you know, it was sort of a quiet time that way, right.  I mean the '70s [1970s] have a certain dull finish, I think, after the--you know, we were the kids, post-'60s [1960s], and, you know, it was disco and (laughter) and, and roller skating and, you know.  And I, and I don't think that in our daily lives--but I will say that as we became more Washington [D.C.] folk--that's because my dad kept coming, we kept coming back here.  By the time you're in high school, you're fairly conscious 'cause you're starting to know those people.  You knew your dad worked for the secretary of defense.  You know who the secretary of defense is.  You go, go to things at their, you know, at those offices.  So you, you've got a lot more conscious of it.  You know, and then when I went off to college [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], I certainly remember the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] election.  It was one of the most powerful things I ever saw.
Story_ID: 360557
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], and, and how you ended you choosing--you know, going there and choosing that or was it chosen for you?
Speaker 2: No, it was absolutely not chosen for me.  And I wish I had a great set of logic about why we went there.  I have no idea.  We, it came time to go for college, and my mind was in two places.  One, should I go to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] for military academy?  Now, that was also not pushed in my--my, my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was not promoting going to West Point.  And this was my own--maybe I want to go to West Point.  So, you know, we were going up to the academies to visit and all of this stuff, and I applied and was going through that process.  I had a good friend--she was two years ahead of me, and she was at William and Mary.  I thought it was like the best school I'd heard of, cause you know, we didn't grow up, I didn't know anything about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and, you know, I suppose I surely knew what they were, but, one, I wouldn't have thought I was anywhere close to being qualified, and, you know, my parents have--there was just nothing in our world that particularly thought of like the Northeast ivies [Ivy League] or anything.  But the closest thing that I knew like that was William and Mary in Virginia.  And it had the prestige in the field of being that kind of caliber.  And so, it just was natural.  I said, well, you know, there's at least--I'm gonna at least try for one of these.  And I applied early decision to William and Mary because my friend had gone there, and she liked it, and it just seemed so prestigious.  And I was shocked that I got in early decision--I, I knew before Thanksgiving, which really put a crimp in the academy process, which goes on 'til April (laughter).  I had not even visited the school before I applied there.  I got in--I remember me and my dad got in the car at Christmastime, and we went down there to look at it.  And nobody was there.  It was closed, it was cold.  You couldn't go in (laughter) a building.  All we did was walk around and look inside of windows.  I said, well, that was our visit.  And I, and I finished up the academy process.  I got in, you know, I got accepted to West Point, and it just didn't feel right.  And William and Mary did.  And I went there, and I have to say to this day, it's one of my dearest loves.  It was the best decision I probably ever made along the way.
Speaker 1: Now, why is that?
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's a, it's just a breathtakingly, wonderful school.  It's, it's, it's beautiful.  It has that element of ceremony and spirituality I like, right.  This is the second oldest college in America, founded in 1693, home of the Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson], Washington [President George Washington], Adams [sic.], Madison [sic.]--you know, it had this just wonderful flavor of sort of ancestral history, and, and, and sort, sort of the sense of being intrinsic to what America was.  So the feel of it was just really great.  It was small, at a level where everybody ultimately could know everybody.  I, I found it to be a safe, warm place to explore, and, you know, I met my wife [Jane Knott Powell] there in five days.  And, you know, she was there.
Speaker 1: Well what do you mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so there's almost no metric in which it doesn't pose--you know, I'm the vice-chair of their board now.  It's, it's my--it's one of my great passions.
Story_ID: 360558
Speaker 1: Now, let me--so you met her [Jane Knott Powell] there in five days.  What do you mean?  You're five days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were in the same hall, freshman hall [Yates Hall].
Speaker 1: You mean five days after you got there [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your wife--
Speaker 2: She was seven doors down--
Speaker 1: Your wife's name is?
Speaker 2: Jane, Jane, I met her--
Speaker 1: So you, you met her in your freshman year, and that was it.
Speaker 2: First week of my freshman year.  Well, it, it wasn't quite that--no, it's not linear.  (Laughter) I, I met her.  You know, we dated a good part of the freshman year and part of the sophomore year.  And then we stopped.  She started dating a guy out of college, much older, and I started dating other people.  And we were just best friends, and we were the rest of college.  We didn't go back to dating.  I moved away to Germany.  She was there, but she still--you know, you have a friend who's just, you know, to tell everything.  Then I got hurt in Germany and came back to Washington [D.C.] to the hospital, was there a year.  Jane would come every single night after work, every single night, you know.  Seven o'clock, here she'd come, bring the pizza, Subway, something to keep you going, every single day for a year.  And got out, you know, and the romance started kind of creeping back in, and when you have a life-threatening thing happen in your life, you get really spiritual about what life's about.  And, you know, I could see myself now going aren't you--why shouldn't you marry your best friend?  And that's sort of what you're supposed (laughter) now, what you ought to do.  And there was a lot that was gonna be hard about that, but, you know, we got married four months out of the hospital, nineteen years--eighteen years ago.
Speaker 1: That is pretty amazing.  Now, when, when you--even though you had been raised in a, you know, in an integrated environment, were there any issues when you were dating her at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--yeah.  And for me there were issues.  I, I mean I don't probably talk about this, for me, I actually found it to be quite a struggle.  I even think for me it wasn't really my preference.  She was my preference, but the racial thing was not my preference.  I thought that would be hard.  I thought it'd be controversial, and it is.  But at the end of the day, it just, it just didn't seem to be able to overcome what was really much more important.  And I was coming off probably the most intense personal experience of my--you know, you're, you're almost killed.  You're twenty-four years old, and you almost lost your life.  You're trying to figure out what's important in life, and you get really pretty fundamental about what's important.
Speaker 1: So you were twenty-four when you, you had the accident, I mean the accident? Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 360559
Speaker 1: Before we get to the accident, I just want to ask, were there other things about the William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] experience that were seminal or, you know, important (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  William and Mary probably transformed me.  There's a few points in my life where I'd say there was major transformation.  So I think William and Mary is a major transformation.  For one, I think that it surprised me I got in.  Again, I was a good student, an A and B student certainly.  I didn't think of myself as an intellectual or particularly scholarly in any way, but William and Mary made me start to think about being that way, and, and starting thinking that ideas and being intellectual and trying to learn was actually a really neat thing.  And it was an environment in which that's not frowned upon.  You're, you're not ostracized or, or sneered at for being a good student--we all, that's what we do here.  And it, it probably raised my consciousness and my level of ambition about, kind of intellectual activity because it made it cool to be so, and it had a three hundred year history of being so.  And you were interacting with people who also care.  And I don't think I would have naturally--like if I had gone to a big state school, of whatever variety, not--and maybe I would have.  That's not meant to be dismissive of a big city school, but if--this environment forced me into a space that I don't think I was naturally inclined to go to, and it really changed my idea about lifelong learning and ideas and thinking.  And that was really seminal.
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: That ideas really matter, that the intellectual record and tradition holds great lessons of insight in your daily life, and they're worth pursuing, that being a philosopher is actually a cool thing and that Aristotle had it right and maybe we are in--the pursuit of happiness is a real thing and part of that pursuit is coming to grips with your place in the world.  I mean all these kind of--it sound a little--but I'm a, I'm a passionate--you know, if somebody who knows me well will say, he is a philosopher.  I'm a passionate believer that life is about the pursuit of happiness and that includes a certain level of intellectual curiosity and I think that was formed there.  I think it was formed there.
Speaker 1: Now, so that was a much different experience than if you had gone to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York]?  Do you think there's that same--
Speaker 2: I think it would have been because I think the [U.S.] military part would have been so much more dominant that there would have been great examples, and, you know, the principles and the honor and everything.  I, I don't know that--I think that would have easily drowned out anything that would have made a conversion in me intellectually.  William and Mary gave me both because I was accepted at William and Mary on an R--a four year scholarship, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] scholarship.  So I went in as a cadet to William and Mary, and I loved the ROTC program there, and I was very successful.  When I was a senior, I was the commander of the corps of cadets.  It's also the place that really made me think I was capable of leadership because I ultimately became the head of, the number one cadet at William and Mary.  I, I joined a fraternity [Theta Delta Chi Fraternity] which was a great social experience for me.  I was the president of the fraternity when I was a senior.  I mean I had a lot of success in leadership things.  Remember I was telling you in high school [Lake Braddock Intermediate School; Lake Braddock Secondary School, Burke, Virginia], you know, this sort of risk aversion.  I'd had a few of those experiences like in the theater, but now, this was starting to say to me, this is what you should be about, trying to take on difficult things and be a leader like your dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and your mom [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] are.  And that I actually had some of that in me, and that school taught me that because that happened a lot there.
Story_ID: 360560
Speaker 1: What did you major in?
Speaker 2: Government.
Speaker 1: Government, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But no thoughts of politics, govern- no.
Speaker 2: No, I mean it was government in the more traditional sense of how government works, and it's structure and not sort of political life.  I mean I suppose I had a little inkling about that, but that's not been the passion of the academics or what I was doing.  It was more vaguely leadership generally.  Now, if that took a political course, to me, that was just a flavor of the thing I cared about.  But I knew I was going in the [U.S.] Army so I was fairly focused on, I'm gonna convert all this into that career cause it was coming up, and I was, you know, I was commissioned a lieutenant the day I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now, is your father's [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] career looming in your background?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Yeah, I don't, I don't know how you could grow up the child of someone like that and not think that part of that is cut into you.  It's (unclear) to get it right because it's not a sense of entitlement or you're absolutely going to be what he--but, but you can't not think part of that is sort of hardwired into what you are.  And again, you have to remember, it wasn't just a career.  The Army had been my whole life.  To have got out of William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] and gone and, you know, worked in a company in some junior management program, that would have been a huge disjunction from my life.  And I mean I, I've been in the Army, it's my whole life.  So, now, that I'm independent, am I gonna leave that world?  So, to me, it was also very comforting to go right back into the space in a professional capacity that I had been in my whole life.  And it was warm to me that way.
Speaker 1: So you, you graduate, you would be--you're what rank?
Speaker 2: Second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Second lieutenant, okay.  And you get shipped off?
Speaker 2: Not right away.  The first thing you do is, you know, I went to a number of schools, but then you go to your, your major school which teaches you how to be, what branch you are.  I was an armor officer, tanks.  So for six months, I went to Fort Knox [Kentucky], and that was another sign of that because that was a very good program, tough program to learn how to be a particular kind of officer.  You're there with every other junior officer in the whole Army of that profession.  And I graduated first in my class out of that thing so there was starting to be this sort of string of, you can do this, you know, and, and you should at least always try.
Speaker 1: And your father, is he still a first-star general or, no, he's--what is he now?
Speaker 2: Two, when I graduated he was a two-star so he was probably still two-star, but soon to be a three-star.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Three-star within a few months of where I am right now 'cause I was there six months and then I was sent to Germany.  And I had been in Germany (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's when he, that's when he whispered in your ears?  Take, take care of the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Take care of the--
Speaker 2: Take care of our soldiers.
Speaker 1: Soldiers.
Speaker 2: So I moved and went to Hamburg, Germany and within six months he was three-star because he came to Germany, six months after I was--a few months after I was there.  He took over what we call the Seventh Corps.  There were two huge corps in Germany, the seventh--I mean the Fifth [Fifth Corps] in the north and the Seventh in the south, but I was in a unit that was inside the Seventh, and he was the commander of the Fifth.
Story_ID: 360561
Speaker 1: So, but tell us what happened with the accident.
Speaker 2: Um, it's about a year and a half after I'd been there [in Germany].  We--I was doing great.  I mean I was--been there a while.
Speaker 1: Now, you and Jane [Jane Knott Powell], you were married (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: No, you weren't, that's right, I'm sorry.  That's later.
Speaker 2: We were not.  I had just become a first lieutenant, and I had just changed units.  I was now what we call an executive officer, which is the second in command of a small company of about a hundred and forty people, so not super small.  But I had a new commander, and he was, he was a little bit of a pistol and not particularly well regarded.  And in many ways I went there 'cause they needed more good officers there I think.  We had--this was, this was a time when the Soviet Union was a real thing, and, and, you know, the war was very seriously considered at the time.  I mean they were on the other side of the line.  And, you know, and then my tanks, for example, we went--we walked around with live ammunition.  This was not playground.  This was the real thing.  And so frequently, we would have to go do a reconnaissance of what we called our, you know, GDP, general defense position, which is when the balloon goes up, which means if war starts, where, where do you go?  So he was new, and we decided we were--he needed to go do a recon--and I wasn't going.  He was gonna go--cause I was now an XO [executive officer], and I'm not a direct combat officer in that situation.  I'm sort of--he has his three lieutenants junior to me, but who run the platoon situation.  So he said, "I really want you to go.  You know the positions, and I don't and dah, dah."  I was like, this is pain, I really don't want to go, but fine.  So we had four jeeps and we, you know, I had my own jeep.  He had his jeep, and he, he was in the front, and I was in the back and the lieutenants were in between.  And we went up and spent the whole day up there doing whatever we did.  We had gotten up early.  We had lunch and we were coming back at like six in the evening, tired and sort of racing down the Autobahn in a prof- you know, in a line, and I was in the back jeep.  And you have to remember, these are army jeeps, there are no, there are no seat belts.  The doors are plastic. There is no roll bar, and my driver basically fell asleep.  And when he did, he lost control of the jeep on the Autobahn.  We're going about fifty miles an hour, and it just flipped over, full speed.  And it flipped on his side, and I think I got thrown out into the street, and I think the jeep went up in the air and then crashed on me and bounced off.  And it broke my spine and broke my pelvic cradle apart.
Speaker 1: You said blood was going--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you never know how these things--I had no external cuts.  No blood was coming out of me, but that was the problem, all the blood was broken and spilling into me.  So basically, you're bleeding to death internally.  And the Germans came and got, I mean the--I can--I never, I'm sure I blacked out at some point, but I can replay this tape now like it's happening right this second.  I can see every click of it, you know.  And the German ambulance came, and they took me to the German hospital.  And they didn't do anything.  There was no IV, no fluids.  There was a kid in my backseat, a lieutenant who spoke fluent German.  He overheard them, and they said, "Oh, it's too bad.  He's gonna die.  Let's not do anything."  So the young kid argued with them in German to at least, you know--so they kind of grudgingly started an IV so you could get some fluids.  Well, I'm--I can see the room now.  I'm laying going where is everybody?  Basically, then the [U.S.] Army had gotten word of what had happened and the Black Hawk helicopters came crashing into this hospital, and they--the army surgeons came in and were furious and hauled me out and put me on the helicopter and took me back to the army hospital [98th General Hospital] in Nuremburg [Germany], went right into surgery.  And then my parents [HistoryMaker Alma Powell and HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] came over, and he had left Germany by this time; four days in the hospital, fighting off death, and then they decided it was too serious.  They weren't gonna be able to handle it.  So they put me on a medivac airplane, flew me to Walter Reed Army Medical Center [Walter Reed National Military Medical Center] here in Washington [D.C.].  And I spent the next year in there.
Story_ID: 360562
Speaker 1: So Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.], you being there, that was very good medical care, right?
Speaker 2: Superb.  It was more than superb they had to--to have any chance, they had to take risks that they'd never taken before.  And they had the courage and the brilliance to figure out what to do and convince my parents [HistoryMaker Alma Powell and HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to take the risk and to take that responsibility and actually pull it off.
Speaker 1: So what it?  What had to be done?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the surgeons--first of all my parents, of course, were panicked because this was really bad.  I mean as bone breaks go, it doesn't get much worse and live.  So they said, "Look, we're gonna find the best orthopedic surgeon in the world if we have to," 'cause, you know, you get nervous.  Does the [U.S.] Army have the right people?  And everybody came to them and said, you know what, the best orthopedic surgeon in the world is right there, the chief of orthopedic surgery at Walter Reed, you know, Colonel Bruce Van Dam.  And he was a great guy.  And he came to my parents, and he said, "Look, this is really tough, and the book doesn't have a great answer.  What you ought to do with this, basically it says, put a kid in traction for seven months and bolt him to a bed and put the bones together and see what happens."  He says, "What will happen is, he'll never walk.  He'll heal crooked, and psychologically nobody wants--you know, the idea of just being bolted still for that long is terrifying."  And he said, "I don't really want to do that.  I have a surgery in mind.  I've only done it once, not in a case this bad, but if it works, I think he could be on crutches in three months.  There's a chance we could get walking again.  Mentally, I think he'd be stronger."  And they said, "Okay," but it was going to be a seventeen, eighteen hour surgery, which it was, in which they really, put in a nutshell, take you very much apart, I mean in a pretty intrusive way.  And they bolted some big steel plates onto the spinal column.  And they literally crow barred them into your body so that they formed an outer cradle, and they bolted the bones on, the broken bones on the cradle to each other and on the steel.  And then they put a big pin frame in the front that came out of your body about two feet.  This thing stuck out of me for like three months, that clamped the front while this clamped the back.  And true to his word--I mean it's not like it all went smoothly, but eighteen hour surgery, and three months later they took this thing out, and we started going to physical therapy to learn to walk again.
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: I was there for the rest of--almost a full year.
Speaker 1: Now, so, at the point that you start physical therapy, there's no question that you'll be able walk again?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there is.  There's no guarantee yet, no guarantee yet.
Speaker 1: Did you lose any feeling to your--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  At the time we started, you still had a lot of loss because your nerves got really yanked.  I mean everything comes out of the lower spinal column and out, and so that got torn.  For a long time, the right side of my legs and stuff didn't even really work.  And at this point, you know, quadriceps didn't work particularly well.  And you didn't, and nerves are tricky.  You don't know what's coming back and what's never coming back.  Enough came back, but a lot of its still gone.  You know, you could stick a pin here, and I won't even feel it, and I have things that don't work, and, but enough to get through.  And he was brill- he's just my savior really.
Story_ID: 360563
Speaker 1: So, what other things, what, what also transpired during this year then [at Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.]?  You had a lot of time on your hands sort of, sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the first, yeah, the first blow to the solar plexus, is, you know, at first everybody's really, you know, "Oh, we can't wait 'til you get better.  And you'll come back," and, but this Dr. Van Dam [Bruce Van Dam], who did not play around came in one day, and my mother [HistoryMaker Alma Powell] was there.  And he said, you know, "You need to realize right away, your [U.S.] Army career is over forever."  Now, I was just devastated, a very upsetting cry, and my mother was really upset with the way he had done; called my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] (laughter).  He came over, you know, and kind of confronted the doctor, you know.  Now, now, you have to remember, here's a three-star general who's gonna come over and be mad.  And I, I really admire--Dr. Van Dam said, "Look, I got to tell you.  There's a lot possible for him.  We, we don't have any time for mental energy directed at things that are never gonna happen.  This is never gonna happen.  We all know it.  He needs to know it.  He needs to grieve the loss of it so we can get the mental energy--."  He was a very spiritual doctor for an orthopedic guy who's usually more like a Legos maker, you know, (laughter).  These guys rarely have this kind of temperament.  And he said, "No, no, no.  I don't know what--I can put bones together, but I can't make it, I can't make a person will to live, will to come back.  And I, I could treat the same patient next door and that kid will die.  And the only thing that I know that distinguishes them is what happens up here.  So I just want every want of mental energy focused on the right thing.  And this is not the right thing.  We might as well get it out of the way."  To my dad's credit, he said, "All right."  And we just went from there.
Speaker 1: So, but isn't this mourning the loss of what had been always anticipated and hoped for?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, most definitely.
Speaker 1: So were you--
Speaker 2: But you have to remember, you know, if you, if you're well balanced, and I think we were, you then, you know, you're grieving, but on the other hand, it's an opportunity.  Everything is a choice--everything creates an opportunity.  So, oh, well, but now I have the opportunity to choose something else.  It wasn't quite that easy, but you, you do, ultimately, that's where you get.  You know, life takes you where it takes you.  I can't, can't make the jeep not roll over.  You can't make someone not die who's important to you.  You, you--you know, there's just so much you can't.  So I think the real test of who you are is what you do when those crossroads come.  And there's always a road, you know, so it turned left.
Story_ID: 360564
Speaker 1: So you get married four months after you are released.  At what point are you walking in the, you know, three, three months after the accident you start your physical therapy.
Speaker 2: Yes, so I'm in the hospital [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] almost seven--well, you know, eight more months, nine more months almost, eight more months.  So, I could walk around on crutches, you know, by the holidays.  I had to have another major organ surgery where things had gotten torn.  Until that was fixed, I wasn't really free to move around all that much.  And so, by the time I got out of the hospital, I walked okay with canes, with canes.  You know, my wedding, I insisted I was not going up with a cane, so I sucked it up, but only (laughter) from the short runway up and back.
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: And the grave thing too was, and you're never gonna have children was the other statement.  Funny how we were surprised by that pretty quickly.  So they're [Powell's sons, Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] little, they're little blessing in a way.
Speaker 1: So Jane [Jane Knott Powell] married you with the, not even knowing that you could have children?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that's why you said you fell in love with the person?  You--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was almost like un- unrequited or you know, this demonstrable love that you couldn't turn away really.  Sort of.
Speaker 2: It's funny how you put it that way, but somehow that's right.  I--it, it--I don't know that there was--it just had to be.
Story_ID: 360565
Speaker 1: So, what are, what are your thoughts at this point?  I mean, so you're newly married [to Jane Knott Powell].  You don't, you don't have a career, you know, in the [U.S.] Army anymore so what are--or you have a position--or do you have a position?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Nothing.
Speaker 2: Well, you go through a process where you're retired for disability.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a lot of work you had to do, sort of processing out.  That took some time.  And then I got a, you know, I went and looked for a job.  I got a job in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] as a civilian, and you know, went to work there for two or three years.
Speaker 1: And who did you work for there?
Speaker 2: I worked for a man named Rich Armitage [Richard Armitage] who ultimately was deputy secretary of state for my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].  He's a great guy.  And then I went to law school.
Speaker 1: Now, what--when did the law school come into focus?
Speaker 2: I had been at the Pentagon maybe two years.  The Pentagon, but the Pentagon was sort of transitional.  I, I, you know, when you sort of say, well, what are your career loves and the ones gone, I always that I would want to go to law school, was the other idea.  Even when I was in the Army and healthy, I thought well, maybe I'll get out and go to law school.  So that was always the other thing I was interested in.  So this, you know, it was just a matter of that opportunity.  But it was intimidating.  Could I get in?  And it was the same thing that the college thing was.  And I got into Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], I--and my wife was great and just like go full time, go.  You know, and she went to work, and took care of that baby [Jeffrey Powell], and, you know, we did it.
Story_ID: 360566
Speaker 1: So how did you find law school?
Speaker 2: For me, it was great to go to law school years after college.  You know, at this point I'd been out of college for, you know, six years almost, and I think that was really important because I knew why I was there.  I, I mean, I, I--I wasn't interested in lingering.  I'm not dating.  I'm not here for social life, you know, I'm not unsure.  I, I'm here to get a career, and so--and there were a lot of people there who were in my cla- category.  Maybe, you know, I had friends who were in similar situations, and we were sort of our group.  Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] was a great place, but, you know, I didn't--it wasn't like William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] where I lingered there.  You know, I had a wife [Jane Knott Powell] and kid [Jeffrey Powell] at home.  When I wasn't in class or studying I went home.  It's, it's not an--it's not a campus law school so it's not like, you know, we're all, all the classes on campus.  Everybody lived somewhere else.  But it, it was another transformational experience though because it was a new level of intellectual rigor that I really found fascinating, which was sort of even an order of magnitude greater than William and Mary.  I mean the legal tradition, which again is tradition bound, saying a lot of those things I'm always attracted to, tradition bound, ceremonial, the role of the judiciary in government, the, the sense that a law--a good lawyer is a calling to, civil rights tradition and the constitutional tradition, all of these things were really powerful to me.  And I, I did much better than I thought I would have done, and argued in a--you know, there's a big competition in the class, moot court, which I won as a student, which I thought was really great for me.  It made me think, I could do this.  And everything is always the same story, which is at some point you take a risk, something happens.  You--it validates that you could do more than you thought you could and you add another layer to what you think you're capable of.
Speaker 1: You won the moot court competition for the school.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that, that's the third year, right?  Was that the third year or was it--
Speaker 2: No, it's actually done early.  It's like the first--
Speaker 1: First, this is the first?
Speaker 2: --or second year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know--
Speaker 2: 'Cause the competition's also decided whether you could be in the program and what--so, by winning, I became able to be on the top--the school had like six more court teams, and they had one that was the premier, so I was one of the four in the premier.  And then we did really well as a team that year.  That was my second year, and then my third, I ran the whole program.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.  So was your thought that you would be a litigator?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't--maybe.  I, I don't think it was very well formed yet.  I had worked for some really good firms in the summer.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you work the first summer?
Speaker 2: O'Melveny and Myers [O'Melveny and Myers LLP].
Speaker 1: But in D.C [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: In D.C.  The second summer I worked for Arnold and Porter [Arnold and Porter LLP].  The third summer, I worked a little while at Williams and Connolly [Williams and Connolly LLP].
Story_ID: 360567
Speaker 1: And then I had the most transformational experience which is--
Speaker 2: Now, now, why--tell me what that--what they were?
Speaker 1: 'Cause, yet again, I took a lark and decided I wanted to try to become a, a law clerk, which was the prestigious thing to try to do.  I was limited 'cause I could not move.  You know, I couldn't go anywhere.  I had to try D.C. [Washington, D.C.], which is one of the more prestigious courts in the country.  I applied--I was surprised I got an interview, and I was surprised I got picked, and I was surprised by who, who--Judge Harry Edwards [Harry T. Edwards], who is one of the first great black, appellate judges on the court of appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit], and had a reputation of being the hardest and the most hard-headed thinker.  And I was panicked that he had invited (laughter) me because I was terrified that he had made a mistake.  I was not capable of being a law clerk to this guy.  I mean, I--and I was already doubtful that I'd be one at all, let alone to Harry Edwards, who only takes the best and only demands the best and suffers no fools.  But, you know, at this point I'd started to adopt this philosophy that the things--do the thing that scares you the most.  It's telling you something.  That's the way you grow, you take risks.  And I was scared to death, but he must see something.  I, you know, my father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] once taught me, sometimes if you're good, other people will see things in you before you see it in yourself.  And you have to learn to trust them.  Harry Edwards, he said, doesn't take an idiot and so he, he must believe.  And he probably knows better than you that--what you're capable of, so trust him.  Okay.  It was the most transformational you--I mean, first of all the level, the volume of work we had to process was something I'd never done before.  The quality that it had to be was something I'd never done before, the, the rigor, the intellectual, the research, to be able to keep up with my co-clerks who were Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and who were great friends and incredible talents.  But more was the, with him a relationship became formed that has been with me for the rest of my life.  He, he rarely chooses to, but when he chooses to see someone he believes has something, and I guess he did, he, he quietly puts you under the wing--and by the way, that means you're gonna get your butt kicked (laughter).  But getting under his wing is not a cushy thing.  It is a, I have decided I see something, but I am going to work out a little harder.  I started feeling, God, what is he doing to me?  Why am I doing this?  Why that?  And I remember one day, his secretary, another wonderful black woman, is a dear friend, she, she goes, "You do know what he's doing, don't you?"  I said, "What are you talking about?"  She goes, "He came, he came and told me, he said, 'Mike, Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], he's got something I've seen before, you know, I'm gonna--,'" and he never told me this.  And she's telling me, she goes, "You'd better watch.  He's decided--," and we, he worked me hard, and I kept learning to go to new levels, and he would, he would tell me stop feeling inferior.  You're as good as they are and just, these lessons would come.
Story_ID: 360568
Speaker 1: I remember one day we had a case--I won't be any more lengthy about this, but it was a really weird, boring case normally.  It was like a bus accident case which almost never comes to a court of appeals.  Because it was D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and D.C. is not a state, these things come to the federal system.  And a woman had lost a relative when the metro bus hit her, hit the car, and the lower judge had--the jury found for her, but then the judge overturned it because he said the evidence didn't support the--so this should have--the appellate courts hate these kinds of cases, you know.  They're routine.  What do we need to be bothered with this for?  I kept reading it, and it bothered me a lot.  It bothered me a lot, and the more I read it, I thought, the judge has misunderstood something 'cause there was an expert who was Korean, didn't speak good English, and I kept reading.  And I said, I don't think he's--the judge thought that they had conceded stuff that I didn't think he had.  So I went to the judge [Harry T. Edwards], and I said, "You know, judge, I hate to tell you this, but I think we should overturn this thing.  I think they're wrong."  He goes, "Oh, come on."  And I, I said, "No, I really do."  And I showed what I'd done.  And he said, he said, "Well, I don't care much about it so if that's what you want to--you know, if that's what you want to argue, fine.  Write it up," and--this is before the oral argument, I wrote my, what we call bench memos, these big things.  And I said we should find for the woman.  So we go have the oral argument.  The case gets argued.  Judges always go vote immediately, so he comes back after the voting, goes, "Well, you lost, you know, they, they, they're not buying.  So, you know, I, what do I care, I'm just gonna vote with them, so it'll be three to zero.  And Judge Williams [ph.] or whoever is gonna write the opinion."  I said, ah, I went back to my--and it bugged me.  It just kept bugging me.  And so I kept looking at the record, and they were measuring skid marks.  So I started doing the math like, if the skid marks--the bus had to be going this fast.  I just couldn't stop thinking this woman was right.  So I kind of went back to him, and I said, "I have to take it--I got to argue with you about this."  I said, "Look," and I with--and he said, "Well, all right.  We'll dissent, all right.  Write the opinion.  I'll tell the court we're dissenting.  And I'll vote the way you want me to vote."  So I think all right, that's cool.  So I go to write the opinion.  It was hard, you know, I put math in it and everything, and I remember I went into this office.  And I was in my office--we, you know, 'cause it was a quiet chamber and I had my door closed.  And I heard his door open--I'll never forget this day.  And he goes--'cause the case had a funny name.  It was Stella V. Boodoo [Stella V. Boodoo et al. v. Jerome Cary Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, 1994], Stella versus Boodoo (laughter), we used to always laugh.  And I heard this door open, and he'd been pretty dour, 'cause this was in the first three months.  He said, "Stella V. Boodoo.  Well, damn if Mike Powell [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] might not be a lawyer after all."  And he was just so excited about the opinion and thought how well it--he goes, "He knocked this out of the park.  Well, well, well, look who we have here."  And I opened my door, and he was just like, "Well, you nailed that one."  And he just walked back in his office.  And I just--it was the warm--it was like, oh, my God.
Speaker 2: Was it because of what you had written?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he read it, he said, "Oh, you got it, you got it nailed."  So we circulated the opinion.  And he said, he came into me, he--we had a rule.  You were not allowed to talk to other chambers about opinions.  He wanted everybody to do their--he goes, "You go try to convince the other clerks this is right."  So I talked to them, and they--he recirculated the opinion.  Long story, short, we persuaded them, and we flipped the whole thing.  So it went from three to two against this woman to three to two for her and we overturned the court.  You know, and this was a poor woman had gotten--her husband was killed in the--I was just--there was just a sense of justice that we'd gotten right finally, and that just transformed me forever.  And then he became--at that, from that moment on, we were mentor and mentee for the rest of my life.  He's my dearest friend in the world and my wife's [Jane Knott Powell] dearest friend.  Whenever we need a good slapping around, you call him up, and--
Speaker 2: That's a pretty amazing story. Now talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a great teacher.
Story_ID: 360569
Speaker 1: Talk about clerking and what that whole, you know, process was like.  Like how many clerks did he have each year (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: And, and was it a one or two-year clerkship? Was it a one year?
Speaker 2: One year, most appellate clerks are only one year.
Speaker 1: One year, okay.
Speaker 2: So, you got a lot to learn and do in one year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there any training when you come on to do it or you're just thrown in--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, you're kind of thrown in.
Speaker 1: Had you been on a law review?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so at least that prepared you, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I--not really, not in my opinion.  I mean a little bit.  I mean you had a little better research skills and a little better citation, but it didn't come close to what it meant to really weigh people's lives in your hands and need to get it right.  It just was not the same thing, the sense of urgency.  You know, because law reviews have a tendency to be sort of esoteric and wack, you know.  Legal scholarship tends to reward the most out of line, right, but this is the real world.  This is pragmatism, this is people's life and death.  This is the government's case, this is--so that just transformed what the nature of the work was.  Judge Edwards [Harry T. Edwards] was really hard on clerks, and some clerkships are pretty cushy.  I mean the judge does the writing and they just kind of talk.  We, we were forced to write.  So the--Judge Edwards would divide the cases for the month among the three of us.  So basically, a third, a third, a third.  He required you write a voluminous bench memo for every case, so I might have--on average in a month, you would have four to five cases.  So in that thirty-day period, you were gonna write a forty-to-fifty page bench memo for each case.  And he had a strict format.  It had to a background, followed by this, followed by that, and then write the attachments.  And then you had to take all the cases that supported it and attach them in a certain way.  He was very thorough about this.  So they'd go in.  He didn't take case--but he went up on the bench for oral argument, all he had was your bench memo.  You, he took--you were responsible for everything.  If he, if he didn't, you didn't have any bench memo, he didn't have it.  That's all he would use, so you had a lot of weight on whether you did that well.  And then if he got an opinion, and you have--any opinion that comes down that he's writing, you had to write.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So in a month, you'd have four bench memos, but you might have two or three opinions at the same time.
Speaker 1: So he really used his clerks.
Speaker 2: Extensively (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Isn't it more work on him in some respects?
Speaker 2: But he knew he was a teacher.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Story_ID: 360570
Speaker 1: Now, talk about his [Harry T. Edwards] background and what you know about him and, you know.
Speaker 2: I think he's one of the greatest minds in the country.  He, he's got a great story.  He's--actually grew up in Motown.  He's, his stepfather was Berry Gordy [sic. Thomas Lyle].  His mother [sic. father, George Edwards] was married to Berry Gordy [sic. Esther Gordy Edwards].  So he grew up in Motown in the middle of it all, saw everything and went to school.  He was always a great mind.  I mean he went to school, went to law school, did very well, became a law professor, was an extraordinarily eminent law professor at the best law schools, Michigan State [sic. University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], tenure professor, great scholarship, became a labor lawyer.  He was very into labor law and equal employment law, made a mark; got appointed to the bench at a very young age.  I think he was a Democratic appointee at the age of thirty-something.  You know, 'cause he's been on the bench over twenty years.
Speaker 1: Who appointed him?  He was appointed--.
Speaker 2: Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], I think.
Speaker 1: Carter, okay.
Speaker 2: And at the time, I think there were only--there might have been three to four black appellate judges in the nation, including Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] who would have been on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: So did you--what other things did he teach you that have stayed with you during that, that very--
Speaker 2: A lot. Oh, God, we could do this all night.  Let's see.  I love the word rigor.  He was a man of rigor, being rigorous about your thinking.  And too many people are very facile about things.  So make assertions or very slick in their sort of presentation, and he was a person who everything got tested three and four times.  And you had to be very thorough and rigorous and that's a skill that I'd--you know, I'm not so sure I had confronted at that level.  What admired me is that we had a connection--I think there was a racial thing in our relationship in which this was all about progress, but he had that old school--I, "I don't help you by coddling you.  I help you by whipping you, I mean (laughter), you know.   You know, I don't have time for people who aren't prepared."  And so he was one of those people I met who really commanded that ethic that said, I'm gonna make racism your problem because I'm gonna be so good, I'm gonna be so good, you, you cannot possibly deny me without being openly, blatantly and overtly racist.  He was a supporter of affirmative action, for example, but he would say, "Look, it's a silly fight.  It's a battle over mediocrity."  And I'd say, "What do you mean?"  He says, "Because we're all arguing about which C students should get the last five seats in a class.  That's not what you need, you know.  If you--you need to be the A student and there won't be any question."  Not that it isn't important, but, you know, his view was let's--you know, I don't want to be talking about battles over being mediocre.  And, you know, his attitude on the court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit] was, he never had a sense of inferiority.  I'm just gonna outwork you.  I'm gonna outthink you.  I'm gonna be better.  I'm gonna be so much--and I don't, I know it's not fair that I have to be this good in order to just be equal to you, but I'm not gonna spend all my mental energy crying about that, or believe it unfair.  I'm just--not only am I gonna do this to be this, I'm gonna do this.  And, and you're not gonna keep up.  And I--as a racial message to me, this was a sort of refreshing, but personal message about how to live your life, which is, you know, I--always around people who can say, "Oh, this unfair, and why should we have to do this?"  It's often turns into rationalizations for failure or weak performance, and he would not tolerate that.  And he said, "The best way to find a racist is be so good, they can't be anything else, and then you'll know."  And I just thought that was so--somehow that was so clean.  Just be so good it has to be--they, they won't get away with the little subtle things, right, cause they're not gonna be able to get away with their little quiet ways of making you inferior.  They're gonna have to come tackle you (laughter) and expose who they are.  There'll be no way, and he's always succeeded that way.  And that's the way I try to go about it.
Story_ID: 360571
Speaker 1: Now, you went--you joined O'Melveny and Myers [O'Melveny and Myers LLP] again, right?
Speaker 2: Yep. After that.
Speaker 1: After that.  Now, why did you choose that over the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Another mentor, Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, one of my favorites. We've been--
Speaker 2: I go from mentor to mentor.  That's my--.
Speaker 1: Now, had he been your--he hadn't been your mentor up to that point?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, 'cause I had, you know, when I had clerked there in the summer I'd gotten to know him, and one summer when I worked for him, Thur- it was the summer that Thurgood Marshall passed.  It was the next summer--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I think it was some commemoration of his time on the bench because Bill had been asked by both Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] to write law review articles about Thurgood Marshall, so he had asked me to help, which was kind of a wonderful assignment, and we were just working on the history of this guy.  And I remember one day, he said, "Come down to my office at two o'clock 'cause I--we just can't figure this out."  I come down, and he says, "Come on we're going, come get in the car.  We're going somewhere."  We got rolling up to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, just sort of crash in the back door.  We take a left to right, all of a sudden we're walking into the chambers of Thurgood Marshall, and there he sits at the desk.  And I was like, I cannot believe this.  And we just plopped down, and he just starts talking like old--and they grew up together.  I mean they grew up in Baltimore [Maryland], and for two and a half hours, these two just told war stories.  You know, I couldn't re-replicate this experience if--but he just--it was important for me to see it.  He wanted you to see it.  They went through Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] in detail.  They were telling stories about what they did.  And I'm just fascinated.  And Thurgood doesn't suffer any fools either.  And it was great because you just got to watch two old friends, great--two lions in the Civil Rights Movement and hardheaded lawyers, recounting their lives together.  You couldn't pay for it.  And then I was blessed 'cause Thurgood--I think Justice Marshall died some time shortly thereafter.
Story_ID: 333331
Speaker 1: Bill [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.] said to me, and Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] said something similar, "The minute you get angry, and the minute you get emotional, you lose.  You stop thinking.  You're missing everything.  I don't have time to get angry at 'em.  I just got to beat 'em (laughter), and if I act like he's, he's insignificant because I reject his position of he's sort of so morally corrupt that I completed erase his value, then he will ultimately win."  So I'm not so sure Marshall wouldn't say of Clarence Thomas, I don't agree.  But I'm so sure he wouldn't spend his energy showing you why Clarence's thoughts are wrong rather than getting emotional about somehow, he's not qualified and not authentically there.  I mean anyone who knows Clarence's legal ability is certainly qualified.  So, yeah, would Thurgood (unclear), I, I disagree.  I'm not sure he would.
Speaker 2: Now, do you think Thurgood had--was he totally happy with the time he spent on the bench [U.S. Supreme Court].  Were--when you were in there that, was there a sense of, a feeling of, of total accomplishment, and, and satisfaction.
Speaker 1: It's hard to say, you know, you--he's my favorite kind of old southern, grumpy old man, right.  I mean he had (roars) all the time, you know.  So discerning his true emotion, I'd have to say in that little window was pretty--he was, a very happy mood that day.  Bill was one of his favorite people, and he was certainly enjoying himself.  You know, but you could argue that in the time on the court, he didn't make that much of a difference.  There's one school of scholarship that says, while he was great, he didn't really--Bill Coleman's thesis in our Law Review [Harvard Law Review] article ['A Tribute to Justice Thurgood Marshall,' William T. Coleman, Jr.] was that his dissents shaped things, that as he took seriously the idea, that I won't be the winner, but I will be the influencer, and things will not go as far as they could go.  And the whole thesis was, could we show that?  That's why we went to see him.  Again, I think he's a--was a lawyer's lawyer.  He, he would accept the rationale of that.  He can't control it--and the president controls how many are on here and who think one way or the other.  That's not my--you know, my role in my lane is to accomplish these things in this way.  That's what I think is breaking down in other parts of our institutions where people get so angry they just go to the podium and yell at each other, and still nothing happens.  That's what's disgusting in America, not disagreement, but that we don't know how to civilly disagree anymore and actually then find pragmatic.  I think we create food fights, and you get rewarded for just being the best food fighter.  It doesn't matter if you do anything.  I don't think Thurgood Marshall would have ever felt content to do that.  You read very few of his opinions that sort of are just fanatic and rant--I mean, you know, he really just--the testament is his best friend on the court was William Rehnquist.  Very few people--he was closest to Rehnquist.  They had lunch together, smoked cigars together, Rehnquist and--and Rehnquist was a very private man.  I knew him, and I said, I said to Bill, "How can he be--."  He's like, "Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], these are people who admire ability.  Thurgood doesn't care if William Rehnquist is more conservative than he is if he admires his abilities."  That's what missing, right.  I wish I could get, you know, you know, the Republican majority leader and the Democratic leader to think of each other that way instead of--you know, that would be nice (laughter).  But the judiciary still has a flavor of that which is why I admire it.
Story_ID: 333332
Speaker 1: When you went back to O'Melveny and Myers [O'Melveny and Myers LLP], so are you--at this point, what, what is your practice?  You're not--are you thinking of a practice area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean when you're young, and when you're junior, I should say, not young, but, you know, you--it's very generalized, you know, wherever the firms going.  You work for people, and you're exploring different subjects, you know, and I did everything from civil rights and labor law.  I did antitrust, I did government contracts, and by the time you start becoming a third and fourth year, you started getting pressured to kind of pick.  And I started picking antitrust and communications law.
Speaker 1: And why did you choose those? What were some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Communications always fascinates me because I think there was a trans- there's really a massive transformation going on in the world and society.  And I think it's really monumental.  Like the industrial age is an epic, I think the information age is an epic, and we happen to be people living at the transition.  And I thought that this is really gonna be what the whole world's about.  This, and I also--I get really, this is the philosophical side of me, I always to say to people, "What makes human beings, human beings is that they can communicate at a higher order."  And so when you change the way people communicate you're probably changing the very fundamentals of society and relationships.  I mean my son's idea of love is very different than mine in the instant messaging kind of world, right.  Courtship is different, expectations--you know, like, so I get really intrigued by how--you know, and I love gadgets.  You know, everybody will say, "Well, Mike Powell's [HistoryMaker Michael Powell] a super gadget guy.  He owns all this stuff.  He plays with it."  I do, but I'm also really intrigued with how it changes people.  I love watching my children [Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] 'cause I think they're the true, first digital generation.  And I think we've yet to understand how they'll change the world.  They--you know, even technology companies, which I work with a lot, I mean we're--the rest of us are frauds.  We're sort of adapting to change, but my eleven year old was born with change.  He's never turned a rotary dial in his life.  He's never not had an interactivity.  He's never seen a vinyl record.  He's never seen the ability to personalize and control and command communications.  I don't know what kind of worker he's gonna be or teacher or father or, or lover or president.  But he's not gonna be like the ones we know.  And to me, that was really intriguing, and that took me there.  And antitrust to me was just intellectually intriguing because sort of--everybody thinks that's a really hard subject and very economic and (unclear).  But it really is about behaviors, right.  So, under what conditions do people behave certain ways that are bad, right.  So what, so when do companies--what, what are the conditions that are present when companies go astray--start to do the things that harm consumers because I think people get really emotional about those things.  There are some people who think that companies always gonna hurt you 'cause they're a company.  Well, that's an ideology.  That's not, that's just kind of a blind--I'm more intrigued like a doctor might be with, "Look, I don't know if companies are good or bad.  I just think they're profit-seeking maximizers."  So when does that behavior reinforce good things and when does it, bad, and what are the condition then can you find them?  I think that's really interesting.  I don't like to get into, you know, is this company good or that company bad.  I don't think companies are personalities.  I think they're institutions that can be more predictable based on what's present.
Speaker 1: Now, who were the clients or the clients, O'Melveny and Myers clients in the area of communications and--and anti-trust (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time, we had a big client called GTE [GTE Corporation], which became Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: GTE was bought by Verizon so our client was GTE that became Verizon.  Disney [The Walt Disney Company] was a big client of O'Melveny 'cause O'Melveny is a big Los Angeles [California] firm.  It had a lot of studios.  We did Disney mergers and, and stuff like that, so.  They had a, they had a pretty nice stable.
Story_ID: 333333
Speaker 1: Now, what made your move to the [U.S.] Department of Justice then?
Speaker 2: Another mentor.  The story's always the same.
Speaker 1: Is that--now, what is this Joel Klein?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My first professor in law school [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], day one, was Joel Klein.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was an adjunct professor.  He was a practicing attorney.  And I was a little--remember I'm an older student, and one, I just admired him.  He took to me, we--I was older so in some ways closer to him generationally than the average student.  And he'd sometimes spend a lot of day in the law school cause, between classes and going back, and, you know, we'd, we'd have lunch together in the cafeteria and stuff.  And I just really liked him.  And I guess he had the same thing.  And when he became the head of the antitrust division at Justice, he wanted a strong, kind of number two to run, be the chief of staff, and my phone rang at O'Melveny [O'Melveny and Myers LLP], and he says, "I'm gonna get this job.  Why don't you come do it with me?"
Speaker 1: That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: To me it was a really big deal.
Speaker 1: Well, it's a big deal.
Speaker 2: And again, I, I at this point actually had conceptualized what I was doing.  I, I take the opportunity to work for people that I admire.  I was like, I want to go learn from Joel.  That's what I want to do now.  I don't know.  I don't even know what the job is.  I don't care.  What's the title?  I don't know, chief of staff, whatever it is.  I want to go learn from and work with Joel.  Now, that's particularly important given at this point, I'm an identified Republican, and I'm a go in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration and work for the, for the Democratic--and I don't care about that.  I just--that doesn't mean anything to me.  I wanted to go work for this man, and loved it.  And to this day, he's a chancellor of the New York City system [New York City Department of Education].  I saw him last--two nights ago in New York, and we're still, you know, Judge Edwards [Harry T. Edwards], it's all the same.  Joel, Judge Edwards, Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.], all the way down the line.  And, and then they become this network for life.  But he was great and a good friend and another person to--and then he married, the woman he married was also an Edwards' clerk.  I knew her before I knew him, Nicole Seligman.
Speaker 1: Now, what did, what did you learn from that experience, though, because being chief of staff, you don't--you've not run anything before?
Speaker 2: Well, I like to think I did from the [U.S.] Army days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually think that's what attracted me to him because Joel knew I was a decent enough lawyer that, which there are plenty of, but he needed somebody who had the legal ability but also had an idea about how do you run an organization?  He knew about my [U.S.] military experience.  And I'm sure he assumed some from the family relationship, I don't know.  But he didn't, he needed someone he thought had both of those sets.  And he said this place at the time was quite dysfunctional.  Lawyers were not nec- necessarily recognized as the best managers, so he said--and it was great 'cause when I went there, he said, "Look, I don't know anything about this stuff.  Just do it, take it over (laughter)."
Speaker 1: So what did that mean?
Speaker 2: It meant everything.  I mean it was just--you know, I was involved substantively with decisions he was making on actual cases, but, you know, I also took care of the budgets, strategic planning, hiring and firing, office space, whose carpets were torn, why the White House was mad that Joel didn't pick somebody--I'm like, one day I said to him, I said, "Joel, I, I mean I'm your token Republican.  I can't argue with the White House about you not taking political appointees they want.  I mean this is goofy."  "You can do it; don't worry about it."  So I'm arguing with the White House, Joel doesn't want so and so over here.  And it was great.  And I was a big interface for him on, in [U.S.] Congress for some reason.  I mean he always wanted me to go with him to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], and him and I had great stories just schlepping around Congress for meetings, and it was great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so how old are you at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I'm only--I don't know, thirty-three.
Story_ID: 333334
Speaker 1: I mean just for people to get an idea, how large was the staff that you were managing.
Speaker 2: Eight hundred, nine hundred.  And it was a weird group 'cause it's like economists and half lawyers, but you get both of them (laughter).  You get both of those two together, and you've got a mess on your hands.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the large profile cases?  He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Microsoft [United States v. Microsoft Corporation, 2001].
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: The Bell Atlantic [Bell Atlantic Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.] NYNEX [NYNEX Corporation] merger.  We had a lot.  That actually--
Speaker 1: That's huge.
Speaker 2: --reinforced my passion of--
Speaker 1: Communications.
Speaker 2: (Nods head)  Yeah, we had the big ones.
Speaker 1: Did it form your thoughts about--that would later take you into the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] or was that--is that still so early?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I mean 'cause the FCC came very quickly after that.  It formed them a lot.  And the, and the, and the sort of again, I'm gonna take a Judge Edwards' [Harry T. Edwards] word, rigorous, which Joel [Joel Klein] is also, and an insight into how companies actually will behave under certain conditions, and Joel was really good at that.  He's an antitrust expert.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: I mean he was a, he was just a brilliant antitrust lawyer and theorist.  I mean he understood what conditions you need to look for to find trouble.  He understood what real consumer harm meant.  He understood that companies are not just bad because they're companies or big isn't bad just cause they're big.  What you have to do is dig deeper to look for what causes things to go wrong cause the truth to it is, any set of conditions can be either good or bad.  And the American consumer has benefited enormously from certain things that other people would say, it should never be that.  But, you know, it's cheaper airfare or, you know, great cases like--well, there's a lot wrong with Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc.] over the small, hometown hardware store, but the average, middle-class to poor consumer has more choice at lower prices.  And so there's good things too.  So it's never--I don't ever find there to be an answer that says it's always this or it's always that or this is right and that's wrong.  You actually have to dig, and he taught me that, which actually proved to be beneficial at the FCC and part of the frustration because I think you also live in a world where a lot of people won't--aren't willing to look that way.  And so you can be really misunderstood because you won't just come out and say big is bad, or you just won't come out and say, these guys are always evil.  Communications is filled with a lot of social and emotional judgments because this is an area that effects our lives really intimately.  We all think we know TV.  We all think we know indecency.  You know, and so I found it really challenging in the sense that I think everybody has an opinion about it.  But everybody doesn't necessarily have a studied opinion about it.  You get a lot of emotional, reactive opinions about it, and I don't mean to dismiss them only to suggest that it, you know, so there's this sort of really hard political layer that's different from the, the rigorous, sort of what an FCC, you know, regulatory layer that actually has to work through the detail.
Story_ID: 333335
Speaker 1: Now, let's look back at the Microsoft [United States v. Microsoft Corporation, 2001] just for a minute.  How much did that case cost the U.S. government?  Was that--
Speaker 2: A ton (laughter).  I don't know the number, but a lot of money.
Speaker 1: But how did, how many years did that go on?
Speaker 2: Years and years cause it went through the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration and into the first part of the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration.  Antitrust cases are always long.  They're very--the breakup of the AT&T [AT&T Inc.] took years and years--I mean IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] took a decade.
Speaker 1: I know.  It's the breakup of AT&T and, now, it's the reassembly of it, sort of, in a different form (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it isn't.  Now, see, that's a perfectly--right, so that's right sort of, except for, instead of one, there's four.  That's not the same.  And cable companies are real competitors to them now, which never existed before.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: If you're gonna count the (unclear), you got to count Comcast [Comcast Corporation] which has telephone service or Cox [Cox Communications] and, oh, by the way, you'd better Rupert Murdoch's DirecTV and you'd better count Charlie Ergen's [Charles Ergen] dish TV [Dish Network].  So the truth to it is, it is more concentrated than the first experiment, but it's, it's dramatically more competitive than anything in the AT&T era.
Speaker 1: Okay, but wasn't the belief then that Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], because of its, its size and, and growth, that it was inherently bad?
Speaker 2: Well, we never argue anything's inherently bad, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, the argument was that they had such control of the monopo- of the operating system, by the way, which our view was they obtained appropriately--monopoly is not illegal in the United States.  That's one thing most people don't realize.  Monopoly is actually absolutely lawful only if it produces an, an anti-competitive consumer effect.  So you can't win a case by going in and saying, Mi- Microsoft is a monopoly on their operating system.  You won't win.  You have to say, they're a monopoly and, as a consequence of the monopoly, these things happen which hurt consumers.  And you have to prove that.  And so the argument was that, not that Microsoft's monopoly of the operating system was bad in and of itself, because it also did--it was great good.  It's the reason we have interoperable computers.  It's the reason we have personal computers.  And Bill Gates should be commended for creating a world in which the personal computer is even possible.  But the argument was that they were using that monopoly to leverage their advantages against other products.  So Microsoft buries WordPerfect because only Word [Microsoft Word] will work really well with Microsoft.  Or they bury Netscape [Netscape Communications] because Internet Explorer will only work--that was the argument.  And that's more compli- then you have to show why that hurts the consumer because prices are pretty low in the information industry, right.  I mean software doesn't cost all that--so we had a tough time trying to show a judge why--you know, you could show all those things happening, but who's being hurt?  Other than Netscape--see, it's not, in our system--I don't know we're talking about this, but in our system, we don't protect producers.  Other countries do, like our system, we don't care if General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] loses and Ford [Ford Motor Company] wins.  We don't go to protect General Motors.  We only go to protect our consumers.  So if somebody rips General Motor and they die, antitrust theory says, I don't care as long as people don't get hurt.  Now, if there's a case in which people get hurt, we might do something that would help General Motors.  But the competitor that's losing always wants the antitrust authorities to come to their rescue.  But you have to be very careful 'cause we don't protect companies.  If they lose in the market, fair and square and die, we'll see you later.  Somebody will take your place.  You know, if General Motors ends up going down because of General Motors' shortcomings, that's not, that's not a matter for, you know, the antitrust to care about.  They get beat, they get beat.  Now, if Ford beat them because they did something that caused them to have an unfair advantage and consumers are gonna end up paying 50 percent more for cars, we'll care.  And we'll try to do something about it.
Story_ID: 333336
Speaker 1: How did the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] commissioner's spot come into the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's so weird, I don't--I can't say that I--one day my phone rang in Joel's [Joel Klein] office.  And this person said, "Hi, I'm Pete Belvin [Lauren Belvin] and I work for Senator McCain [John McCain]."  Okay, and I was like, Pete Belvin?  It sounded like a girl and it was a girl who goes by the name of Pete.  And she said--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --yeah, Lauren Pete Belvin, and I said, "Yeah."  And she said, "And Senator McCain would like to know whether you would be interested in being considered for a vacancy on the Federal Communications Commission."  (Laughter) And I remember thinking, is this some friend of mine that--I, I even think I cussed and said, "Who the blank is this?"  And hung up on her, I think.  And she called back, and she, she's laughing, and she's like, "I'm dead serious."  I couldn't believe it, and I finally realized she was serious.
Speaker 1: But, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd never even met John McCain.
Speaker 1: That's what was gonna be my question.
Speaker 2: I most certainly knew of him, but I hadn't met him.  I don't completely know.  I've heard different versions of how my name got to him, but basically, there'd been a long-term Republican vacancy.  He was the head of the commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation], and he was upset with the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration for not filling the seat.  And he was on a rampage to find someone.  But apparently, he said, I really want a non-traditional choice.  I want somebody that'll surprise people, that's gonna be capable.  And I think it was somebody we would have worked for at O'Melveny [O'Melveny and Myers LLP], said, you know, you--I got an idea for you.  So I went up and met him and interviewed a little bit, and to my shock he decided he--I was gonna be the one he supported.  It took six months of back and forth, but at the end of the day, President Clinton agreed, and became President Clinton's appointee.
Speaker 1: Which is when--it's amazing.  People would not, you know, think of that.  You've been going back and forth--
Speaker 2: Actually, I was at the FCC eight years.  Half of it was the Clinton appointee and half of it was a Bush [President George Walker Bush] appointee.
Speaker 1: That's right, Bush appointee.  Now, with--
Speaker 2: Come out of the Clinton justice department [U.S. Department of Justice].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you consult with Joel Klein on the whole--
Speaker 2: Everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every time you pick up one of those mentors, they're in the kitchen cabinet.  All of 'em got a call.  And they were helpful.  I mean Joel was very supportive, very confident that I could do it, which I needed at the time.  This was another, what--you know, you're suddenly putting my own story together for me, that I never realized.  It's like all the things, right.  It's can you really do this?  This is too soon.  I don't know if I can stretch to do this job.  Go to the mentors.  They'll all tell you what you need to know.  It scares you, so do it.  But Joel was great.  Judge Edwards [Harry T. Edwards] was probably the best cause, you know, to the extent that I was waffling, he said, "Look, I, I've watched these cases for fifteen years.  I've seen these commissioners.  You can do this.  You know, you're good as any of them.  Trust me.  You know how to learn.  You'll, you'll, you'll do it."  And that's another one of those, my father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] saying, "Look, John McCain don't pick people just for the hell of it.  If--you got to believe people who are talented, who see something you don't see.  And if he thinks you could do it, you probably can do it."  So I met with the Vice President Gore [Al Gore], and they said, "Yeah, we like you.  We'll do it."  It was great.
Speaker 1: Now, talk about the commission that you came on.  Who was--
Speaker 2: When I first came on?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The chairman was Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard] who's, to this day a dear friend, appointed by President Clinton, and he came on the same time I did because he had been the general counsel.  He was the chairman, and then Susan Ness, who'd been there a while already, and a new Republican named Harold Furchtgott-Roth came on with me.  I think they put four of the five members, came on at the same time, and a woman named Gloria Tristani from New Mexico.  And the commission's always dysfunctional.  It's a bizarre organization, right.  And by law, it has to be divided by party.  So you get this unusual organization where you have five members.  Two of 'em are on the opposition party, and three of them in the majority party, but they all have to vote on the same things, and you have to get a majority. And it's never as simple as, well, if you have three Rs or they have three Ds, you'll always control because that's rarely the case.  I mean I was probably the most important third vote in the Clinton administration.  And me and Bill worked together, so most of the time it was Bill, Ness and me in the majority 'cause the other Republican was too far on the right, and the other Democrat was too far to the left to produce the center, I think.  And we were sort of the moderates.
Story_ID: 333337
Speaker 1: So talk about the issues that were, you know, ahead of you, and--I mean in front of your during that time [at the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)]?  You had a lot of--
Speaker 2: Pre-chairman, the, Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard].
Speaker 1: Pre-chairman, um-hm, 'cause he came on--first of all, he's the first black (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was the first black.
Speaker 1: First black chairman.
Speaker 2: I remember--by the way, let me say something about, that actually was a source of pride to me, even though ideologically or politically we might not come from the same dimension.  I, I was happy for him and what it meant.  And I remember when him and I first met, and you have an immediate bond on something like that.  And I remember saying to him, I said, "This is important to me for you, for you to succeed, and this is bigger than any of this other silly stuff.  And I always felt that I--I'm not gonna agree with you all the time, but I'm--I will always try to help you."  And my father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] one time, I mean I remember when Bill was having a tough patch, The New York Times had done a hatchet on 'em, and--we all get this.  I mean you can't find a chairman that doesn't at one point, get the daylights beat out of him 'cause you have to make too many tough decisions that cost people billions, and some people win and some people lose.  So you never are gonna get through without--and Bill was, and I remember my dad said to me, "Well, Bill Kennard, he's a nice guy; hasn't had a lot of leadership experience.  So he's probably having a tough time," and he looked at me and he said, "Just remember, never join in kicking a guy when he's down.  Do anything you can to get him back on his feet.  Be with him, not against him.  He'll remember it."  And I just remembered that, right at this house, him saying that.  So that was great.  I mean that, I mean I, I--and that's why we're still close.  I think that was important.
Speaker 1: Now, his whole thing, his--he wanted to open up.  He was very pro-minority focused, right?  And also very breaking up the monopoly focused, right--not, not so much the, you know, more regulation focused, right?
Speaker 2: Slightly, I, actually--you know, and again, this is sort of funny because what does it really mean.  Bill was not a super pro regulatory focus.  I mean I think people say that 'cause he's a Democrat, and he's a liberal so he must be more regulatory.  I'm not so sure him and I aren't that far off on those things.  Bill also was chairman in an era where everybody was winning.  We're talking about the dot-com era.  Everybody's getting rich, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's right.
Speaker 2: Everybody's into technology.  It can do no wrong, so deregulation is all good at the time.  This is what was really interesting.  People couldn't deregulate fast enough.  There were no constituencies against deregulation.  It was all about the Internet and, and new enterprises and the old monopolies don't matter any more.  And, oh, boy.  And when Bill got in trouble, it was because he would be regulatory.  So the same papers, who used to--in the future, would beat me up for being less regulatory, used to beat him up for being too regulatory because in the time that was de rigueur, right, and that was what was hot.  And so every now and then Bill would, you know, step on a landmine because he'd proposed something that would government interventionist.  And he and I laugh about this today.  Some of the same senators who might yell at me for not being interventionist, used to beat the daylights out of him for being so, 'cause they just go with whatever the current is.  And he got in trouble right from the beginning because he proposed some regulation of liquor adverting or something, and the [U.S.] Senate went ballistic.  And so, yeah, he had a few things that certainly I wouldn't have done.  And there're plenty of things, I dissented from him.  On racial things, we were well together, though I used to cautious him cause I thought--
Speaker 1: He was big on the--
Speaker 2: He got a lot of pressure.
Speaker 1: He was big on that from a speaker standpoint?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think Bill, I, I've seen many people in this situation.  When you're first, there's an enormous sense of weight, about how you lead in a way that's faithful to the fact that you're the first minority.  And I think it also attracted a lot of powerful minority lobbying and groups who kind of expected and wanted because he was the first black chairman, that all these tings should happen.  And so I think he was under a lot of pressure for them to happen.  I also think that when you're Democrats, it's even harder, because, you know, your team sort of demands and expects it.  And I think he had a lot of trouble with that because I think his heart cared about that stuff.  But people will push you to do stuff that just didn't exist.  He talked about it a lot, but I mean I can count on one hand the things we actually did, 'cause there aren't that many things you could do.
Story_ID: 333338
Speaker 1: Wasn't there the issue of minority ownership and the rules being sort of taken away at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the problem was, they got taken away by [U.S.] Congress as a matter of law, and we didn't have any way to put 'em back.  I mean he talked a lot about studying it and fixing it, but we never did because we couldn't.  And at the end of the day--oh, my tummy has been rumbling, you know, we did new EEO [equal employment opportunity] rules together.  I thought he went too far cause he was under pressure to go too far.  He even admitted to me, we're going too far.  And it got overturned in court like I knew it would.  And then we put 'em back in the more reasonable way.  And--
Speaker 1: The EEO rules, he had proposed, what percentage was it?
Speaker 2: Actually, they were--it wasn't a percentage, but it was certain obligations that broadcasters had to meet and their equal hiring.  But he required them to keep race-based data that was sort of a no-no under the [U.S.] Constitution, new constitutional analysis about these things.  And I said to him, "You're gonna get this through.  The courts are gonna like--."  He said, "I got to do it.  And we'll see if we get through."  And I just was sure we wouldn't, and we didn't.  Yeah, that's the thing.  The story is never carried all the way.  A lot of these things when they're big flashes, you got to follow them all the way through.  They don't often end up actually.  So we did some good thing, and I think his tone was very positive, and I think tone matters.  And his hiring and other things where I think he made a difference.  But like minority ownership, we didn't do anything--we had a lot of conferences and a lot of reports that said there should be more minority-ownership.  But there's no more minority--we really didn't actually produce minority ownership, and we really didn't produce any rules that would dramatically change that equation 'cause the real problem with minority ownership had nothing to do with their being minorities or getting a shot.  It was a problem of capital, media properties are ridiculously expensive.  And often, quote minorities were new entrants to the business.  And let me tell you, if you and me want to go out and decide we're gonna buy radio stations, you and me better find billions of dollars.  And the big problem for a lot of minority interests were capital access, and we don't regulate capital markets and access.  We didn't have a great way to get at that.  We tried some things, and most of 'em didn't do too much.
Story_ID: 333339
Speaker 1: So when you were on staff--okay, I mean when you were, not on staff, when you were the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] commissioner, there, you--how many, how many staff do you have as a commissioner?
Speaker 2: Personal staff as a commissioner?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You have three legal advisors and two administrative assistants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you're a commissioner, that's all you have.  When you're the chairman, you have the whole place.  (Laughter) It's good, good to be the chairman.
Speaker 1: So, now, what are the things that--did you have--did you have any idea that it was possible that you were gonna be chair? Okay are you--
Speaker 2: Certainly not in the beginning.  You know, there was an election coming up.  As it got closer, I think within probably a year and a half, you know, it would certainly be something you thought about that if the president, you know, if, if the election elected a Republican president, you knew it would change the chairman.  You know, I was probably the senior qualified Republican around.  It was a--certainly a possibility.  But I don't--I have this very kind of limited school where my, my attitude is, I don't think much past a year or two.  I'm a big believer in, I think you get really--it messes up what you're doing today if you worry about too far.  You know, and this is another thing my dad [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] used to teach me.  Look, take care of the little things and the future takes care of itself.  It's the people who are not paying attention to the pot boiling while they're starring off dreaming of the next thing.  And I'm just not that way.  I mean maybe I should be to some people, but you know, I have basically a one and a half year horizon that I worry about.  And it's always been my good fortune that if you take care of business today, that somehow the next thing finds its way to you.
Speaker 1: So this is a time now, you know, this is a very like seminal point in the Powell's family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --because your father is secretary of state.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and then--and how--
Speaker 2: Not 'til I become chairman, remember.  I was there three years while he's retired.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: I'm the only one in public service for the first half of this.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  Okay.  That's right.
Story_ID: 333340
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you.  The issues that--were there differences like, like in the time that you spent--you were how long with--you were, you were with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] a total of eight years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, seven, plus, but close to eight.
Speaker 1: Okay, and three--was it three or four--how many years as a, as a--no, five, was it?  How many years as a commissioner?  Five.
Speaker 2: Four--three and a half, or almost four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's kind of like three and a half, then four, plus a little as chairman.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think that in that--so you had this very judicious sense of what you were doing, okay.  And that's how you ran your staff and did things, okay.  And, and so Bill's [William E. Kennard] management style allowed you to operate in that way, I take that.
Speaker 2: Well, the beauty of when you're a commissioner, you can do whatever you want.  You know, first of all the chairman almost is disproportionately the persona of the agency.  They're the ones the press writes about.  The press almost always forgets that you have to get votes.  It's, it's a---they always act as if sort of the chairman is doing this, the chairman's doing that.  And if you read a story tomorrow on the FCC it would be mostly--if they mention anybody's name, they're gonna mention the chairman's name as if he--it's almost as if you're a cadet officer, and it's all your place.  Well, the FCC's not really like that.  So a lot of times chairman get too much credit and too much blame for some things that go on there.  But a commissioner is about the most perfect job you could imagine, right.  You answer to no one.  The chairman's not your boss.  He may be first among equals or she, but they're not your boss.  You have your own personal staff.  You come and go as you please.  You have your own travel budget, and you--once you vote, you know, you don't even--you're not even the ones that write the final documents.  So you can vote for something or dissent for it, participate a lot or I've seen commissioners participate hardly at all.  They don't care, and they go home to do whatever.  It's a great gig for that reason.  So, yeah, you could say I ran it as a judicious philosophy, but, you know, all I controlled was my one vote.  You know, I could arrive at that vote any way I wanted.  The real leader of the agency, and I always recognized and respected that when I was a minority commissioner, was the chairman.  I mean Bill, you know, Bill had to run the entire agency staff.  That's two thousand people.  That's not three.  He had to set the tone of the meetings.  He had to talk to the press.  He had to testify in [U.S.] Congress alone.  So when you say whether the person has a philosophy of leadership that affected the agency, I think from any other seat other than the chair, you can make a little bit of an impact on that.  But it, it's--your vote is your vote, and you can cast it--you can arrive at it any way you choose.  I arrived at mine as a, more like a jurist than a politician.  What does that mean?  I never called companies to see what they thought, never.  I would never call a public interest group and say, will you support me if I do that?  Never.  I would meet with all of them, if they want a meeting, I'd have a meeting.  But I, I didn't think that it was my responsibility to try to get cover or permission or supp--or engineer support for--I, I worked hard on the filings.  I talked to people in meetings.  I worked with my staff.  I arrived at what I thought was the best judgment for the public and I voted.
Speaker 1: Now did you--
Speaker 2: Now, other people have styles where they just--they'll meet with every constituency.  They'll try to call and, and cajole this public interest group or this company to issue positive press statements about what they're doing.  That just wasn't--I don't--it wasn't my style, and it's not a style I believe in.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you, did you get out to try to learn about other technologies and things like that?
Speaker 2: Constantly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that was probably my niche, which was, I tried to carve out a space where--yeah, but when you're a commissioner, you're looking for, so, what's your identity if you don't do anything you have to--I loved the technology.  And so I had a rule where I went on a field trip every quarter, which is, I was gonna go see things in their native habitats.  I always believed that we're looking at filings cold at the FCC, inside Washington [D.C.].  It was a terrible way to make decision.  You know, if you wanted to know about cable, you had to go see a--I, I've seen the infrastructure of the plant, the technology, of everything in the space in my career, at their places.  I've been to the factories where they make fiber optic cable.  I've been to Cisco [Cisco Systems, Inc.], or Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] or, you know, and watch their home of the future.  You know, I always thought you get great ideas there, but they also had a better respect for you because they felt like you took the time to understand what they really do, and not just read some Washington office's filing and think you know everything about them.  I found that if they respected you, you could even be, you vote against them, and they wouldn't get too upset.  And they believed that you made an effort to understand.  So I did that a lot, I think more than any of my colleagues in spades at the time.
Story_ID: 333341
Speaker 1: Now, some people have described you as a free marketer.  Were you--did you self-describe yourself that way?
Speaker 2: You know, it's a name, you know, it's not a noun to me.  So it's a--I don't like to have a label like that.  Every one in America, to some degree, believes in the free market.  This is, this is why it's a bad way to describe people.  Who doesn't?  I mean I, I--even the most left leaning, you know, unless you're sort of a 100 percent Communist, right.  You believe in the fruits of the free market.  You, you believe in the, the way that we work, the way the capital markets produce opportunities to own homes and buy cars.  And we can go through this all day, and everyone--you know, virtually everyone in this country would say they believe in the market.  The question is, you know, what people usually say when they mean that is, oh, you're lazy; I feel like you--anything goes.  Absolutely not.  And I made a career in antitrust of shooting companies, blowing them out of the water for doing the things they shouldn't do.  I don't know why you'd be in the regulation business if you didn't believe there should be limits on things.  I think we did, in our tenure, plenty of things that I would call extremely regulatory.  Ordering companies to let consumers keep their telephone number when they switched services isn't a lazy affair; creating a do not call list so people can stop being bothered by telemarketers is not letting the market work.  I mean I--it, it's funny how you can be characterized by particularly controversial issues.  But if you really looked at the record, I could, I can match toe to toe what you would call regulatory with Bill [William E. Kennard] or anyone else.
Speaker 1: But it was the media ownership--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --that's what, I mean, really, cause I remember being--I was in Washington [D.C.] that day.  And it was the headline of the paper.  So, but why do you think had you--why did you, why did you take that position, and was it--do you have any other views on hindsight?  But--or do you think you were misunderstood.  But, I mean--or did people, you know what I think is that people were surprised at how far you went.
Speaker 2: My argument would be, there's very few people even understand what the rules meant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--this is tough for me to talk about 'cause I really don't want to sound defensive because I don't want to be defensive.  I'm perfectly comfortable owning up to our failures, and I think we had some.  I think the way we went about it was wrong.  I, I think it was right academically and intellectually.  I think it was wrong politically.  Again, I think, I think my tendency to want to be judicious and rigorous and academic about the right answers probably blinded us to sort of a political momentum that we saw, but underappreciated how big it would get and lost the opportunity to better control the way this got debated; and let our opponents essentially caricature what we were doing in a way that we could never get back.  I mean I don't know how many TV shows where I did--where the host--you know, the guy would start out by saying, "Well, here is the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] who believes big meetings should get bigger."  (Laughter) I--as if that's a crusade of ours.  I, I don't care one bit about big companies getting bigger.  (Background noise) There were six media ownership rules.  Nobody ever talked about the fact that one of them was making the radio ownership a little tighter.  And so, this again, was our decision a free marketer decision?  Well, I would challenge anybody to name what the six rules were and what they did.  Everybody complained about radio the most.  Radio was the one rule we actually were restricting ownership more than it had been before, but that almost never would get in the paper.  I would say it 'til I was blue in the face.  I would testify--it got ignored as an inconvenient fact in the caricature.  But it was pretty regulatory.  I will tell you one thing; the radio companies were extremely unhappy that we were not going to loosen up their market.  In fact, we're gonna tighten it.  There were a bunch of rules about how many stations you could own in a local market.  Those were fairly tight.  The, the furor was essentially over one and part of two rules.  One was the national ownership cap because that effected networks, how many stations could a network own?
Speaker 1: In one market.
Speaker 2: And the rule was called the thirty-five percent rule, and we were proposing it to move to forty-five percent, which sounds really dramatic and letting the big guys get bigger.  And that's what almost the whole controversy was played out as.  Just to show you why, you know, messages matter, the thirty-five percent rule has nothing to do with how many stations you can own specifically.  A lot of people, I think, thought forty-five percent meant you could own forty-five percent of the stations in America.  The rules are actually how much audience you can reach with the stations you won.  The largest ownership group in America--the largest, the network that owns most of the stations in America only owns thirty-three in the whole country.  The rule would have allowed them to own two more.  That's it.  Two more.  Not twenty percent more, not--two more.  I used to tell people our mistake is we should call it the three percent rule.  But people just ran with this and sort of overstated what it was.  But I thought most people--I couldn't, it was such a complex argument, like I'm having trouble now.  To explain to you how it really worked is something you couldn't do in the one minute you get on Fox News or the press conference you had.  They had the easy argument 'cause they would say stuff like, this is the death of democracy.  Well, that's a great argument--I mean I wish I had that argument, and this is big guys getting bigger.  How do you argue with that kind of rhetoric when the truth has these complexities of operation, and, and we were just on the wrong side of the ability to make that case in a really highly public way.
Story_ID: 333342
Speaker 1: And I don't even want to start to get into the fact that [U.S.] Congress commanded that the commission review the rule on a two-year interval, and they must presume that they should go away unless they prove--unless we can prove, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], that the rules have this enormous benefit.  And Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard] had tried to keep the rules from moving up a lot, and he lost every single case in court.  When I took over, all of Bill's media ownership rules on his review had been rejected.  And so I personally believe--and I, you know, I'm not gonna get in a fight with people about it, I believe we were doing what the law absolutely compelled the commission to do.  I think what happened is, in the interim, there was a change of heart, but not a change of law, meaning the same senators who then demagogued how bad this decision was, were the same senators who voted for these provisions that liberalized all this stuff.  And I, I used to look at them with sort of a dark look in my eye, like you did this (laughter).  We're do--legally bound to do what you did unless you change it.  But you're now changing your political tone when you've created this legal regime that makes it very difficult.
Speaker 2: But don't you think that it's all a case of, you know, that was your first, you know, sort of major decision that you came out with.  And the issue was--I mean you--
Speaker 1: It wasn't, it was--you see, the thing is, it wasn't.  I mean we'd been there two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Here's what it was.  Media is very--in most things the FCC do, is sort of rife with complexity and, and hideous language, and--but the average person wouldn't care about it or understand what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: And most people don't even--it's, it's not written or talked about necessarily.
Speaker 1: But we all think we know what we think about television.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's very easy to have a genuine opinion about.  You know, you think it's all about--and by the way, I couldn't make sense of the debate at some level because there was no congruity.  So the Republ- all the conservatives thought the, the end of the world was liberal media.  And all the liberals said the end of the world was Fox News and conservative stations.  If, if you listened, the real argument was about message and ideology more than the rules.  So there were strange coalitions, right.  So why, you know, why were sort of the liberal, antiwar groups teamed up with Brent Bozell [L. Brent Bozell III] and the parents' television council, which are the right-wing and decency people; because they all had one common denominator.  They hated the media for exactly opposite reasons.  So people used to say, well, you're going--you're so stupid.  You're up against the NRA [National Rifle Association] and Moveon.org.  I said, does it ever occur to you, why would the NRA, Moveon.--because the postcards coming from NRA people say, "Stop gun-hating, media liberal elites" (laughter).  And the ones from Moveon.org saying, "Stop the, the rise of conservative Christian radio."  It was this rare issue where enormous constituencies could come together over a really facile idea, even though the underlying reasons were completely incongruous.  That created a huge checkmate for us because there was no way to resolve what was being complained about because it was really about, something about media that they hated, that was not consistent with their own view of life.  The NRA and Moveon.org have nothing in common.  You could argue, well, maybe if they both hate the media, maybe the media's doing its job.  I don't know, but there's no way you can sort of credit the NRA's argument and then go ahead and credit the anti-war people's argument at the same time, other than to conclude, don't do anything, which is what I wish to God I could have done at the end of the day.  Me and Bill laugh about it 'cause Bill called me, and he goes, "What's everybody upset about?  I read your rules.  They're not that bad, I mean they're not that much liberal."  All these rules, by the way, Bill proposed loosening at one point too.  So did his predecessor, Reed Hundt for Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  Nobody ever said anything about it.  That was the era of nothing matters.  We'd just gotten into the war, the Enron [Enron Corporation] scandal.  I have a philosophy that what happened was the dot-com bubble burst; 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened, Enron happened, the Iraq War happened, and there became this sudden sea-change in public life in which people wanted protection from the government, and there was a sort, an, and end of the halcyon days.  Deregulation was now a bad word, when it was the only word a year earlier.  And I think proceeding had been started by Bill, under one set of environmental conditions (laughter), and I, I think it was like half way out in the lake when the world kind of turned.  And it was tough to get reconciled.
Story_ID: 333343
Speaker 1: We also have, you know, the perception of pro-business, you know, a period of business being in control of government, you know.  And the no controls and fear of big media and what, you know, they'll do and lost opportunities and loss of, of diverse voices (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I agree.  Don't disagree.  I, I just think that I--
Speaker 1: But you had to back pedal.  This, this became very controversial, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, hugely controversial.  Hugely controversial.
Speaker 1: How long did the whole process take?
Speaker 2: I would give anything to figure out how to stop it.
Speaker 1: How, how long did it take?  From the point of your--
Speaker 2: Two years, probably.  A good year solid, but a year of the real hellacious part.  But, you know, I, I know, you know, and my own view is I know where we got.  I know why we had to get there.  I, I don't think--I think the only thing that I would really strenuous in arguing about is, we didn't--those of us who believed in the order--and I must say, a lot of it I still believe in.  I think there's a huge political problem with media ownership that I don't know how I'd handle today, but I think the rigor of the legal exercise was not unfounded.  And at the end of the day, I think--wow. I, I found it challenging 'cause I can't--I think it's this judicious instinct.  I didn't see any way where we [Federal Communications Commission (FCC)] were not legally bound to review the rules.  And I didn't see how we had to prove their value or eliminate them or modify them, which meant that most of the time you had to modify them or eliminated them.  We didn't eliminate a single rule.  We only proposed to modify rules.  I used to tell people, well, if we're so free marketer, why are we keeping all the--every last one of the rules with subtle changes to them?  You know, it was the thirty-five [percent]--I could have eliminated the cap, right.  I could have gone from thirty-five [percent] to nothing, which is what the companies wanted.  We went from thirty-five [percent] to forty-five [percent].  It meant CBS could get two more stations in the whole country.  I just didn't think that was that bad.  But to read articles about it, you thought we were lifting the cap like to here.  And if--and I will tell you, Julia [Julieanna Richardson], it, it gave me a cold lesson in the reality of political fights in America.  Intellectual dishonesty is absolutely acceptable and freewheeling.  People who I knew were smart, people who I even respected would say stuff that I knew they knew darn well was not accurate.  They didn't care.  I mean they were--they loved the debate, they hated me, and this was good to them, they didn't--you know, I had colleagues who would say things.  And they just know that's not true.  And they'd go out and with these grand statements like, "Oh, the big companies are getting twice as big as, twice as big--."  How do you go from thirty-three [percent] to thirty-five [percent], and that's twice as big?  But it did--it just took off.  And I think the media themselves wanted to prove (laughter), kind of prove their credibility by sort of flogging themselves in the process because the, if you're the writer for The New York Times, you're not the corporate New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York], and it's a great opportunity to yell at management.  It was really--I could write a whole book on what was really going on.  And what really disappointed me--and I'll conclude with this, is [U.S.] Congress scared me on this issue because if the First Amendment's about anything--it's interesting 'cause I used to tell people, I understand why you're scared of 'Citizen Kane,' but don't, don't turn it over to King George [George III] as a substitute.  What [President] Thomas Jefferson was really worried about was not 'Citizen Kane,' though I can see why Rupert [Rupert Murdoch] or these guys bother you.  But you're about to make a worse bargain.  You're gonna invite political Washington [D.C.] into the content of our messages in the name of stopping big media because, let me tell you, I know these senators.  And I know what the story is.  I could write a book just on what the real motivations of, for most of the congressmen.  People say, well, bipartisan, they're against you.  I said, uh-huh, you want me to tell you why Trent Lott--you want me to tell you about Trent Lott's relationship with Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] when Gannett was editorializing against his re-election, and he vowed to make sure that they never were allowed to get--you're talking about politicians who are very pragmatically attempting to preserve and advance their own power by being able to control the messages that the media reports on them.  This is dangerous.  And maybe we should have a fresh debate about what the limits should be, but you're making a huge mistake.  And that's why I find the indecency issue really interesting because a lot of people who are in the (unclear) media (unclear) group are outraged by the indecency enforcement.  And when I talk to them now, I say, this is what you invited.  But what has happened now is we have a government that's gotten monumentally more comfortable with the regulation of content.  And the media ownership brought us that.  So the problem with the First Amendment is you take the bad in order to have more of the good.  Thomas Jefferson understood that there's gonna be a bad part of the First Amendment.  People are gonna say stuff you don't want to hear.  There's gonna be people who do things you want or subscribe to, but the alternative is to put the sovereign in control, is a really bad thing.  And I think the outgrowth of the media ownership receding is a lot of noise.  They stopped us, which I'm actually glad for because I'd just as soon be stopped and not be held responsible.  But I think the points we were making will ultimately be shown that we will regret inviting Congress and people who have very personal political interests into the world of--so what have we done this year in the commerce committee?  We've had four indecency hearings.  We don't do anything about the information age or my children's education in technology.  No, we're gonna grandstand about Howard Stern and 'Desperate Housewives' 'til we're blue in the face, all right.  I think it's ridiculous.  We're gonna waste so much time on stupid stuff.
Story_ID: 333344
Speaker 1: But basically, Michael [HistoryMaker Michael Powell], [U.S.] Congress stepped in and reversed, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One rule, one of the six rules they stepped in and modified four percentage points less than mine.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: I should say the more--the rule was going from thirty-five [percent] to forty-five [percent].  They moved it to thirty-nine [percent], which I kind of giggled about too 'cause I'm like, where did you get that number?  Nobody had--they just made it up.  So they make up a number, but what was interesting is everybody says, "Well, see they stopped you."  I was like, they liberalized the rule (laughter).  They liberalized it four percent more than the existing rule, and less than what I proposed.  Why is that--I don't even know what it means, thirty-nine percent.  But it was, you know, this, just political cut the baby.
Speaker 1: But it was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the only rule, though.  All the other six, they didn't do anything about.
Speaker 1: They didn't do anything.  But it was, it was the concept of the Congress coming in to do that, to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  Had that been done much before?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's happened plenty of times.
Speaker 1: Plenty of times, okay.
Speaker 2: It had happened before my tenure.  It happened to Bill [William E. Kennard] a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's important to remember an agency is just a creature of Congress.  We're just exercising the laws that they have empowered us to exercise and interpret.  When, when they want to change that framework or do something different than your interpretation, that's what they're supposed to do.  My argument to Congress on the media ownership, I used to beg them, don't have us do this.  If you want stronger media ownership rules, I will support them, but you should do it.  The last thing I would say about this, 'cause this is really important.  America's a very diverse place.  You're not gonna find any consensus in a country as diverse and varied as ours about what the right messages are.  And so if you want to talk about the promotion of diversity, you should have that--and, and then do something about it in law, you should do that at an institution that at least is theoretically representative of all the interests in the country, and that is not the FCC.  The FCC has five people, and three of them can make a decision.  That is not a diverse cross section.  If you ask me, if Congress wants stronger media ownership rules, I'm all for it, but you do it.  Stop saying you believe in that, and then turning it over to an institution that is not able to properly reflect diversity in America.  There's five hundred and thirty-six of you, from every state and hamlet in America.  And why can't they do it?  Because opinion is so diverse, it never would create a consensus.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: It's fascinating.
Story_ID: 333345
Speaker 1: You know, in many ways, it's sort of like, you know, had there not--well, this may be, you may disagree with this, but there was the, as you said, you had the dot-com bust.  You're a new technology person, right?  And, and had you, had you not--had you not--had that not been, that's a broadcast issue, you know.  So, really, the growth of new technologies is really not a--I mean I shouldn't say it's not in the broadcast field, there is the digital, the HDTV [high-definition television].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, which was another issue that you were, you know, prevalent, I mean outspoken on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So let me ask you this, you, you're known--you created--what I'm told is that you were a very good manager, and so you created something called FCC University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  And what was the purpose for that?
Speaker 2: Well, if there were one overarching theme of everything which, which we, that we did is that we thought we understood and saw that technology was gonna change the world on everything, that there were gonna all kinds of news ways that people got content, new ways people got information, new tools for consumers.  Children were gonna interact with their media very differently.  And believe it or not, that, in my mind, was actually the, the most powerful genesis of the media ownership proceeding.  It was not media ownership.  It was about broadcasting.  But broadcasting was only one of many media.  Our biggest argument was, the only way these rules are valid is if they take into account all the ways that consumers consume media.  The media ownership rules aren't even about cable.  Cable--87 percent of Americans subscribe to cable, but they weren't even being counted as the way we looked at the rules.  So my real going in position was that, we're gonna make the rules better by taking into account all this change.  The minute you take into account, however, then the market's not as concentrated as you thought it was.  That's why the rules went up; not because we believed the rules should go up, but we thought when you counted everything.  If I said, cable was a source of news, and the Internet was a source of news, and X-Box was a source of entertainment, now there's more things consumers have, which means it's hard to argue this medium is too, too concentrated, you know.  And so I also believe that in the staff of the commission [Federal Communications Commission (FCC)], that this agency was going to have to be very relevant in a fast-changing, tech-driven world, and that we weren't; that we were very backward looking.  And that the only key to that is you had to have a system in which employees all the way down to the janitors if necessary were constantly students of the change, and that we didn't have a good training system.  So, you know, my task was to build something we called the FCC University, which was a full-blown, three hundred and sixty day-a-year curriculum.  And we, we've created a curriculum this thick with every kind of course known to man that we thought would keep our staff relevant.  I used to sit at the other side of the table with Bill Gates or Steve Case, and I would say, we can't rely on the companies we're regulating to teach us what they're doing (laughter).  And we have to have our own independent ability.  So we created it.  And then we made the performance system so that every person was graded in a way that also included an education development plan to the highest person.  And, and I insisted that it go to the lowest person.  So every assistant, every secretary had courses they could take, and that would help them stay relevant.  And I also believed that they might not work here forever.  And I want them always to be getting better so that the day they decide to leave and go do something, they're gonna, they're gonna be very competitive people, and so we built the university.  The employees loved it--
Story_ID: 333346
Speaker 1: It's like where are people manufacturing all this money from? And it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's why me and Bill [William E. Kennard] are still friends because we sort of feel like we're really two sides of the same coin that believed in balance.  And the problem is, depending on the time and context that hits when you're there, you know, you can be two degrees off of current sentiment, and that vector blow you up.  I mean it happ- it happened to me in some, in a big way, and, and it also happened to him in some big ways.  And in many ways, if you combine the two thoughts, both of them are trying to balance--he used to believe that there was excess exuberance in the problem with the dot-com [dot-com bubble].  So he wasn't gonna be a radical deregulator, but he got criticized for that.  In my world, there was this huge anti-corporate sentiment, which--so a lot of people believed anything that might benefit a corporation was bad.  My staff always says, and I don't use the line very much, but I think we were right, but we were too soon.  The next time they do media ownership, you're gonna have to cope with iTunes, and you're gonna have to cope with TiVo [TiVo Corporation], and you're gonna have to cope with all this stuff that's changing--podcast and blogging.  We were trying to make that case three years ago.  And I just think that it was too soon, and too--not enough people in the real population were seeing that yet and could appreciate it.
Speaker 1: But they couldn't really see it.  I mean you're seeing all this new technology, and you're seeing its possibilities, and, and they don't--you know, people, people--
Speaker 2: We got ahead.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so, but like--weren't you quoted as saying TiVo was like God--what was it TiVo--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) TiVo is God's machine or something.
Speaker 1: Right, TiVo was God's machine.  But you didn't worry about it disrupting the, you know, the whole advertising agent--you know, arena and how people priced things, and--
Speaker 2: Now, see, you're being a free marketer.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Sorry.
Speaker 2: I'm pro-consumer and you're free market.  This is why it's so--right.  There can even be things that are enormously pro-consumer that are very disruptive to businesses.  So what should you do?  Try to preserve the business or help the consumer.  In one sense, you can say, "Well, I'm always trying to help the consumer."  Of course, we are, but there are things that you can help consumers so much that the producer can't survive.  And I used to tell people--somewhat dramatically, but I think there was truth to it, that now every newspaper writes about this.  I said the problem with these broadcast ownership rules, we're gonna love broadcasting to death.  It is not gonna survive this change because it's dependent on providing free content on an advertising model, and all of these trends are gonna tear that apart.  So I know you all, all wish and dream for broadcasting to be this high ideal and everything looks like PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  And I said, but the truth to it is, that stuff doesn't sell.  And this industry is starting to pay the price.  And it, and you may not want to count cable as a competitor or iTunes, but they have to.  And the truth to it is those dollars are leaving.  There are no more movies on broadcast TV.  There are no more sports programs.  All the quality stuff is being, flying away from broadcasting because the model won't support it.  You cannot watch the NBA [National Basketball Association] on broadcast TV.  You cannot watch hockey.  More and more, you can't watch football.  They just took ABC 'Monday Night Football' off Channel 7.  It's gonna move to ESPN.  When I was a kid, you could watch the 'Roots' miniseries on, on a major network.  Those miniseries don't exist anymore because if they do, they're all on cable, right.  HBO is the movie channel.  And there's no Monday night movie on Channel 4 [NBC] anymore.  What's happening?  The, the golden age of television died a long time ago, and television is slowly going under the waves.  And so this media debate happened at a time where people still believed in the 1950s version of television, but weren't willing to talk about the year 2000 version of media.
Story_ID: 333347
Speaker 1: What do you think's gonna happen with broadcast then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it survives, but I mean I think it's gonna be dramatically diminished.
Speaker 1: And how, but what--and then what about HDTV [high-definition television]?
Speaker 2: It's great.  I just bought one for the first time.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  Now, this is, now, this is very technology focused.  I mean, it was something that consumers were not asking for.
Speaker 2: No, and I was never a big supporter of the government sort of mandating it.  But that all preceded me and to the extent that it has been mandated and it's gonna happen, is it a good product?  Yes.  Should it come to consumers eventually?  Absolutely.  Whether it needed the government to be the micro manager of how that happens, I doubt it.
Speaker 1: And what is the purpose, to free up spectrum?  That's one thing--
Speaker 2: Well, it's only to free up spectrum because the government gave all the broadcasters double spectrum to make the transition.  To make it simple, broadcasters have, let's just say, ten units of spectrum.
Speaker 1: So what are they gonna do with those ten units?
Speaker 2: They're gonna sell them and make money and put it in the treasury, which is why they want to it all of a sudden now.
Speaker 1: So who are they selling them to?  What are--these spectrum are for different uses, I take it.
Speaker 2: They might sell it for wireless telephones.  You might sell it for Wi-Fi.  You might sell it for public safety--I mean you can use spectrum--and what's happening is, there's a lot more new uses of spectrum than just television, right.  So even people at home have home, home wireless networks and so wireless is becoming really sexy and powerful, and very valuable.  So the government wants--see what happened is, they--broadcasters did analog spectrum.  They had ten units of spectrum, and they needed to go to digital, and they argued that, "Well, we have to, at, for some period of time run both."  So the government gave them ten more.  So the broadcasters have this phenomenal amount of spectra, double what they need because they are quote transitioning, but that's why the government's getting impatient, like they want their ten back.
Speaker 1: Now, this is what is interesting to me, or I want you to comment on.  New technologies, like take something like Wi-Fi or--is it the IOP [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the OIP [Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)].
Speaker 1: The O--or, what, what do you think the--what has been the time from concept to reality, cause I remember like with fiber opter- fiber optic technology, it was a twenty year, twenty or twenty-five year window.  So what are the windows with, you know, with, you know, Wi-Fi and--I mean have they--it seems like they've been shorter.
Speaker 2: They are shorter.  What's happening is--again, I don't want to go in--spend forever going into this, but if you understand the nature of the way technology increases geometrically--think about your PC [personal computer].  That first PC you ever got, and think about your remorse that six months later the PC is--
Speaker 1: Outdated.
Speaker 2: --is twice as fast and half the price.  This is the most powerful, economic, productivity ratio ever, meaning all new technology is doing is it, it doubles in power at the same time it halfs in price.  Think about that for a minute.  So you're on this rocket ship of progress in which things get more and more powerful but more and more cheap.  Normally in goods, let's say manufactured goods like a car.  The nicer the car, the more fancy it gets, the more expensive it gets.  And if you go from a, from a Toyota Corolla, you know, to a Mercedes S500, you're also gonna up seventy to eighty thousand dollars.  On the other hand, if you go from a Dell 386 PC in the year 2002, to a two gigahertz Dell PC, you're actually gonna pay less for the other--the later PC, for three times the power.  Oh, by the way, and if you want to factor in inflation, you're paying probably even less because the second one's cheaper than the first one in current dollars.  So what's great about that is it also shortens the window of change 'cause the technology increases geometrically.  So does the time, so does the time it takes to change things.  Wi-Fi, two years ago, nobody ever heard of it.  When I started at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], nobody I knew had a cell phone.  You don't realize how long--how short a time it was when nobody had one.  When, when you're in college, nobody has one.  You really don't see people having them in any real way 'til maybe about '94 [1994], and there are some.  Now, there's a hundred and seventy million of them.  That's unbelievable, and then we forget how short a time that was.  That's our lifetime, right, or that DVD players were invited in your lifetime or that high definition TVs were invented in your lifetime or Wi-Fi was invented in your lifetime, and Google [Google Inc.] was invented in your lifetime, and the Internet was invented in your lifetime.  And sometimes I talk about people, you should measure your life in technology and see how much change there is, you know.  You could take fifteen years of your life, and it would blow you away if you actually marked what got invented.  And you go to the industrial age, Henry Ford's concept took a heck of a lot longer to get to all Americans than this computer has.  And the next thing will take even half that.
Story_ID: 333348
Speaker 1: What new technologies are you banking on or you feel strongly about?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I mean, lots of things.  I mean wire--all things wireless are very intriguing.  I always tell people, you know, if we all want that doctor's, that sort of 'Star Trek' world, where you just flip open your communicator wherever you are and you can do whatever you want.  I mean that's all dependent on wireless.  And that stuff is coming on so strong.  I truly believe that the mass media is completely in convulsions.  I, this is what I thought I was trying to get at years ago, but didn't do well.  It's, you know, my children [Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] have such a different vision of what--they don't even think TV.  They think video or even notice, notice that over the last year, you're hearing television less and video more, just that fact.  The language we are using is moving away from television--the idea of television.  But to give you an example, you know, my kids--when I was a kid, you made appointments to watch TV.  "Mom [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], we got to get home, our show's on at seven; I got to get home, 'Brady Bunch' ['The Brady Bunch'] is on at seven, and I--," you know.  And if you didn't see it, it's gone forever.  There's no other way to see 'Brady'--if you missed it, you missed it.  I haven't seen my children ever make an appointment to watch TV.  If they choose to watch TV, they just turn on the channel that's diverse within the genre they like, and they'll watch whatever's on within the family.  So maybe if Bryan wants to see a cartoon, he'll watch the Cartoon Network.  Or if Jeff wants to see music videos, he'll turn on MTV.  This is called diversity of choice that supposedly we don't have, but we're getting more and more by the day.  Or they'll play Xbox, but what they don't do anymore is go sit on the family couch with the rest of their family to watch the show at eight o'clock that they all like.  And very few families do any more.  And as you start to create iPods with video, now, they don't even have to do that much of a communal experience though.  They have a very personal experience.  And that's not all good by the way.  I'm just saying it's what gonna happen.
Story_ID: 333349
Speaker 1: I mean with every decision like this, there are public policy and societal implications.  So technology for the sake of technology is not always that good.
Speaker 2: Well I think there's plenty of things bad about it, though I think they're not bad in the sense that it's a public policy problem that you should stop them, because you can't.  There, there are things that are bad that we're going to have change and adapt and be sensitive to, is the way I would, I would--you know, cars are wonderful, but they kill more people.  It doesn't mean you shouldn't have cars, right.  I mean planes are dangerous and they crash sometimes, but it doesn't mean that the benefits outweigh.  Technology is great, but is everything great about it?  No.  But we will have new evils to cope with.  You know, culturally and sociologically, you know what worries me about personalization, people say they want diversity and choice, but I think they only mean that so far because what I think--I actually think the opposite's what's wrong; not that there's not enough choice.  I think there's too much choice, and because there's so much choice, people can seek out content that reinforces their biases.  If my father-in-law is a conservative, he can come home and plop down on the couch, turn on Fox News and never, ever have to watch stuff he doesn't care about.  Fifty years ago when Walter Cronkite came on seven o'clock to give you the news, that's what you--that's the only choice you had, or maybe--and two others, three networks.  So the whole country had a communal media experience.  We all watched Walter.  He told you the things you wanted to hear and the things you didn't want to hear.  He could make you eat your vegetables.  With Fox News, you don't have to eat your vegetables at all.  You can eat--you can have dessert all day long.  And with the Internet, it's even worse.  Kids can go to Myspace or some product and create my whatever, and they only have to digest the stuff interesting to them all day long and never expose themselves to alternate ideas or have their, their thoughts questioned.  So the irony is that while we all say diversity is a value, I question whether it's the ultimate value because the ultimate diversity would be, you get all the content you want, tailor-made for you.  But if that's true, you and me don't have shared experiences any more.  The problem with the cable dial is not that it's enough; it's too much.  We're being--we're being paralyzed by having too much to choose from.  How much time do you waste today selecting something?  And when I was a kid, you had two choices, and you went to the store and you came home within an hour.  I spent four months trying to figure out what TV to buy.  And oh by the way with the Internet, I got to go to Consumer Reports.  I got to research fifty different things, and you're paralyzed, you're constantly fearful that you don't have the right data to make a good choice.  So I like choice; I like diversity.  I'm not so sure that all--individuality and community conflict with each other.  It's not their intention.  And if we move everything toward the individual, ultimate choice, I think the community loses something.  I think, I think a neighborhood loses something if we don't all go to church together every now and then.  I think a neighborhood loses something if it doesn't have a block party.  I think a neighborhood loses something if we all stay in our houses and live sort of very atomistic lives.  And it may be maximizing of our personal interests, but does our community suffer?  I think it does.  But everybody says the problem is not enough choice.  I, I'm not sure that it's the opposite.  That's one problem.  I think kids are challenging.  I think they're smarter in some ways.  I also think they're incredibly impatient beings.  I think kids are--turning away from books to some degree 'cause it's too slow for them.  My children [Jeffrey Powell and Bryan Powell] have brilliant spatial abilities and chaotic kind of thinking and stuff that I can't even do 'cause of video games and stuff.  But I'm very worried.  Do they have the patience, that, that a hard math problem still might take that (unclear).  Do they have the patience that da Vinci [Leonardo da Vinci] had to do it day in and day out for a month?  I don't know a lot of little boys who I think have the temperament to even do it, you know, that's gonna be challenging.  The speed with which we expect things is becoming problematic, concentration, focus.  The one's that worry me the most are things like reflection, repose, thoughtfulness, you know, retrospective.  You and me are doing a four hour interview.  I've done a thousand television shows.  I'm lucky if you're on there for nine minutes most.  What you're usually on there is two and a half.  And you have to convert anything, no matter how complex, media ownership, you got two minutes, go, to tell the country why you're right.  Do you think you could do--I know you can't do it.  You can win a sound bite war.  They kind of liked your sound bite more than theirs, but if a debate is really serious, and you want it to be serious.  I've never--didn't want the media ownership debate to be serious.  What medium are we gonna provide for having a mass conversation about something hard?  You know, I was just rereading 'Parting of the Waters' [sic. 'Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-63,' Taylor Branch] about King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] years, and I'm always struck by the, you know, the sort of moments when, you know, he's there to command five thousand people and there would be these moments which you could get worlds to pause, long enough to reflect on some of these complexities.  You could take the 'Letter from Birmingham Jail' [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], which is pretty long by modern standards.  I don't know if I could get a kid to read the 'Letter from Birmingham Jail' today or a paper to publish--The Times [The New York Times] wouldn't publish something that long.
Speaker 1: So, but that's right, so it's sort of a mournfulness for lost ideals, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Story_ID: 333350
Speaker 1: My question is given that, you know, reflection now, would you enter political life again?
Speaker 2: I would enter public life again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Political life and public life are not the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think the Martin controversy [Kevin Martin] had some effect on you in that way?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't single that out.  I mean I, you know, I don't know who--at the end of the day, I think our view won out over that and the controversy.  Our roles ultimately prevailed there, but--look, you, you can't be in public life and you won't cross sabers with people.  That--if you're really honest, any task worth doing is one that will engender conflict.  I mean I don't know a CEO that at some point doesn't go toe-to-toe with someone in the company.  I'm the only board of directors that at some point doesn't have to do some dirty stuff--not dirty, unethical, but something gets ugly.  I don't know any president whose ever served in office who didn't have an enemy or an opponent or someone who doesn't subscribe to their program or that they have to--this, this is a sort of naivete about the reality of leadership at high levels, and I think even more naivete about public leadership because I think public political life has become so infested with partisanship and conflict that if you think you're gonna go into the government and take on any job worth doing, and walk away without anybody--if you ever can leave one of those jobs and nobody say anything bad about you, you didn't do anything.  And, and I think that's what the country should worry about most.  We could create a class of political leaders who we'll like better, who might be more, less controversial, but what you might ask is, are you losing boldness and, and courage for change if what you reinforce is the sort of meek political figure, who just wants to do this all the time and smell where the pressure's coming from and sort of roll over here.  Yeah, yeah, a lot of people used to say to me, "Well, you know he's really smart, but God, just the political instincts."  And I used to think about that 'cause I said, "Well, maybe they're right."  But what I concluded is this is garbage 'cause what they mean by political instincts is that kind of mealy compromising, that sort of meek form of avoiding con- showing how good you are at just baby splitting constantly so that nobody gets mad enough.  But often what's needed is a decision that's clear, unambiguous and bold that will help change the world, and it can't--if you water it down to make everybody happy, nobody actually got anything.  This is what I think that [U.S.] Congress does day-in and day out today.  They end up trying to get so many things taken care of, and this--that at the end of the day, the total package actually helps none of those people.  Now, you, if you've got an ounce of the bread, and she got an ounce of the bread, why is everybody who's just an ounce of the bread hungry?  Maybe the answer is you should have won.  I mean you're right.  Maybe next time they're right, but, you know, I'm not so sure you're feeding the world if you give 'em all a little once and the bread's gone and everybody's still starving.  And I think that's the impulse in Washington [D.C.].  I think when people say political, more and more it's the art of just playing this kind of game that I don't, I just don't--my attitude was if somebody's gonna give me a big job, I want to do something with it.  I don't want to just put it on my resume and go home.
Story_ID: 333351
Speaker 1: So do you think, you know 'cause people would say that you're perceived as more conservative than your father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think so.  There's a huge difference between me and my father, which I think he would quickly credit.  He's a [U.S.] military man.  We--there are certain cultures in America that are sacrosanct.  I, I, you know, one, Ron Williams [Ronald Williams] once said to me, "The first black president will come out of your law enforcement of the military."  I thought that's interesting.  "Why?"  He said, "Because that's the only place a black man's gonna be able to have a glorious career without getting glove touched in which they can cross racial boundaries because we have a, an undying reverence for the general."  Not that he didn't earn it 'cause he's as good as he seems to be.  But let me tell you, when you wear the uniform, and you got four stars on your shoulder, there is a magic that's associated with that.  It also means that you serve--you, you're, you are permitted to be completely apolitical the bulk of your career.  And when my father was contemplating a run for president, nobody even knew what party you're with.
Speaker 1: That's right.  They didn't really care.
Speaker 2: There is no other profession--
Speaker 1: They didn't really care (laughter).
Speaker 2: There's no other thing you can do in this country where you can go to the age of fifty and be as prominent and popular a figure as he is and you don't even know what political--this is not possible in the civilian world.  If you're a civilian and you want to have public policy leadership, you have to be political.  I mean I can't get the chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] without being something.  They don't make independents the leaders of cabinet agencies.  So anyone who, you know, is--you know, and if you're not in that sort of wonderful world of the military, you're forced to choose a political space way earlier.  And so I think the difference--you know, people say you're more conservative.  I, I think I had to be in a political space in a more, in an earlier and a more dramatic way than he does.  And, and I am in a domestic field--the other thing I would say is I think foreign policy generally, although lately it's pretty partisan, but historically, it's one thing the country could, could be more consensus about, as is war.  I used to tell a foreigner, you know, Americans hardly have any traditions, but if there's one, we're warriors.  And when our troops are overseas, that's a very powerful--that's one of the few things that makes Americans tighten up together.  So a guy like him has all that going for him.  If, if you, if your field this foreign policy and military stuff, right, those are great fields for less political partisanship because you don't ever actually have to make many decisions that have anything to do with the divide in the country of politics.  If you were the secretary of health or your field happens to be, you know, the economy or, you know, these social issues, the day you enter the field, you got 50 percent of the country who thinks one way and 50 percent who thinks another way.  You can't do domestic public policy work and not have dual controversy, right.  So my field is domestic focused.  It's a, it's a world that's about things happening in the country.  It's filled with billion-dollar companies on opposite sides.  So like, you know, when you do something that Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] likes, AT&T [AT&T Inc.] hates you, and they have a billion dollar budget to scream at you with.  But if you do in their--they get what they want, these guys--what's the foreign policy equivalent of that?  Now, if the French yell at the secretary, Americans rally.  If the Germans yell at the secretary, the president (unclear), you--don't be yelling at our people, you know.  It's just a very different world.  And so I think some people interpret that as, well, he's more conservative.  I don't know many policy things that he and I talk about that we don't have virtually the exact same idea about.
Story_ID: 333352
Speaker 1: But you do think ideal- ideologically, you're, you're a Republican?
Speaker 2: Well, I got to say, these days, I'm not so sure what any of these labels mean.  I like to believe I am a, a moderate, and I think to the extent, you know, my Republicanism is pragmatism.  I think to the extent it's conservative is that I just happen to have a high degree of trust in individuals.  And I am somewhat suspicious general--I shouldn't say suspicious.  I, I always start skeptical that our governmental institutions actually are superior choosers and allocaters of benefits than people are.  And I think some--I don't like politics that tend to assume the stupidity of Americans.  And I think, since I'm in a world of economic policy, that tends to make you more conservative.  So when you say, are you a free marketer?  I said, yes, because the market's about people, empowerment of people.  I want consumers to be deciding, not industrial policy where me and my philosopher king commissioners sort of puppet what companies do, and we--because the people are too stupid to protect themselves.  So we'll do all--you sit down while we do all the protecting for you.  More often than not, we also keep them from things that they should have.  It happens all the time.  Give you an example on VoIP [Voice over Internet Protocol] you mentioned.  Well, we all believe in the E911 [Enhanced 911] system, so do I.  But let's, what if consumers have available to them the traditional phone system that costs fifty dollars a month, that has a full 911, and a service that costs ten dollars a month and doesn't.  And they have that choice, and as long as you fully disclose the risks, they're taking, why shouldn't they get to pick?  Now, this commission just sort of said to VoIP, you have to do 911, and if you don't, you can't offer service.  Now, they would say they're protecting consumers, and they're, they're, you know, they're not the free marketers.  I would say to you, you're just screwing people.  So the poor family that can't afford the forty dollars a month, who has a possibility of ten dollars a month and might make this trade off, you just said, you're just, and you're not even gonna let them have the prospect.  So my conservatism is that flavor of conservatism.  And I've never had to be involved in the social side of politics, so, you know, I think more and more, most of the time when people are talking about political labels, they're usually talking about the social issues, divide countries.  And I've never been a public figure in any of them.  So that's why I don't like to say, well, are you a conservative Republican, 'cause today that means abortion and, and church and all this other stuff that I don't actually traffic in.
Story_ID: 333111
Speaker 1: In your world that you exist in right now, because it's been--the last time (background noise) I've heard you mention race was you as a young lawyer, sitting sort of at the foot of Harry Edwards [Harry T. Edwards] and, and justice, you know, Thurgood Marshall, and I won't even say race came in, a factor there, but except that they were black men in these, you know, very esteemed judicial positions.  So I'm just wondering in your world, where does that factor in or has color gone away?
Speaker 2: Oh, color can't--I mean color cannot go away.  And it, it does factor in.  I think I just take it, in a particular direction which is the values and the principles I choose to live by and lead by, I think, are thoroughly derived in significant measure from unique experiences of black life, meaning--so, we talked about those judges and justices and people I've met.  It, it wasn't just that they were great men at what they did and the principles I took from those experiences.  It was in the stories and the unique experiences of them as people who had to struggle.  And in this case, the struggle is particularly racial.  Now, you know, you can learn from other people who have other kinds of struggles, but I think struggles are the great teachers.  And so those men are not black by coincidence at all, right.  I mean they are uniquely who they are because the nature of their struggle included a racial dimension.  You didn't relate to them.  I didn't relate and take to them just because they were talented or even had struggled.  I took and related to them because there's a common and shared nature to that struggle.  There's a commonality.  I also think there's a trust.  You know, we all go along--we learn most from the things we trust.  And, you know, to sit down in a room with Harry Edwards or, or the late Thurgood Marshall or Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.], is to sit in a room with someone who believes--who you feel you could let down your anxieties to, who could, who could recount theirs for you in a way that you know they will trust and protect because they have--you know, we do--I've heard people use metaphors of ladders and leaping, they feel a unique sense to me and my generation to help us take one more step in this long river of racial progress forward.  I don't think personally that'll ever be completely colorblind, but it should be equalized; that is, more of us are in the same places that they are.  And I think that there's an innate sense of that in everything that they've ever taught me.
Story_ID: 333112
Speaker 1: And what we didn't talk about is, I am equally passionate about it as I reach the age that I am now, with those who are younger than me.  I spend enormous amounts of time with, with talented young black people because they gave to me; I'm gonna give it to them.  You know, when I went to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], I looked around, there was nothing going on with black folks.  No meetings, no come-togethers, no culture.  I started holding my own sessions, invited all the black attorneys at first.  We'd go over readings.  I started getting things, I would--things I read that were meaningful, I'd mark them, send them to all the, all the employees, started hosting dinners and luncheons.  We'd get together, create community, create networks because I think the world works on networks.  And I think sometimes black communities are being cut out of those networks.  They have to learn how to do that.  And for eight years, I nurtured that system.  And I didn't do it just 'cause I wanted to hang out with the black folks.  It was to me a sense of duty that if I'm a commissioner, I'm a senior person in this building.  If I'm a chairman, I'm really senior person in this building.  I owe an allegiance to every one of the two thousand employees, and I will give it to all of them.  But do I have a special place in my heart for trying to share my struggle and accomplishments with this little group because I think they uniquely need to hear it, in a unique sort of way, and they need sort of the, the guidance in a unique special way.  And Thurgood Marshall is now not with us, so none of them are ever gonna have that conversation.  So aren't I the link to his legacy for them, to me?  Absolutely.  Now, that said, I, I do adhere to the idea that all I'm owed is fairness.  In a fair game, you can still lose.  And so at the end of the day, it's nec- you know, race to me is something to grapple with necessarily, but even overcoming it is insufficient, meaning it--even if we were colorblind, my world would not instantaneously necessarily be better because in our kind of society, you still have to compete to win.  And so, yeah, you could look and say, "Oh, all of my daily toil, I'm on this or on that," because in the world of Judge Edwards [Harry T. Edwards] and Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], you're not just fighting for the chance to be the secretary of state, you'd better know what you're doing when you get there.  And, oh, by the way, in my opinion, if you're black, you'd better know what you're doing even more because they're just waiting for you to fail so someone could say, "See, they shouldn't have been one."  On the other hand, if you're one of the great ones, you've changed the world forever.  And so, that's one of my messages to young people is look, we, we can focus on race.  And there's a lot of unique things, but at the end of the day I'm not doing anything for you if I don't teach you to be really good, if I don't teach you how to be, you know, successful and powerful and significant and play the game--you know, it's not a game, and you do your work and do it as well as they can, what, what have we accomplished?  I can get you an opportunity, but if you can't succeed in the opportunity--one of the hardest conversations I'll ever have with a young black person, job comes up.  And, "Oh, yeah, Mr. Chairman, can I have that?"  I said, "No."  "Well, you know, come on, it'll be a great opportunity."  "It would be a great opportunity for a black person, but you're not ready.  If I put you there, you will fail, and if you fail, I have not helped you.  And if you fail, not only will people say, see, I told you so.  They'll, they'll associate it with your race, and so we're gonna take another year, and we're gonna do these ten things, and I'll find you another opportunity."
Story_ID: 333113
Speaker 1: Your legacy.  Okay, not many people have had the opportunity in their life, one, to have a father [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] like you--black people, and to be mentored by the strong group, I mean all strong men, you know.  And, and so I'm just wondering in the tradition of, of your, you know, family backgrounds, what do you want your, your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Let me answer two things--say two things about that.  One is, I hate the word because I'm a big believer that legacy is not something you can, you can consciously guide you today.  Legacy is something that only with the passage of time and history and sort of the test of duration can someone say you've earned a legacy.  And so I always caution myself and others that, we don't--you know, I used to say at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], we don't use the L word around here because I think that's become very vogue, that people are contemporaneously worrying about their legacy.  I've tried to worry about getting the job done, doing it as well as I can, learning from failures and hopefully, if I did it right, with the passage of time and reflection, someone will say, you left something in this world.  Now, do I care what people think?  Sure, but I really do feel passionately about that and think about legacy.  But I think there are certain things that you would always want said of you.  I hope that it's always a person of intellect and integrity.  My father has taught me, even in the toughest battles, people will long forget events and things.  They will never forget the way you did 'em.  They will never forget how you conduct yourselves.  They'll never forget if you used ill words rather than good words.  And so hold on to yourself, maintain your temperament, your, your, your grace, your respect, your integrity.  Those things, no one can rip from you, but you can give away.  When you give 'em away, they'll never come back.  And I think this country has an enormous propensity, no matter what people do, that if at the end of the day, they liked the way they walked, they will always be remembered in the hearts of people.  And so for me, it's more of these things, these intangibles, how I conduct myself, the honesty, the ethics, the integrity; how I take care of people who work for me, because one of them one day is gonna be president.  One of them is gonna run the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], and if they say, I was one of those people that helped guide them, that's the legacy, right.  The legacy is, did your example cause someone coming behind you to go past you.  That's what I want.  I want somebody behind me, no matter how I get, whatever that is, if somebody that I touched goes past me, that's, that's--then you've left a mark.  So, I don't know.  That's what I hope someone will be able to say.
