Story_ID: 666765
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Yes, Judge John W. Peavy, Jr. [HistoryMaker John W. Peavy, Jr.], and it's Peavy, P-E-A-V-Y.
Speaker 1: And what does the W stand for?
Speaker 2: Wesley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I'm a junior.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 28, 1942, Houston, Harris County, Texas.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a senior judge plus I own--self employed in terms of having business and owning real estate here in Houston.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 2, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my office at 44--in Houston, Texas, at 4412 Almeda Road.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm a lawyer, by, by training.
Story_ID: 666766
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we ask as sort of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I guess my--my favorite food is collard greens and maybe fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And gray.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: We like--yes, Galveston [Texas].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying is that if you can't make it in Houston [Texas], you can't make it anywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) so it's the opposite of New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah right, right, right and that phrase was from my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.] because my dad used to always tell young people the opportunity was in Houston and if you can't make it here then you can't make it any other place.
Speaker 1: I've heard this now maybe three times on this trip.  People say that and they seem to really believe that in Houston, that Houston is the land of opportunity.
Speaker 2: Well it is and I guess the reason being is that places like New York, Washington, D.C., you know, California has had so much growth and there are so many people and minorities here in Houston are just now--you know, we're really just beginning to get the benefits of integration and everything and because of that it's a lot of opportunity. We've got a lot of land in Houston and so what you think that you can do, you can do it in Houston.
Story_ID: 666767
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John W. Peavy, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Malinda, M-A-L-I-N-D-A, Corine, C-O-R-I-N-E, Terrell, T-E-R-R-E-L-L [Malinda Terrell Peavy].
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think her date of birth was in 1906 and she was born Anderson [Texas], Grimes, Texas [Grimes County, Texas].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Anderson is A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Grimes G-R-I-M-E-S, County, C-O-U-N-T-Y, Texas, T-E-X-A-S (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  Okay, so how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side and what are the stories and the personalities on that side?
Speaker 2: Well on my mother's side I guess we went back to my great-grandfather and I think he was born in 1854 [sic.] and he came here from South Carolina--Charleston, South Carolina.  I'm not sure; I guess it was about 1865 or 1866.  His master freed him and also gave him the money to buy some land.  He had three children, and one being my grandfather and another one I.M. Terrell and then he had a daughter [Emma Terrell].
Speaker 1: Okay now your great-grandfather was Alexander Terrell?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and you are related in some way to Mary Church Terrell.
Speaker 2: Yes that's correct.
Speaker 1: As well, right?
Speaker 2: Yes that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So your grandfather was I.M. Terrell?
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather was Alex Terrell and I.M. Terrell was his brother.
Speaker 1: Oh I see he's your great uncle.
Speaker 2: He's my great uncle.
Speaker 1: I.M. Terrell.
Speaker 2: Right, I.M. Terrell.
Speaker 1: I.M. Terrell, yeah.  So, and now he's significant because?
Speaker 2: He was educated just as my grandfather was educated too, incidentally.  But he went on to become principal of the black school [East Ninth Street Colored School] in Fort Worth [Texas] and then after leaving being the principal of a black school in Fort Worth, he was one of the founders and first president [sic.] of Prairie View College [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University].  At the time they called it the Negro college but he was one of the first presidents of that college in Prairie View [Texas].
Speaker 1: So this is--Prairie View is school that's funded by the State of Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's part of the Texas A&M system [Texas A&M University System].
Speaker 1: And so it was started as the Negro college?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then it became Prairie View.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So we could, I guess, gather that he was--you know, so this is a state position, the state appointed him president, right?  Is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm not sure how it happened but he was--
Speaker 1: There may have been a board of directors chose a president, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my, my grandfather, Alexander Terrell, he too got an education and he was head of what they called a colored--well I guess it was Negro schools in Grimes County and so he was an educator also.  And he had, it was eight daughters and one son and all the children went to Prairie View and all of them were teachers.
Speaker 1: Hm, okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother was--was a teacher.
Story_ID: 666768
Speaker 1: Okay so she went to Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] too and?
Speaker 2: Right, she went to Prairie View also.
Speaker 1: Now did she always want to be a teacher or were there limited opportunities or what?
Speaker 2: I think that there were limited opportunities at that time but clearly having just gotten from--freed from slavery and experiencing all that they felt that the way for black people to progress is to have an education.  And--and at that time, you know, teaching was one of the avenues that you could do something, you know, unless you went into a trade.  But they went into teaching.
Speaker 1: So it was a good position to have in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As it is now.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: But, okay.  So did your mother [Malinda Terrell Peavy] grow up in Anderson--in Grimes County [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah she grew up in Anderson but she eventually moved to Houston [Texas] with my father [John W. Peavy, Sr.] when they got married.  He was from Grimes County also, Anderson.  They moved to Houston and she got a job teaching Houston Independent School District and she taught the fourth grade up until her retirement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she--do you have any stories your mother told about growing up in Anderson or the early days of Houston?
Speaker 2: Well one thing, my grandfather [Alexander Terrell] in addition to being in charge of the Negro school system in Grimes County, he also owned land, and what was unique in Anderson, Texas, their home--and they had a big two story home on the main street of Anderson and they were the only black family that stayed, you know, in town.  And the town is sort of like on a hill like and you've got the courthouse--the Grimes County Courthouse [Anderson, Texas] to the right, you've got an inn to the left and right there is the Terrell--where the Terrells had their home.  It was like four or five lots, as I was saying it was a two story house.  He also founded the black church in Anderson, Texas and he was very business minded because of the fact that when people lost their property for taxes, he would buy property at the courthouse and get a tax sale and buy property.  So she talked about Anderson and growing up. She didn't talk too much about the Depression [Great Depression] but one of my mother's sisters who was older than my mother, experienced the Depression and she talked about the Depression.  I can remember as a little boy going to their house where in their pantry they had a lot of flour, you know, they had a lot of staple products because of the fact that they had experienced the Depression and they didn't want to experience it again.  You know, so they made sure that staples--that they had plenty of it in their pantry at home.
Story_ID: 666769
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Your father's name is John Pea- Peavy [John W. Peavy, Sr.], right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And--senior.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And his--what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Anderson, Texas also in Grimes County, Texas.  I do not know a whole lot about his family, no more than his mother was named Lula Mae Haynie [Lula Haynie Peavy] and his father was named John Henry Peavy [John Peavy] and--and Haynie [Eb Haynie] grew cotton and he had land up there.  He had two or three hundred acres in Grimes County.  But the thing that's significant--
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother's--
Speaker 2: No this is my father's father, Haynie.  Mother--yeah, my grandmother's father, right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But what was interesting about my dad is that he tells a story--well he used to tell a story that when he was about sixteen years old he saw some white people hang a black man in Grimes County on a tree and he walked from Grimes County to Houston [Texas] and that's how he came to Houston.
Speaker 1: So this would have been like--this would have been prior to--this would have been around the turn of the century, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, right 'cause my dad was born in 1906 so he was about fourteen like 1920 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Gee whiz.  So, what did your father say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well he did that and then he was self-educated and he graduated from high school then went on to be, you know, be an insurance person, sell insurance and he was also involved what you would call a longshoremen's, ILA [International Longshoremen's Association], with a local--black local [Local 872] and he was their business manager.  In addition there too he acquired property, we grew up in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] and he acquired property in Fifth Ward and built either single family houses or four plex units for rent so he would have additional income.  But the most important thing though about my dad was that not only did he do that but he was active politically, and that's what helped me.  I'm told that he was one of the first black election judges in Texas in addition there to doing that, we used to have what they call poll tax and he was very active in getting people registered to vote.  And in addition to getting the people registered to vote, people looked to him as to who to vote.  And as a consequence, he gained a lot of stature in the community doing that and the politicians would come to him for his support.  If he thought that they were going to be fair and do the right thing for the black community, he would support them.  As a consequence of doing all of that, and back then his precinct was one of the largest black precincts too in the county [Harris County, Texas] because it was a geographical area as against the number of people who lived in the area.  So when Johnson--President Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson] and Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] ran for president in 1960, his precinct was one of the largest precincts to vote for Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his party affiliation was Democratic?
Speaker 2: Right yes and he was involved in the case of Smith v. Wainright [sic. Smith v. Allwright, 1944]--
Speaker 1: Famous case (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which gave blacks the right to vote in a Democratic primary.  He was one of the local organizers for the local chapter for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] here in Houston.
Story_ID: 666770
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about Smith vs. Wainright [sic. Smith v. Allwright, 1944] for somebody watching this doesn't know anything about it.
Speaker 2: Well in Smith vs. Wainright, people who said they were a Democrat in the primary they could not vote in the primary that is blacks could not vote in the primary although whites could vote in the primary, but yet they could vote in the general election.  But we couldn't vote in the primary.  In Texas, that's where it was in Texas.  So they--Lonnie Smith--incidentally I knew him too and he was a dentist; he and my daddy [John W. Peavy, Sr.] and some other people in the community and he was from Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] too, filed a lawsuit and they were successful.  It went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and the Supreme Court ruled that blacks had the right to vote in the Democratic primary in Texas.  So it was a landmark case.  So not only was my daddy able to that but he was one of the first electors to go to the Democratic National Convention from Texas.
Story_ID: 666771
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their talents, the way walked, the way they talked, and what they looked like, their sense of humor--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't--I think it's very hard to say.  Both of my parents having come from the background that they came from, they both were serious people.  They were religious people, God fearing, believed in education.  When I was a child my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.] would tell everybody, "This is my son." I was the only boy, I had two sisters [Shirley Peavy Peart and Johnnie Peavy Viser], and that, "He's going to be a lawyer one day."  But my mother [Malinda Terrell Peavy] was more practical and I'll never forget when I graduated from high school [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] that my dad had been telling everybody that I was going to be a lawyer and I was getting ready to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  That my mother called me into a room and said to me, "John Wesley [HistoryMaker John W. Peavy, Jr.]," and that's what they called me John Wesley, she said, "I know your daddy wants you to be a lawyer but let me tell you this." She said, "Black lawyers starve to death. You need to be a minister." That's what she told me.
Story_ID: 666772
Speaker 1: And the meaning of that is that black lawyers are--were almost invariably in private practice, right?
Speaker 2: Well not only were they at that stage in private practice but because of the fact that the black population did not provide enough business for black lawyers to make an economic wellbeing and support their family at that time, a lot of black lawyers although they had gotten a law degree had to work in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] or had to take a job somewhere in order to support their family.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so I'll never forget that and although I was God fearing and she [Peavy's mother, Malinda Terrell Peavy] wanted me to be a minister that just was not my calling.  But I ended up being a lawyer (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what I meant by private practice, I mean black folks would have to hang up the shingle and serve the legal needs of the black community if they could 'cause there were some black people accused of criminal offenses, or had property issues, sought white lawyers, and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right well yeah, well sure, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So black lawyers were--they had a double whammy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on them.  They could only serve the black community for the most part and some of the black community preferred having a white lawyer because the white lawyer represented power in the white power structure, right?
Speaker 2: It--it's no doubt about it and unfortunately and especially in Houston [Texas] if you had a white lawyer and a black lawyer and you got a white judge the judge going to rule for the white lawyer.
Speaker 1: So this is--this is some serious consideration.
Speaker 2: Right.  It--it's no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: I mean it's not to say that some black lawyers weren't successful and there weren't things going on that were heroic and successful in those days, like, but--but it is, it was harder to make a living.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Much harder to make a living.
Speaker 2: Very hard.
Story_ID: 666773
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have--I had two sisters.  An older sister named Shirley [Shirley Peavy Peart] who got married and moved to New Jersey as a teacher and then I have another sister named Johnnie [Johnnie Peavy Viser] who was a registered nurse and she passed away in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're the youngest?
Speaker 2: Right, I'm the youngest (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, okay.
Story_ID: 666774
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well I just remember how hard, you know, my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.] worked in the community [in Houston, Texas] trying to make--make it fairer for African Americans.  He spent--three things he did: he went to work, he went to church, and he went to civic meetings, you know, and that was his life trying to make it better and when he supported someone he demanded that they be fair to black people and improve our conditions.
Story_ID: 666775
Speaker 1: Can you describe--now what was the, you li- you grew up in the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Right I grew up in Fifth Ward.
Speaker 1: And the Fifth Ward is--has a national reputation now as being like almost a prototypical hood or ghetto or something.  Geto Boys, the rappers--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: --came out of the Fifth Ward and it may not have been that way when you were growing up but it popular culture now it's seen as the heart of the ghetto, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--and one of the thing about the Fifth Ward when I grew up it was Fifth Ward and Third Ward [Houston, Texas] and that's where most of the black people lived and there was a rivalry between Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] and Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas].  And Yates--people who went to Yates couldn't be caught in the Fifth Ward and people who went Wheatley couldn't be caught in the Third Ward.  And, but I'll say this, is that although, as you said about the ghetto, back then, I didn't think it was the ghetto but I learned later that, that, you know, you could consider it--you know, could consider it that, you know.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't as bad when you grew up as it was when say the Geto Boys were writing about it.
Speaker 2: Right, that's true.
Speaker 1: It wasn't that bad, was it, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No. No, no, it was flourishing and basically people were doing fairly well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, what was--was there a particular part of the Fifth Ward that you lived in that had a name or was it just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--that's what it was, Fifth Ward, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Fifth Ward.  And what was the main street in your?
Speaker 2: Lyons Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Fifth Ward the main street was Lyons Avenue and in Third Ward the main street was Dowling Street [Emancipation Avenue] and so on Lyons Avenue, as a matter of fact right around the corner from us, Don Robey had Peacock Records [Houston, Texas].  I can remember as a kid seeing busses being there.  It might have [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, different people because they would go to Peacock Records to record their records and then four or five blocks closer toward town there was a guy named Dickerson [Louis Dickerson] who owned a hotel [Crystal Hotel, Houston, Texas], owned a nightclub [Club Matinee, Houston, Texas], owned a cab company [Crystal White Taxi] and he was considered I guess one of the richest men in the Fifth Ward during that time.  But it flourished, you know.  And that's everybody--I didn't go because I was too young, but during that time that's where all the stars would appear at his club.
Speaker 1: Were most of your shops--barbershops, beauty shops, other establishments (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they inter- yeah, they were there.  Shoeshine shops, barbershops there was a guy named Marshall who had a drugstore [Marshall's Drug Store, Houston, Texas] in the bla- in Fifth Ward on Lyons Avenue.  There was another guy who had an auto shop that did real well in the Fifth Ward.  And there was a Simpson's Barbecue [Houston, Texas] that was in Fifth Ward that did real well but unfortunately, most of--and Lane's Barbecue [Houston, Texas], but most of these businesses turned out to be one generational businesses.
Story_ID: 666776
Speaker 1: I know when I think about Houston [Texas], I always think about Jack Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas] and the rivalry between the two but I forget about Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas].  Now (laughter), how do they fit into--how does the Booker T. Washington crowd fit in to this rivalry?
Speaker 2: Well they were a part of it but it wasn't as you said--they weren't the main rivalry because what happened traditionally in Houston every Thanksgiving there would be a Wheatley-Yates game.  It would be the battle of who had the best football team in addition to who had the best football team it would also be who put on the best halftime show in addition to Booker Washington never really had a good football team.  And they were just third place when it came to all the drama.  One of the things I want to say is that when I was at Wheatley I was in the ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and I was a colonel in the ROTC but more importantly I was a part of the drill team and we would perform back there then at the Wheatley--Yates games.  But, you know, and, it was always spectacular.
Speaker 1: Now did the bands exhibit the exuberant style made popular by FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], with--
Speaker 2: No doubt about it, no doubt--yes the bands--they had the Wheatley marching band, the Yates marching band, they had band instructors who did exuberance, who had them doing--
Speaker 1: Fast pace marching (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fast pace and they had the drum majorettes and it was just unbelievable.  I remember one year that--for Yates at the halftime they brought Miss Yates in a helicopter and landed on the field and I mean it was a sight to see.
Speaker 1: Now Jack Yates was named after a fellow named Jack Yates who had been a slave who founded the--grew up to found the school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes and then he was also the founder of the church that I'm a member of.
Speaker 1: Which is what?
Speaker 2: Antioch Missionary Baptist Church [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jack Yates, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was the founder of that church.
Speaker 1: And Phillis Wheatley, of course, was named for?
Speaker 2: Phillis Wheatley as you know during slavery was an activist in poetry.
Speaker 1: Right, poet and activist, okay.  And, when you were, I guess when you were seven years old they built a new Phillis Wheatley High School, right?
Speaker 2: No they built (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They said they built it in '49 [1949]?
Speaker 2: Well they moved--they were at E.O. Smith [E.O. Smith Middle School, Houston, Texas] and then they moved--right I guess so, I guess it was in the '50s [1950s] that they built a new Wheatley.
Speaker 1: Yeah and this was Phil- this one was a two and half million dollar, 44,900--no it was at 4900 Market Street.
Speaker 2: Right, at Market Street, right.
Speaker 1: It had a fifteen hundred seat auditorium.
Speaker 2: Right yeah
Speaker 1: And over twenty-six hundred students, sixty teachers, one of the largest schools in the United States.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And I graduated from Wheatley in 1960 and that was the largest graduating class when I graduated in 1960.
Speaker 1: Now Wheatley and Yates boast teachers that were college quality teachers.  Was this true when you were in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, all, all of them had been to college and certified.
Speaker 1: No I mean college quality teachers, I mean college level teachers, rather, not just--
Speaker 2: Right, yes, right, right, oh sure.  Yes, yes, no doubt--no doubt about it, no doubt about it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, many of the teachers had advanced degrees.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666777
Speaker 1: You started school at--was it E.O. Smith [E.O. Smith Middle School, Houston, Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bruce.
Speaker 2: I started at Bruce Elementary School [Blanche Kelso Bruce Elementary School, Houston, Texas] and then after graduating in the sixth grade from Bruce I went to E.O. Smith.
Speaker 1: So what were you--were you considering becoming a lawyer in those days?
Speaker 2: I was active in terms of leadership but I hadn't really thought about being a lawyer.  I thought about business.  As I said my daddy [John W. Peavy, Sr.] always wanted me to be a lawyer and I never told him that I didn't want to be a lawyer but I hadn't really--as I said, I hadn't really thought about it, you know.  But I was always active and had a leadership role from being in elementary school, junior high and being at Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas], you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now did you have any heroes when you were in elementary school?  Or who were your heroes and role models?
Speaker 2: I had a first cousin who was a principal and I admired him, you know, a great deal and I was involved with what you called (unclear) Y which was sort of like the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and--
Speaker 1: It operated out of the grade schools though, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, and I was involved in that and I enjoyed participating in that and I thought at one time that might be something that I wanted to do, you know.  But I guess what happened is that over time things evolved and you realize that just--I majored in accounting but just being an accountant wasn't enough and I needed to do more than just be an accountant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I want to still talk about grade school before we get you out of it.  So in grade school you didn't have--you didn't see yourself as being a lawyer necessarily?  So when you entered Jack Yates [Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I went to Wheatley.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry Wheatley yeah that's right.  There's a big difference, I'm sorry I don't want to make you mad at me, by saying that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Oh, no, no that's all right.  My wife [Diane Massey Peavy] is from Jack Yates.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you entered Phillis Wheatley--you were pursuing like a--did they have it divided into college tracks?
Speaker 2: Right I took business class, I took typing, I took accounting and I was very good at typing also accounting.  And, and that was a good thing about it--you know, high school.  Plus my mother [Malinda Terrell Peavy] took me--they had what they called vocational guidance counselors and they would test you back then and see what a student aptitude was.  She did that for me and my aptitude was business, accounting and also law.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You start at Phillis Wheatley in 1954 I guess, right?  No, '6 [1956], '56 [1956], '56 [1956] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fi- '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh 'cause you went to junior high school, right, right, okay, '57 [1957] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah '57 [1957] to '60 [1960]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was there.
Story_ID: 666778
Speaker 1: Had you been keeping up with the Civil Rights Movement on television and that sort of thing?  'Cause this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes a little bit, you know, because, you know, my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.], being active in politics, we had Jet magazine he had a subscription in that, the Pittsburgh--what's that, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Courier, yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Courier, right, he got that paper and he was always, you know, interested in what was happening in the black community and making sure that we made progress and that we were treated fairly.  So I mean I lived in that type of family and so yes I was aware of that.
Speaker 1: Was your church like friendly towards Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and his ideas?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and he--as a matter of fact he came to the church.  I went to a church called Pleasant Hill Baptist Church in Fifth Ward [Pleasant Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas].  It was one of the big churches in Fifth Ward at that time and if I recall correctly, I think that Dr. King met with my pastor who was Reverend L.H. Simpson [Lee Haywood Simpson] who was one of the renowned ministers in Houston [Texas] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so they were on board with the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 666779
Speaker 1: So you're taking basically the business course at Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did you have favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: Yes I did and one was a lady by the name of Anna Ruth Cataway [ph.].  She was--taught me typing and, then there was a gentleman who taught me accounting and they both were, you know, they both were very supportive and spent time with me and I really appreciated that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you said you were in the band, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I was in the band too in addition to being in the ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 1: Okay, ROTC.  What--what did you play?
Speaker 2: Clarinet.
Story_ID: 666780
Speaker 1: Was Houston [Texas] changing at all when you were in high school then?
Speaker 2: Yes it was changing, and as I mentioned there was a girl in my class named Beneva Williams [Beneva Williams Nyamu] and she actually filed a lawsuit against HISD with regards to us not being able--blacks not being able to go to integrated schools.
Speaker 1: HISD is the Houston--
Speaker 2: Schools--Houston Independent School District, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she filed a lawsuit--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: And--as--and part of that Brown vs. Board of Education lawsuit [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and her suit they agreed to integrate but only one grade per year and they started off at the first grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was going to take a while.
Speaker 2: Yeah right it took a while, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were a senior at Phillis Wheatley [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas], you became a member of the Young Democrats of Harris County [Harris County Young Democrats].
Speaker 2: Yes that's true and that's because my father [John W. Peavy, Sr.] was very active in Democratic politics and so I--I was a member of that.
Speaker 1: Okay so this is 1960.  What was--was there a big consuming issue in the city then for the black young Democrats or what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well you know, they were trying to--at that time Texas was a Democratic state but they were trying to get more persons who were elected who were Democrat who were more sympathetic to black causes and would--who would give more African Americans opportunities, and so that's why I was involved.  And then in 1960 they had the state convention in Houston and I was delegate along with a friend of mine by the name of Elie Bennett [ph.] and I had gotten him involved and we voted--they voted for us to go to the convention in Houston and when we went to the hotel and they saw that we were black, they told us that we couldn't stay there.  So the chairman of the Young Democrats of Texas [Texas Young Democrats], a gentleman by the name of Bill Kilgarlin [William Kilgarlin] who was from Houston, and so they told the hotel that if we couldn't stay there in the hotel they were going to take the convention somewhere else.  The hotel didn't want to lose that money (laughter) and so they could stand to have two black guys spend the night.
Speaker 1: So, they didn't publicize it though.
Speaker 2: Yeah they ain't publicize that (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is an exciting time in Texas, I guess for the Democratic Party nationwide, 1960 is when in the national Democratic convention [1960 Democratic National Convention, Los Angeles, California], John F. Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is nominated as well as Texas' own Lyndon Baines Johnson.  Did you attend the national?
Speaker 2: No my dad did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah my dad went to that convention.
Speaker 1: Was he a delegate?
Speaker 2: Right he was a delegate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Was he for Johnson?
Speaker 2: Was he for Johnson?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, he was for Johnson and as I said President Johnson came to Houston after they won and when he came to Houston after they won he met with my dad and told my dad he really appreciated everything that he did and asked my dad was there anything that he could do for him.  My dad just told him to do a good job.  But then the president--well he was vice president then, asked him a couple of more times and so then my dad told him, "I've got a son and I think he might go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  If he goes to Howard give him a job," and Lyndon Johnson said he would.
Speaker 1: Now that, that's a good connection.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a good connection.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 666781
Speaker 1: That fall, now that--this is just as the national election is going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're starting Howard University [Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you start what in August?
Speaker 2: Of 1960.
Speaker 1: In 1960 and the election was held in early November 1960--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] wins by a whisker, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Kennedy and Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson] win.  And so--you actually a chance to work in the White House [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  After he won and everything back then the way we communicated most of the time on phone is we'd call on a payphone, you know, and call home and hang up and then they would call you back on the payphone.
Speaker 1: So you could save money.
Speaker 2: To save money yeah because it's cheaper for them to call you than you trying to put coins in the machine--in the payphone, you know, to call them, you know.  But my dad kept asking me had I gone to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to see the president and I told him I would.  I was there when my--you know, he talked to the president but I didn't put too much credence in it.  And, so anyway my daddy had to--see I went to school in August and I guess it was about February or March that I went to the White House and tried to get in but clearly I couldn't get in.  My dad was a good friend with Congressman Albert Thomas and so I went to see the Congressman Albert Thomas and--that was my daddy's friend too, and he called President Johnson and told him.  They called my dad J.W. [John W. Peavy, Sr.] and they told the president that J.W.'s son is here and so Lyndon Johnson told him, "Well send him on over to the White House," and I went right on over to the White House and I started working there.
Speaker 1: Now what were your duties?
Speaker 2: I worked--he was, as vice president he was head of the National Aeronautics and Space council staff [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], which was right there at the White House.  And, you know, I did accounting clerk work and I was the first black, you know, there.  There was--I remember a guy named Martin [Louis E. Martin] who was a photographer [sic.] who worked there at the White House and a couple of other blacks but in terms of blacks being having jobs, it wasn't, that was not going on there.  So I did that up until I graduated from undergraduate.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever encounter the wait staff at the White House, the butlers and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No I didn't, but I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know the movie ['The Butler'] just came out a couple of years ago--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, I know, I know.  I did encounter the people in the messenger room, you know, I did meet them, you know.  But in terms of--I might have met one or two butlers but not on a--you know, because what I did--you know, I had an office they had for me.  It was part-time 'cause I was in school and I'd just go, you know, go there in the evenings, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I worked like four hours a day.
Story_ID: 666782
Speaker 1: There was one--I know there was at least one appointee of--this may, he may not have been there until the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration, I'm trying to think.  Louis Martin [Louis E. Martin]--remember Louis Martin?
Speaker 2: That's what I was saying Louis Martin, that's what I'm saying, Louis Martin.  I knew Louis Martin--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you said a photographer that's what threw me off (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay but he did photography too didn't he?
Speaker 1: Well he was a special--
Speaker 2: Assistant--special assistant right.
Speaker 1: --assistant for civil rights, him and Harris Wofford, Harris Wofford, who was a white guy.
Speaker 2: Okay I didn't know him.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was a lawyer who--
Speaker 2: But I knew Louis Martin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was a lawyer though--a white lawyer that graduated from Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Harris Wofford right.  He was rich and his grandmother fell down the stairs when she heard he was going to Howard law school.  But he was dedicated to civil rights so it was Wofford and Louis Martin, they were there, that's--okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had--oh that's right, we had, there was a Louis Martin [sic. Louise Martin] here in Houston [Texas] too who was a photographer; yeah I was getting them--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, all right, all right.  Okay, Louis Martin, there's a little book ['Walking with Presidents" Louis Martin and the Rise of Black Political Power,' Alex Poinsett] about Louis Martin's time in the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 666783
Speaker 1: How long did you work with--?
Speaker 2: I--I worked there all the way through law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I started out--they gave me the title of accounting clerk and then when I went to law school they named me administrative assistant and I worked there all during that period of time.
Speaker 1: That's quite an experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is.
Speaker 1: There were very few black people, you know, working in that situation in those days.  You were like a White House aide.
Speaker 2: Well there was nobody else--there was nobody else who was in college who was black doing that, so.
Speaker 1: Could you ever imagine that like a year before you got there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, and the thing that's interesting back then, people, when they--somebody wanted to go see like Albert Thomas, they couldn't just go see him.  You had to have been involved in politics or give them some money or something.  But because you lived in his district and you were in Washington, D.C., you couldn't see him.  There was a protocol back then.
Speaker 1: All right so you were there, you were there when JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I was there.
Speaker 1: And did you have any recollections of the atmosphere in the White House [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Clearly it was a very sad time and things were very solemn.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing when you found out about it?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure--the day that it happened, I'm not sure that I was actually at the White House or at school because I was going to school.  But when I did come to work it was just sadness and gloom at the White House during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Do you have--a lot of people saw the Kennedy administration as like a new beginning--a new generation takes over from a somewhat staid presidency of Dwight Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower].  You know, they called the Kennedy administration the New Frontier, Camelot and all that.  What was your sense of the atmosphere there?
Speaker 2: No doubt about it, it was a change, it was a progressive change and Kennedy and I had a chance to meet Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] also.  As a matter of fact one of my friends who went to law school with me worked for Robert Kennedy as an intern, but--
Speaker 1: Who was that do you remember?
Speaker 2: I can't recall his name and then there was a friend at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] too that worked for another congressman.  There were five or six people who were at Howard who worked part time on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and that was the beginning because before then, you know, nobody had worked--nobody of color, you know.
Speaker 1: Not handling papers (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you--there's another, other famous Texan that was in the Kennedy and Johnson administration was Bill Moyers [Bill D. Moyers].  Did you ever encounter him?
Speaker 1: I met him and Jack Valenti, yeah I met him.  I came in contact with a guy named Walter Jenkins, I don't know if you've heard that name before.  He was a confidante to President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].
Speaker 2: Yeah Jack Valenti became like a Hollywood, the president of one of the--
Speaker 1: Motion picture [Motion Picture Association of America], right, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Motion picture, screen, yeah.  So what about the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] guys, Burke Marshall and John Doar?  Did you ever come across them?
Speaker 1: No, I, unh-uh.
Story_ID: 666784
Speaker 1: Let me go back--back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] too, 'cause you're--this is, the students at Howard were involved in the Civil Rights Movement, you know.  They had like firsthand involvement in the Civil Rights Movement in those days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were saying that you lived in Drew Hall [Charles R. Drew Hall], right?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: At the same time that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Hank Thomas [HistoryMaker Henry "Hank" Thomas] were there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right we were on the same floor; we were, you know like maybe two or three doors from each other--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Drew--at Drew Hall.
Story_ID: 666785
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 2: Well as I mentioned, he was on the same floor [of Charles R. Drew Hall].  He was committed to changing things.  I didn't--you know, I wasn't involved with going down to Mississippi and all those places with him.  He invited me to do it but I didn't do it but it was always interesting all the publicity that he had.  He was on the cover of Time magazine and he was covered a great deal about his activities.  Clearly what he did was very beneficial and helped to--you know, this racial inequality that we had encountered for so long, he did make a difference there's no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of course he changed his name later to Kwame Ture and I'm not being disrespectful because I was just trying to refer to him as Stokely Carmichael because that's how you, you would have known him in school [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  His roommate was Hank Thomas [HistoryMaker Henry "Hank" Thomas] who participated in the first Freedom Ride who got beat up badly in Anniston, Alabama.  And do you have any thoughts--did you have any conversations with him before or after that?
Speaker 2: No I just remembered those things happening.  I thought it was tragic that that, you know, that someone would do that to them and it made me really not want to, you know, go to Mississippi and places like that because of that.
Speaker 1: Did you consider it at one time?
Speaker 2: No--I'm just saying, but it made me not want to do it.  You know, it, I was--I knew I didn't want to do that.
Speaker 1: Have you ever been a demonstrator at all?
Speaker 2: Well in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I demonstrated a little bit.  When we went to law school in the first year, they used to require that we wear suits and ties back there then and we demonstrated against that happening and then they changed it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 666786
Speaker 1: At Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] your, your major was what--in undergraduate school?
Speaker 2: I had liberal arts which was accounting--business, business, accounting and real estate was my focus (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Were there any special teachers there or fellow students involved in your major?
Speaker 2: Well one of my teachers was a guy named Ursula [ph.] who was a large real estate owner in Washington, D.C. and he used to preach to us that, you know, real estate was the way to wealth because they don't make anymore.  He advocated that when we got out of school that we try to buy real estate and invest in real estate, you know.  And, as I said, that was--that stayed on my mind from undergrad school about real estate being involved.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities at Howard, any fraternities or?
Speaker 2: Yes well before I talk about attorneys, I was involved in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and, which was mandatory at Howard for the first two years and I was involved for two years.  Then afterwards they wanted me to take advanced ROTC which meant that you'll be going, you know, into the [U.S.] military, you know, and some of my friends did that.  But because of the fact that I was working at the White House [Washington, D.C.], I didn't make that election.  I decided that, you know, that what I was doing was a better alternative.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this would have been like towards--well the first third of the Vietnam War, I guess right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yes.
Speaker 1: U.S. advisors start in '60 [1960] and then by '64 [1964], '65 [1965] it's starting to really kick in and the reports on the news about the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you earned your, your B.A. from Howard in 1964. Did you graduate with honors or anything?
Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me.  I think that I did graduate with honors, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're not sure (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's been a long time (laughter).  I know that when I was in law school I got a Ford Foundation [New York, New York] scholarship at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay was this before you entered law school or after you got in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Once I got in, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 666787
Speaker 1: How did you make a decision to go to law school at that time, it?
Speaker 2: Well after graduating from undergraduate, I didn't think that accounting was going to be sufficient for me and so I decided to go to law school.  And, as I said, I had alw- you know, my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.] had wanted me to go and I felt that this was a good opportunity to go.  A lot of my friends who graduated from Howard undergrad either went to law school or they went to medical school.  So I decided that I wanted to take the legal route and go to law school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have an advisor in Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Not really, I had an advisor in undergraduate school but not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the dean at the law school then?
Speaker 2: Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] was one dean, Pat Harris and incidentally she had worked--not she had worked but she had been the ambassador to Luxembourg and President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had appointed her.
Speaker 1: Oh Patricia Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris], yeah, you're talking about, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Patricia Harris, and so she knew me from the White House and we had a good relationship.  I think she only lasted maybe a year as dean of the law school and then we had another person, there were three deans while I was there, you know, one each year.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was the president James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] at that point, of--of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: He was--right, he was president of Howard.
Speaker 1: He was a lawyer and a part of the law school at one time.
Speaker 2: Right, yes, and he had been in Houston [Texas] at TSU [Texas Southern University] prior to that time [sic.].
Speaker 1: Did you know much about him?
Speaker 2: Well my dad knew of him and everything and this was one of the factors that, you know, in making my decision to go to Howard, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this generation of lawyers that James Nabrit was in was a generation of lawyers taught by Charles Hamilton Houston, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Which included Thurgood Marshall, Nabrit, Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III], Charles Duncan [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan] and, the--the, a woman who became a judge in New York, I can't think of her name.  But anyway--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's what I was exposed to.
Speaker 1: Constance Baker, yeah, yeah, so these are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Constance Baker Motley yeah, I was exposed to all of those people.
Speaker 1: Were you?  So this is--this is tall grass as they say.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact Thurgood Marshall--one of the things you have to do before you graduate from law school is you have moot court competition and he was the judge for my moot court competition and he told me I did real good, yeah.
Speaker 1: You can't beat that, for.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now this is just before he's appointed a justice for the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: Yes, right that's true.
Speaker 1: So I mean he was appointed by Lyndon Johnson, right?
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: So this is, as I said, tall grass.
Speaker 2: One of the things I want to say too is one of my instructors was a guy named Herbert Reid [Herbert O. Reid, Sr.], I don't know if you've ever heard of him or not but Herb Reid went Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], he was a black lawyer.  He had been a clerk I think for Justice Frankfurter [Felix Frankfurter] but more importantly he wrote most all of the briefs and worked on most all of the briefs with Thurgood Marshall on his cases.  And he taught at the law school, Howard law school.  He represented [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry when he was mayor.
Speaker 1: The mayor of D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Herbert Reid, this--somebody we should remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know he's deceased now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's somebody we should take note of, though, for his work.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah no doubt about it, no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause--yeah, we've interviewed Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], Charles Duncan and I think of that group that might be it, you know, in that group, you know.  We were tried--we tried to interview Constance Baker Motley a few times but it's never worked out, but.  Yeah but this is the famous Howard law school, and all these--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all these heroes and sheroes there.
Story_ID: 666788
Speaker 1: Was the first year difficult?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And--and I was surprised.  It was not difficult at all, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, I read that you were--one of the features that you liked was that the, a lot of the instructors had practical experience.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well what was important to me is that there's a difference between having an education and not had experience, and at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and even also in undergrad [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], the instructors had been successful businesspeople or successful in their respective endeavors and now they were teaching.  And I, and that, you know, so you were able to get two perspectives and you were able to get things in the book but in addition, that the instructor was able to communicate things that you wouldn't get in the book and I found that very helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Was that your favorite feature of Howard law school?
Speaker 2: No--no doubt about it.  Plus you know it was the capstone at that time of black education, you know, and I enjoyed Howard, although I was from Houston [Texas], a lot of students, I was a popular person at Howard, people knew me and I knew people.  So I felt at home at Howard and that's the thing about Howard is a certain warmth that you get and you create friendships and relationships for the rest of your life.
Speaker 1: Are there any other personalities or either instructors or fellow students that you want to mention before we move on to graduation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the persons I got to be a good friend of was a guy named Earl Hilliard and he was from Birmingham, Alabama, he was one of my good friends in law school.  He went on to become the first black elected to the U.S. Congress from Birmingham, Alabama, and we're still friends today.  Another person who was a good friend of mine was a guy named George Brown [George H. Brown, Jr.], he's from Memphis, Tennessee.  He went on to become a member of the supreme court for the State of Tennessee [Tennessee Supreme Court] and I could go on with just the relationships that I developed with people who went on to be successful and we continue to communicate and be--and stay in touch with.
Story_ID: 666789
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1967 and, now were you tempted to stay in Washington, D.C. since you already had a hookup with the White House and all that?
Speaker 2: This is an interesting story, is that when I graduated in 1967 Shell Oil [Shell Oil Company] sent me to--their headquarters were in New York [New York] and they sent me to New York to, I interviewed for a job as a tax attorney for Shell Oil working in their legal department.  I met with them, they called me back a second time and they offered me a job.  And they had a program laid out where I was going to get my LL.M.--master of laws in a program where they were going to move up with Shell Oil.  I told my father [John W. Peavy, Sr.] about it and my father said, "Oh no, you've got to come back to Houston [Texas]."  He wanted me to come back to Houston.
Speaker 1: So did you feel bad about that?
Speaker 2: I didn't feel bad about it because this was all new to me and I didn't know where it was going to take me and so my dad first wanted me to go work for Congresswoman Barbara Jordan.  She was in Congress at that time [sic.] and he had arranged for me to work for her but that was not a lot of pay.  So he arranged for me to be associate field coordinator with the Harris County Community Action Association.
Speaker 1: Now did you interview with Barbara Jordan?
Speaker 2: Yeah oh sure, we were--we were close, yes, yes, and she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is a historic figure, I don't want to go over it like a speed bump now.  We (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So tell us about Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 2: Well she was just--
Speaker 1: What was your impression of her?
Speaker 2: She was just an outstanding individual and she was committed to changing the image that white people had of black people.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, she had this distinctive way of speaking.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: I know, which has certainly captivated a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was tall and--and did you know her before she became a congresswoman?
Speaker 2: No I didn't--well my daddy knew because he helped her get elected and she's from Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my daddy was very close to her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so had there been a woman before--elected in that position before in Houston, I mean in Texas, rather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No she was the first black to be elected to the Texas Senate and then she was the first black to be elected to U.S. Congress from Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any stories about Barbara Jordan you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, a little--I guess she was very, how can I put it, very conscious of people being--putting you in a certain category, you know.  And I'll never forget one time I visited with her and she told me I look like a Baptist preacher and I said, "Not you Congresswoman Jordan," because that's the type of thing that she despised.
Speaker 1: So what did that mean?  How were you, how were you--what was your presentation like?
Speaker 2: I was going to say, you know, I had on a suit and tie like I have now but she said, you know--yeah.
Speaker 1: So, was, was it suggested that you were dressing too flashy, or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know but that was the end of it, I just said, "Congresswoman I'm surprised," you know, and she just chuckled and that was it, you know.
Story_ID: 666790
Speaker 1: So you didn't take that position and you were getting ready to tell us what you did do.
Speaker 2: Yeah so I went to work for Harris County Community Action Association and their purpose was organizing the community to get, you know, training communities about the legislative process, you know, who the people were on the city council [Houston City Council], the different parts of government, the people and also just their neighborhood and getting them to organize a local neighborhood organization so that they could improve their own neighborhood and that they govern their own neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay now, from, there's a--the Harris County community action organization was known as HCCAA, right?
Speaker 2: Right HCCAA, yes.
Speaker 1: All right I just wanted to point that out, and the--now, community organizing is something that's widely misunderstood. People make jokes about it when Republicans remark that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was a community organizer, they always end it by saying whatever that is.  So what is a community organizer?
Speaker 2: Well here again a community organizer is one that goes out and meets with the people in the community and get them to form a local group and they elect their own officers and then they try to improve their own neighborhood.  They talk to, you know, members of city councils or the police chief, but they actually reach out to different organizations in the community to make that community a lot better.  So if they've got a crime issue, they meet with the police department, not necessarily the police chief but a representative of the police department.  As you know that, and we talked about it, Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] started putting police departments in communities to help to reduce crime and make the community safe for all residents, make it a better place.
Speaker 1: Lee Brown wasn't the chief in what '67 [1967] right when you started, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean he was or wasn't?
Speaker 2: No, I think he came later, yeah he came later.
Speaker 1: But he had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mayor Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire] was mayor in '82 [1982] and she appointed him in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Right, okay so this comes a little bit later, but--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you were organizing in '67 [1967] to '69 [1969] right with HCCAA?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And was HCCAA an Alinsky style organization?
Speaker 2: When you say a--what type of organization?
Speaker 1: Alinsky--Saul Alinsky style.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't--I guess you would say to a certain extent.
Speaker 1: The organizers know--now they know if it's a Saul Alinsky style or not.  'Cause there's--he has a certain style that he teaches on how you go door knocking, how you identify community problems, you have to agitate people a little bit to already--they know something is wrong but they don't tell you unless you agitate them a little bit.  And then they, when they get agitated then you bring them together so they can share their agitation and form an organization, right.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So that's--so is that the model basically, the HCCAA (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's what--the model, yeah.
Story_ID: 666791
Speaker 1: Do you remember who some of the community leaders were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ovide Duncantell back there then. Then--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name, now what was, how is his name spelled 'cause we used to have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) O-V-I-D-E.
Speaker 1: O-V-I-D, Ovid--
Speaker 2: O-V-I-D-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Duncantell, D-U-N-C, let's see, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N-T-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Duncantell.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But he was one of the persons who was very active.  Then there was a guy by the name of Lee Otis Johnson who is deceased now, but he was very active.
Speaker 1: So these are people who lived in the neighborhood who were fed up with some of the problems and decided to do something.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the organizer's role is what, to educate them as to what they can do or give them some training?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And my role was to supervise the persons who were doing the organizing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: I oversaw them that's why I was called associate field coordinator.  So my area was from Houston [Texas] to a place called Humble, Texas and I would go and make sure that the organizers were doing what they were supposed to be doing.
Speaker 1: So what you're actually doing which is interesting is that you're actually doing what Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and them were doing in the early '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and just, I mean, this is just coming a few years later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but the difference is that I'm getting people who look like me to do what they should do to make life better for them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now that's not really a difference in this if you think about it. That's what Stokely and them were doing.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: The same thing, but it was around voting, that was the issue, the major issue that they had.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So what was the major issue in the Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] at HCCAA [Harris County Community Action Association], what was the major issue?
Speaker 2: Well I think one of the main issues that has traditionally been a problem is the lack of city services, you know, whether it's street repair or making sure that lots are clean, you know.  And then also my father [John W. Peavy, Sr.] was very involved in Houston in having a multiservice center.  They would put multiservice centers in white neighborhoods but wouldn't do it in black neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Now what, what's a multiservice center?
Speaker 2: Well a multiservice center is a center where the residents in the area can go and they have games, you know, they have meetings, they have meals and it's just a community place where they can go and be together.  They play dominoes, they can play cards. It was just a place where everybody from the area can get together and have fellowship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they talk about the issues too, you know, in their community also.
Speaker 1: All right, so other neighborhoods had that but the Fifth Ward did not.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: Well not only Fifth Ward, none of the black areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah just the white areas--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --had it.
Story_ID: 666792
Speaker 1: So the multiservice centers, that was the issue, and a lack of city services.
Speaker 2: Right, and getting streets paved in the black community, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now I don't know what Houston [Texas] was like, but I remember going to Kentucky when I was a kid and to other black towns in the South--I mean other towns in the South and noticing that the white part of the community was paved and the black part was gravel.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that the case here in Houston?
Speaker 2: Right a lot of streets was that way, sure, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then as I say the issue about vacant lots, the city wouldn't--they failed to either make sure that the landowner, you know, mowed them and keep them clean or to maintain them.  And abandoned houses--failure to demolish abandonned houses.  All the things that make a neighborhood bad because as you know when you have, you know, a house that's vacant and in disrepair that people will go in, you know, do drugs or what have you and it just makes the neighborhood bad.
Speaker 1: So properties abandoned invite crime, invite disorder, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  So was there like a--I know organizers try to speak truth to power.  Was there a confrontation with the city at some point around these issues?
Speaker 2: I don't think there were confrontations, it's just outside of--like Ovide Duncantell who people like that wanted action.  You know, they wanted everything done today and not tomorrow, you know.
Speaker 1: Now there's a story about him.  Wasn't he--there was a controversy about him being dismissed I think, right?  From the organization, from HCCAA [Harris County Community Action Association]?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about that story--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because, you know, I left.
Speaker 1: Okay so you left before that took place.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah I left before that took place.  It was still going strong when I left, but I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But the, yeah, but the papers reported there was some controversy, I don't know who did what but he was dismissed by the organization and whatever the reasons were.  But, I heard you say though that he felt things weren't moving fast enough.
Speaker 2: Right, right, he felt it wasn't moving fast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is an issue, you know, because you've got, you know, you've got to have some progress.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, yeah, let's see. So before you left what was done--what had you accomplished?
Speaker 2: Well I think that we were able to get neighborhoods to organize and elect officers and to be aware where you go when you've got a problem and who you need to contact when you have a problem, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I think that we were able to educate the people along those lines because that's important because before we were involved, a lot of people--and it's sad, but when they had a problem they don't know who to turn to (background noise).
Speaker 1: We just got CNN for some reason, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I think that we did--the success was that we did educate people and they understood.  First they formed a governing body that knew how to govern themselves, and then more importantly they knew who to contact if they had problems.
Story_ID: 666793
Speaker 1: Some of the people involved with HC--
Speaker 2: HCCAA [Harris County Community Action Association].
Speaker 1: HCCAA were Al Henry--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Pluria Marshall [HistoryMaker Pluria Marshall, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who we interviewed in relationship to cable television.
Speaker 2: Okay, right.
Speaker 1: He was an activist for cable television and his son [HistoryMaker Pluria Marshall, Jr.] now owns newspapers in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: Right yes I was just with his son as a matter of fact in June, he's a member of Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] and we visited there together.
Speaker 1: And then the elder Pluria Marshall was really quite an activist here in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --D.C. [Washington, D.C.] around minority ownership of cable television back in the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he ran an organization called Breadbasket--Operation Breadbasket.
Speaker 1: Right, right, for which I think Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] got the idea of having the same thing in Chicago [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] in--right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So then William "Bill" Lawson--Reverend Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson] who was here too, he's connected to the Baptist church.  Was he a part of Breadbasket here as well?
Speaker 2: No he was more with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]; I think that's where he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah Pluria had, you know, he had his own organization and then I think Reverend Lawson was involved with SNCC and I was involved a little bit with Pluria Marshall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now during the time you were with HCCAA that's the time period that Dr. King was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968].  Do you remember where you were then or what--or how it affected what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I, I just, here again this was just a very sad, sad day and time when that happened, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--were there any riots in Houston [Texas] in those days because of that because cities went up in flames in those days.
Speaker 2: Right and in other parts of the country but not in Houston.  I know that the black community was deeply saddened, you know about what had happened, you know.
Speaker 1: So but they, they weren't excited enough to where somebody had to go calm them down or anything, or?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 666794
Speaker 1: You left in 1969, right?  And you went to serve as executive assistant to Judge Bill Elliott [William Elliott], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who is Judge Bill Elliott?
Speaker 2: Okay here again Judge Bill Elliott was a county judge of Harris County [Texas] and when you say a county judge it's really an administrative position and each--the county--Harris County is divided into four precincts and then they have a county judge who presides over the four precincts.  So it's five people who run the county and back then Judge Elliott got elected as the county judge and in addition to being the county judge he ran the probate court and also he handled commitments to a psychiatric hospital.  That was one of his roles in addition to being the presiding officer of--being the county judge of Harris County.  I had the distinct pleasure of being the second black person to work in that position.  The first person was Congresswoman Barbara Jordan. He had hired her.
Speaker 1: Now, now Judge Bill Elliott was white, right?
Speaker 2: Right, oh yeah, he was white.
Speaker 1: I just want to make sure 'cause people watching this three hundred years from now are not going to know unless we tell them.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, right he was white, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was the time where everything was still segregated pretty much, but--
Speaker 2: Let me tell you this.  When I took that position there was Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.] who worked for a friend of County Judge Elliott who was a county commissioner and then there was me and then Barbara had been before.  Everybody else was white at the courthouse.
Speaker 1: I mean, meaning how many or about how many were there?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say, but even the elevator operators--they had elevator operators at the courthouse, they were all white.  I mean--it was just, you know, we were not--we didn't have a presence.
Speaker 1: Okay so you had really a tiny presence there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay.  So, now he pops up and he's--he hired Barbara Jordan as the first African American woman administrator in Harris County.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: And this is--so would you say he--was he a courageous judge being a white judge, or--
Speaker 2: I think he was courageous.  My daddy [John W. Peavy, Sr.] had helped get him into office and my dad had made him commit that he was going to give minorities opportunities.
Speaker 1: Okay so he was under some pressure, there was a demand as Frederick Douglass says, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah right he got the black vote.
Speaker 1: There was an obligation.
Speaker 2: Right there was an obligation, you know.
Speaker 1: Which he could have reneged on but he followed through with it.
Speaker 2: Right he had the foresight and the wisdom--
Speaker 1: Yes sir (laughter).
Speaker 2: --not to, you know, not to be contrary but do the right thing.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, one of the first things in Alinsky [Saul Alinksy] organizing they teach you about politicians, the first thing they want to do is get elected.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's what's on their mind first and foremost--getting elected (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And the only reason why he was able to get elected was--'cause he had a white opponent, and the only reason why he was able to get it as against a white opponent is because he had the black vote.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So one could assume that most of the white people wanted the other guy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the balance of power was in the hands of the black vote- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --voters.  Okay, all right.  So, and--was he a Democrat or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Democrat, oh yes, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 666795
Speaker 1: So you worked for him for I guess, was it a year, or?
Speaker 2: A couple of years, and then I got an opportunity to work at Project Home [ph.] which was sponsored by the American Bar Association and what we did was provide legal and technical assistance to attorneys who were involved in low to moderate housing projects.  So I became an expert on developing low and, and moderate housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, so you're not just throwing it out, you were the expert, the expert, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right I was the expert right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this, this project was sponsored by the American Bar Association.  It was funded by HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and it came through the senator and at the time the senator was John Tower.
Speaker 1: Right I remember Senator John Tower.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a Republican and I was really shocked that he did that.
Speaker 1: In those days were you--now in those days, were you sho- in those days it wasn't unusual for a Republican to be involved--to sponsor a social service piece of legislation, right?  I mean when you look--I mean around the country you had like Chuck Percy [Charles Percy], and Dirksen [Everett Dirksen] and there were others, Congressmen Whalen [Charles W. Whalen, Jr.] in Ohio or others that were like--be likely to do something like that.
Speaker 2: Right but still, you know he was a Republican and we're in Texas and I was associate director.  And, you know, as a matter of fact the next time around he wanted to fund it and wanted me to be the director, John Tower.
Speaker 1: So you turned it down?
Speaker 2: Well what happened was I think that was when--something happened I'm trying to think but what happened in my life was that Judge Elliott [William Elliott] the county judge after that redistrict- the commissioners court [Harris County Commissioners Court] redistricted Harris County [Texas] and it had never been redistricted before the founding of Harris County.  When they redistrict they created--we're talking about the justice of the peace court and constables for the county, he created where the black community could get two justices of peace.  The Hispanic community could get two justices of peace and a constable, you know.  Each one could get and then the white community got the rest.  And so--
Speaker 1: So did you get a constable too, as well as a?
Speaker 2: Yeah we got a black constable, right and so Judge Elliott came to me and asked me would I like to do that.
Speaker 1: Be a justice of the peace.
Speaker 2: Yeah justice of the peace, yeah, and I thought about it and I told him yes. And so after they did it and created it he appointed me first and so I became the first black justice of the peace in the State of Texas and in Harris County and then subsequently they appointed a black as a constable and then eventually maybe three or four months later they appointed a black attorney as justice of peace of the other precinct.  But I was precinct seven, position two [Harris County Justice of the Peace Court, Precinct 7, Place 2].
Story_ID: 666796
Speaker 1: You have to kind of explain to people who are not familiar with this.  I mean we--from the old movies we al- we see the justice of the peace in the Westerns and he comes in the saloon and sets up--clears the bottles out of the way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Law west of the Pecos is it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah Judge Roy Bean.
Speaker 2: Judge Roy Bean yeah.
Speaker 1: Or people run away, they elope and they go to a justice of the peace, they've got to wake him up, he comes out of his house and he goes downstairs.  So, so most cities have judges now, major cities--the justice of the peace, it seems like something for another time, another place, a smaller city but what's the concept here in Houston [Texas] of the justice of the peace?
Speaker 2: Well here in Houston, first, justice of the peace has original and exclusive jurisdiction with what we call forcible entry and detainer, that is eviction cases, that's number one.  Then number two, civil cases, I think now is up to ten thousand dollars, I think it is now.
Speaker 1: At that time it was two hundred, right?
Speaker 2: Right two hundred then, it was two hundred then.
Speaker 1: Times have changed.
Speaker 2: Right because the population has grown so yeah but it was two hundred, you're right at that time.
Speaker 1: Two hundred dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then the other jurisdiction was on the criminal side.  We decided whether or not a case--was there sufficient evidence in a criminal case to send it to the grand jury, you know.  So the justice of the peace had the power to dismiss a case.  And I'll tell you about a case I had when I was justice of the peace [on the Harris County Justice of the Peace Court, Precinct 7, Place 2].  A policeman stopped a black man at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] and told him that, "If I see you again at University of Houston campus, I'm going to arrest you."  Well the white police officer saw the black guy again on the campus and so when the policeman start coming after the black guy start running and so he ran into a buil- into a building at University of Houston and he opened the door and ran through the door and kept going.  Well the officer ran into the door and messed himself up.  So he filed an assault and battery against the guy.  I heard the case, I dismissed it because it wasn't assault and battery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't, you know.
Speaker 1: Because the man had really--he hadn't done anything to the officer.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Except, you know, he ran through a door himself.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the fact that I did that, I started getting threatening phone calls.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you, you had ruled against a white officer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In pursuit of a black man.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So this is a--and I hear also--now did you perform weddings and that sort of thing too?
Speaker 2: Yes and that was at the time a very lucrative business and people get a marriage license then they want to get married and I can't tell you how many times someone would call me at ten or eleven o'clock at night and say they want to get married.  But now in Texas when you get a marriage license you have to wait three days before you get married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because what was happening, a couple would go and get a marriage license, get married and then two or three days later they decide that they don't want to be married, you know.  And so in Texas there is what you call a cooling off period.  You get the license and then you have to wait three days.
Speaker 1: Okay to make sure you're really sober when you go through with it, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  But I found that being a justice of the peace, it's the first court that most people ever come in contact with and I found that a court that I tried, and I think I did, do a great job of listening.  Because you don't need a lawyer when you go to the justice of the peace court, you just tell it to the judge and then the judge rules.  And I always try to make sure that parties have their day in court.  So I really enjoyed being justice of the peace.
Story_ID: 666797
Speaker 1: Now one of the issues when you were justice of the peace was a redistricting, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And it was--it had to do with, I hate to say it like this but speed traps, right?  People had--one of the issues with speed traps that were set up by certain justices in their districts and when they were redistricted they couldn't collect the same revenue.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.  And as you probably know they filed a lawsuit against the redistricting and, but they lost and we were successful.
Speaker 1: You also had another issue of white police officers trying to circumvent you in terms of applying for arrest warrants.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They--they'd rather go to another justice of the peace to get the warrant rather than the one in the district they're in.
Speaker 2: Right, yes and that happened quite a few times.
Speaker 1: As you--did you often disagree with them about whether someone needed to be arrested or not?
Speaker 2: Well I disagreed with them when they were wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when they were right, I would arrest them.
Speaker 1: But if they were wrong and wanted someone to approve it anyway they would get another justice (laughter).  Is that how it worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah.  So this is--I mean was this--now this is--was this ever resolved in any kind of way?  I mean how did the higher courts view this, officers circumventing you for warrants?
Speaker 2: Well what eventually happened was that notwithstanding that was happening, because all JP courts have jurisdiction that, you know, it continued.
Speaker 1: So the chief of police was a guy named Robin [ph.] or something, is that the right--
Speaker 2: The chief of police now?
Speaker 1: No then, Robin or something like that--Chief Robin?  I have his name in here but I don't--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure who the police chief was then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So one thing that you thought was amusing here, this is in another interview was that white people filing cases against black people would feel a little nervous when they stood before you.  They didn't realize there was a black justice of the peace [on the Harris County Justice of the Peace Court, Precinct 7, Place 2].
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  But I was always fair no matter who it was.  Whether or not it was black against white or white against black, I always was fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But this amusement, does it have something to do with the expectation that white people have that, that it's going to be unfair with a black judge which might mirror something that goes on on the other side?
Speaker 2: Well I think that, on the whole, that during my tenure as being the justice of the peace that I had a reputation for being fair no matter who you are.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was the perception in the black community that when they went before a white justice of the peace they were going to get justice?
Speaker 2: Well sometime that, that would be the case but I think when they did the redistricting and started having a new one as against the old ones then there was improvement in the system.  But clearly the old justice of the peace didn't look with great favor on minorities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Period.
Speaker 1: So there was likelihood you were not going to get justice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --if you stood before a white judge.  Okay now in '74 [1974], well, you were elected for a full term as justice of the peace, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 666798
Speaker 1: In '74 [1974] you--now this was the first time you were actually elected, right?  You were appointed [to the Harris County Justice of the Peace Court, Precinct 7, Place 2] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right 'cause I was appointed first, by the commissioners court [Harris County Commissioners Court], and then you have to stand for election at the next election so in 1974 I ran.
Speaker 1: So did anybody run against you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One person was a good friend of mine, had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with me and when I first became judge he pretended he wanted to be involved in the campaign and help me (background noise) and then the last minute he ran against me.  And then there was a black activist that ran against me too.
Speaker 1: So what--what were the names of these two?
Speaker 2: Well one was Arthur Jackson and I can't remember the activist 'cause he is deceased now.  Well both of them are deceased now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah they are both deceased now.  But I handily defeated both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So all right, so you start up an elected term this time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How long is a term of service?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four okay, so you could look forward to being in office until '78 [1978] I guess at this point (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is, 1974 I believe, this is when Watergate was being resolved, or on television.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I only mention it because it's of legal interest to everybody in those days.  It was on TV twenty-four hours and, you know, it seems that there are some Texans that played a major role in it, you know.  But what did you think about it?
Speaker 2: Well I thought it was wrong what they did and I think that--and I was shocked that politics would be--people would do that in politics.  But I soon learned in politics, you know, there are no rules.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Well for some people.  There are no rules for some people.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a personal experience with that kind of situation?  I know you just mentioned running and thinking that somebody was for you and then they ended up turning against you.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But were there any--when did you first like kind of learn that lesson that politics is--about the rules of politics?
Speaker 2: I learned it in that race because here's a person who had been a friend of mine, had gone to Howard with me and had pretended that they were supporting me and then at the last minute, you know, they were running against me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you were interviewed by the Houston Metropolitan Research Center [Houston, Texas] in '74 [1974] and what--this is an oral history or something--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, I guess that's part of it.  It was the library of Houston [Houston Public Library, Houston, Texas] I think?
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, do you have any thoughts about that, or are there--about that interview?
Speaker 2: That was a long, long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah you were only thirty-two I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was in '74 [1974]. As a matter of fact, when someone mentioned it to me, I had to think long and hard to remember that I had done it.
Story_ID: 666799
Speaker 1: Are there any memorable cases or anything that came up during your tenure as a justice of the peace from '74 [1974] to--'cause you served from '74 [1974] to--
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I did not finish my full term [on the Harris County Justice of the Peace Court, Precinct 7, Place 2].
Speaker 1: Now you didn't finish because you--was it because you ran for judge of the 246th District Court [246th Family District Court]?
Speaker 2: No the governor appointed me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Oh okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: The governor of Texas appointed me as judge of the 246th District Court.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's an appointment.
Speaker 2: Right it was an appointment.  The legislature--legislature created a new court, and so the governor appointed me to that position.
Speaker 1: Who was the governor at that time?
Speaker 2: Dolph Briscoe.
Speaker 1: Dolph Briscoe all right, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I had to run in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay so once again someone passed away in office I guess?
Speaker 2: No, no it was a new court.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, all right, new court.
Speaker 2: The legi- the Texas Legislature created the court system--the new court.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So what, now what was--how was this different from being a justice of the peace?  Did you like it better or--
Speaker 2: Justice of the peace is county; you handle only the people in the county.  When I went to state court, the court is in Harris County [Texas] but I have jurisdiction over the entire state.  So it's a more powerful court.  I might add that although they said it's a family law court and that's what I handled, you know, specifically but I could handle any other cases too but I became an expert in handling family law matters.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And now, one thing that you advocated was mediation, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why mediation and why were you for it and why were some others against it?
Speaker 2: I was for it because I felt, and there were legislators who subsequently agreed with me, that if two parties were getting a divorce, if they can be in the same room and kind of work out the agreement amongst themselves before seeing a judge, that they would be happy about the decision and it's more likely that they will keep the agreement that they made.  I thought that this was the best way to start off trying to resolve family law matters.  Unfortunately as you said not only some of the judges who were on the family law were against it but some of the attorneys were against it and I don't know whether or not they were against it because they felt that it was taking away from lawyers.  But as I say I felt that was the best way to handle it and now it's mandatory in family law matters.  You have to go to mediation first before you can see a judge.
Speaker 1: So now it's a, it's a process that's tried and true.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: And then it was not.  Now one of the judges that was against it was Judge Bill Elliott [William Elliott], right?
Speaker 2: Yes he was against it.
Speaker 1: One of your sponsors in the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  Yeah he was against it.
Speaker 1: And what--so do you think that they were against it because no lawyers were involved in the negotiations in mediation?
Speaker 2: Well I think that he thought that it was taking away from lawyers' role.
Speaker 1: And taking work away from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I definitely feel that that's how he felt, and as you know I went on to be the administrative judge, I was in charge of family law judges in Harris County.
Speaker 1: Okay and when did that position start?
Speaker 2: I think that probably started maybe around 1990 or something like that, or '91 [1991].
Story_ID: 666800
Speaker 1: Now you retired in 1994, right [from the 246th Family District Court]?
Speaker 2: Wait--right, well yes, when I ran in '94 [1994] for a four year term, that's when they had the Republican landslide in Texas and that's when Texas went from blue to red and that was when I lost by a small margin maybe about 1 percent or 1.5 percent.  I decided not to pursue it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what precipitated the landslide, the Republican--'cause there was a nationwide Republican Revolution, not just in Texas but--
Speaker 2: Right I think that Bush (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [U.S.] Congress had been Democratic, the [U.S.] Senate was Democratic, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president in '92 [1992].  By '94 [1994], Congress is now Republican.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right and--
Speaker 1: And many states are governed by Republican governors after that time.
Speaker 2: And you have to run for state--well on all of them by party affiliation and so when you're at the bottom of the ticket like that, you get impacted and there's been talk about--some states you don't run by party.  And there's been some talk in Texas, before there was talk and now that seems like it's turning blue again, there's talk about it again that you don't run on a partisan ticket.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's the Bush--it's the Bushes when they ran, you know people supported them.  And what's interesting is that people who I knew and had supported Governor Ann Richards when she was governor when she ran the second time, you know, they supported Bush [President George Walker Bush].  The same people.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's--yeah it is strange.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what you had to do--this is tricky right?  You really didn't completely retire, you did what?  You were telling me before how this works, you--
Speaker 2: Well under law now is that when you've been a judge, you've got to make two--you've got to make an election.  Whether you want to continue to be a judge or be a lawyer but you can't do both and I made the election to continue to be a judge where I can be a visiting judge and hear cases.  But (background noise) I decided later on to continue my status but not to hear cases but continue my--continue my status as a senior judge.
Speaker 1: So you were a senior judge but you participated as a visiting judge--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in certain cases, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but, right and I continued to do that but I just deci- I've declined to hear any cases at this stage.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're basically retired now--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --from being a judge.  And that took place about when--when did you decide to stop?
Speaker 2: It was about two or three years ago.
Speaker 1: But in the meantime you got involved in other business activities, right, in the--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: What were some of those activities, or what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well we started a family owned ice cream shop [Peacole Ice Cream Company, Inc.] at the airport [William P. Hobby Airport, Houston, Texas] and my son [Jason Peavy]--I have a son that ran it--runs the business and I spent a little bit more time being involved in that business.  I've been involved--my dad [John W. Peavy, Sr.] when he passed away he owned real estate in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas] and I've acquired some real estate.  So I've been involved in real estate and just keeping busy, yeah.
Story_ID: 666801
Speaker 1: In 1997, now, and I--I'll say up front that you were acquitted of this while I think everybody else was convicted of in- you were indicted on one count of bribery, right?
Speaker 2: Yes I was, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the other people who were included, Ben Reyes, Betti Maldonado [Elizabeth Maldonado], so this is serious business, right?  There was a long investigation--a FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] investigation that came up with this--
Speaker 2: Yes it did.
Speaker 1: What exactly did they accuse you of doing and what really happened?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't do anything wrong but at the time there was, I think they call it the convention center hotel, that came up and--and anyway I was supporting the convention center hotel all along.  Someone made a contribution to my campaign but yet was trying to say that the contribution was given because I said I was supporting the hotel, which was not true, it was just unfounded, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But one of the tragic, I guess losses was Ben Reyes right who--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was a rising star in Houston [Texas].  But he was actually recorded--he was actually doing pretty much what they accused him of.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about in retrospect about these undercover stings and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well I think that there are cases where people are really accepting money and doing that type of thing, you know.  It might be the appropriate way to handle it to find out what's really going on.
Speaker 1: Do you think there was any, any--a political reason for you to be named even though you didn't do anything?
Speaker 2: Well I think too that politics was involved, yeah, no doubt about it.  You know, the problem with being a family law judge is that most of the time one person is going to be happy and the other person is not going to be happy.  And the issue is to what degree that that person is unhappy.
Story_ID: 666802
Speaker 1: Now have you ever--have you ever been threatened by a person that you ruled against?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, oh yeah.  I've been threatened; and while I was on the bench, in custody cases, at least I know of three cases where the husband has killed the wife because they were not going to get custody.  So this--family law is serious business and it's not the issue of getting a divorce, it's the issue of who's getting custody, how much child support, the valuation of property and how it's divided.  And it's just amazing how people can be married and say they love one another and then when they decided that they no longer want to be married how fierce the battle is.  There are no holds barred.
Speaker 1: Yeah the old saying it's a thin line, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I've seen people been married fifty, sixty years both working, they both retire and then they get a divorce but they were all right as long as they were both working.  But when they get in the same house they can't stand each other, you know, it's crazy.
Speaker 1: So, you think a lot of--you're still in favor of mediation, right for a lot of these--
Speaker 2: No, no, oh sure and it's not going to happen in all cases but I assure you in a whole lot of cases it will happen and they'll reach an agreement and the parties feel good about each other, you know.  And if you can do that to just one case, you've done your job, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now is there a, is--can you tell us--I don't know how much you can tell us about these cases but just speaking I guess anonymously is--is there a case that really stands out that you want to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well I can remember that one of my first cases going on the bench [246th Family District Court], where a father was trying to terminate the parental rights of the mother to the daughter.  The mother had been involved with some drugs and had had some problems and the father had had the child for a long--for a period of time, and he was requesting that the mother's parental rights be terminated.  And I found that a very difficult decision for me to make just because of my background and my experiences in my life.  But the law was quite clear that it favored termination, you know, under the facts of that circumstance.  But as a moral issue, you know, it was, it was difficult, but I did it.  And subsequently I understood the reason and the logic behind it.  But, you know, the relationship between, you know, the father and the mother of a child they give birth to, you know, I've always thought that it was an important relationship, you know.  And, no matter how bad a parent might have been at one time, if they gotten themselves together and want to reconnect, you know, I thought that should be made possible, you know.  But, as you know now back then terminations of parental rights and everything all that stuff confidential and everything but now courts are allowing children to find out who their birth parents are.
Story_ID: 666803
Speaker 1: Are black people better--better represented now in the Harris County [Texas] courts or on the state level, as--?
Speaker 2: I think it's no doubt about it that time has brought a, brought a change and things that used to happen can't happen, you know.  And with social media and the news and everything things are a lot better.  Oh yeah it's no doubt about it.  Someone who is not qualified or seems some bias, or what have you, they won't survive being a judge today in Harris County.
Speaker 1: Now, how--how do you feel about--I know that one of the police brutality cases that made national news was the Sandra Bland case, it was here in Texas.  Was it close to your jurisdiction at all or close to any--do you know anything about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that's another county, Waller County [Texas].
Speaker 1: Yeah and that was just--you were basically retired [from the 246th Family District Court] when that went down but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well I--I think that it's a real sad case and I think that the police also, for arresting her for making a turn without putting a signal on, the punishment wasn't commensurate with what she did.  I just think it's, it's, I think it's really sad what happened, it's tragic, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And would you--do you have any thoughts about what can be done to remedy this situation nationwide or is it a national problem?
Speaker 2: I think that we need to--black people need to vote and work hard to make sure that the right people get into office, you know, from the lowest level on up, you know, so that you can change the mindset by doing that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you--but you got to be active in order to change it.
Story_ID: 666804
Speaker 1: Now you've been involved in various business activities and you, you have like--I know in 2000 you founded the Airport Currency Exchange [Airport Currency Exchange, Inc., Houston, Texas]. Is that still going on?
Speaker 2: Yes it is, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now that's--and what else do you have in terms of business activities?
Speaker 2: Well I have that and then I have a yogurt shop [Peacole Ice Cream Company, Inc.] at the airport [William P. Hobby Airport, Houston, Texas] and as I said I'm involved in real estate that I own, and have grandkids (laughter) and having grandkids.
Story_ID: 666805
Speaker 1: You had another bench story you wanted to tell us before we talked about your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was about to mention--tell you that, you know, experiences--and, and I've got two experiences I want to tell you.  One when I first ran for district court judge you had to run countywide and so I went all over the county trying to get votes but there's a conservative portion of Harris County [Texas] called Pasadena, Texas. I don't know if you've heard of that or not but it's conservative.  So I went there and it's somewhat--it's a blue collar area and it was at a labor hall, chemical workers and people like that and I went there and my wife [Diane Massey Peavy] was with me.  She was standing on the side and I was standing on the front and my wife told me that she heard one of the people say that, "I can't believe that Negro came out here."  So my wife was nervous and she was getting concerned and so anyway she said that I finally talked to the people and when I get through talking the people were clapping and the guy who had made that statement said, "You know, he sounds all right and I'm going to vote for him."  So, but she always tell the kids about that.  One other thing when I was, too, running, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] had my signs out in Pasadena and the Chronicle [Houston Chronicle] called me and they asked me about it and I said, "Well I don't know anything about it but obviously they feel that I must be a fair judge." Anyway that was the end of that story.  But, you know, and then I had another incident that happened where my court coordinator was on the elevator and I was on the top floor in the courthouse and she rode up the elevator with this white attorney with his white client and he was talking to his client trying to comfort his client trying to explain the procedure and keep him relaxed and everything.  My court coordinator who was black--who is black, said that just as the elevator opened the attorney told his client, he said, "You know the judge is a nigger, don't you."
Speaker 1: This is an uncloseted speech, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean closeted speech that you don't really hear, but here it is.  So what are you--are you surprised by that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well I was, but I didn't let it impact my ruling.
Story_ID: 666806
Speaker 1: So do you have a judicial philosophy?
Speaker 2: Be fair--no matter who it is, be fair.  No matter who it is you've got to be fair, you know.  And when I first became justice of the peace and when I first became a family law judge, I was nervous but once I started I was no longer nervous and the only thing that we need is the opportunity, that's all. We can do it just as good as they can--as they do it we just need the opportunity.
Speaker 1: All right do you think there is more opportunity now than it was when you started?
Speaker 2: It's improving and especially in Texas where--in Harris County [Texas] where Harris County appears to be going blue.
Story_ID: 666807
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well I hope that we can try to come together and try to make the community better and at the same time that those persons like myself try to help someone else come up the ladder.  You know I think that's important and that's what I want my legacy to be is that I always try to help somebody else--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, make it better.  And when I was on the bench I appointed minority lawyers to represent clients and even in my business I try to help minorities and I'm a little bit more sympathetic with the issues and the problems they face, than, I think, than some people would be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we've got to help each other.
Story_ID: 666808
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at your career is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go, go back and do it again?
Speaker 2: I'm very happy with my career.  Outside of that one issue that happened and that really wasn't my fault, but I think it was more political than anything else, but God gave me the strength and the financial resources to overcome it.
Speaker 1: It makes me think what if you didn't have the financial resources?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Well that's true, that is so true.
Speaker 1: You know, sometimes it seems as though justice can be won by the ability to pay lawyers and pay fees and fight a case, you know, sometimes for them.
Story_ID: 666809
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family?
Speaker 2: Well I've been married twice.  I got married when I was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and I have a son, John, Jr. [John W. Peavy III] from that marriage.  He attended Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] also, U of T Law School [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], went on Wall Street and ironically he went to work for Shell Oil [Shell Oil Company] and he was head of mergers and acquisitions for Shell Oil from North America.  He was in, in the Netherlands and he retired--took early retirement a couple of years ago because oil prices were going down and everything so he had the opportunity to take an early retirement so he took it.  Plus his wife didn't want to move over there and he was flying back and forth.  He did that for about five or six years and so he's doing real well.  He's in the hospitality business developing and acquiring hotels in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And in February 26, 1972 I married my present wife [Diane Massey Peavy] and we have one son his name is Jason [Jason Peavy] he went to Howard.  He has a business degree, he's in business for himself plus he is in business with me.  He runs my operation.  My wife has been married before and we have two daughters Wendy [Wendy Turner Codwell] and Tiffany [Tiffany Turner Barnes]. And Wendy went to UT, went to the University of Houston law school [University of Houston Law Center, Houston, Texas].  She practiced law for a while and eventually got married and she married a doctor John Codwell [John Codwell III] and they have three boys [John Codwell IV, Reid Codwell and Austin Codwell]. Then my other daughter is married to a gentleman by the name of Stephen Barnes who is an entertainment lawyer and she has two daughters.
Story_ID: 666810
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I'm trying to think. I think we covered mostly everything.  I think that although I find--I just want to say this too is that I think being involved, relationships are important because all of the things that have happened in terms of being the first justice of the peace and White House and all that and state judge was first--I think I was prepared and then we had the relationships and we were, you know, and I've been fair.  And I think that's so important that when you're put in a place of trust that you do your best to do what's right and make the right decisions, you know, I think that--that's so important.  I see people even today who, when I was on the bench, tell me that they thought that I was very fair and I think that's important.  And then lastly as I'll mention is, reaching back, trying to help someone who is--hadn't quite found their way yet, you know, and try to lead them from the shadows to the light, I think that's important.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I think you've asked--you've answered my last question actually, which was how would you like to be remembered, which I think you just answered it, so I'd just like to thank you for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Oh this has been my pleasure, it's been my honor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 666811
Speaker 1: This is in 1982, and I think this is at a Houston Grand Opera event and this is Mayor Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire] who was the first female mayor for the City of Houston [Texas] and of course that's myself and this is my wife Diane [Diane Massey Peavy].
Speaker 2: I think this is probably in about 1976.  This is my wife Diane, Alex Haley and yours truly.
Speaker 1: This is in 1994.  This is myself, this is my daughter and this is at a wedding and I think this was around about July or August of 1994.
Speaker 2: This was probably 1996 and this is my youngest son Jason [Jason Peavy], this is my daughter Tiffany [Tiffany Turner Barnes], this is my daughter Wendy [Wendy Turner Codwell], that's my wife and that's me and that's at a church event at Antioch Missionary Baptist Church [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and this was I think in 2015 at a reception that I attended in Houston.
Speaker 2: This is in 2016, this is, this is me unfortunately I don't know all the other people on the picture but I received an award, Phillis Wheatley Hall of Fame [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: This was in 2015, this is attorney Gene Lott [ph.] and this is me and this was attending Antioch Missionary Baptist Church banquet.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and that was I think in probably '77 [1977] when I was justice of the peace.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and that probably was in 1991 or 1992 when I was judge for the 246th District Court [246th Family District Court].
Speaker 2: That was in 2016, this is Congressman Al Green, this is my wife and that's me and we were at the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: This is 2016 at the Capitol and a luncheon that Congressman Al Green hosted for members of Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], that's me and that's Congressman Green.
Speaker 2: That was probably 1981--probably 1990.  This is Ann Richards, that's me and that's a guy by the name of Derrick Smith [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is 2016, this is Congressman John Lewis [HistoryMaker John Lewis] and that's me.
Speaker 2: And this is in 2016 also and this is justice of the peace Zinetta Burney and that's me.
Speaker 1: This was in 1995 and a picture of me at city hall [Houston City Hall, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: This was 1994, this is my daughter that's her husband, Stephen Barnes, this is Diana Fallis, this is Babyface Edmonds [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] and [HistoryMaker] Tracey Edmonds and as I said this was 1994 (background noise).
Speaker 1: This is 1995, this is Senator Rodney Ellis, this is John Peavy [HistoryMaker John W. Peavy, Jr.] and this is Congressman Sheila Jackson Lee.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was 1995, I went to China and this is one of the dignitaries from China and that's Rosie Chang [ph.] from Houston and this is me.
Speaker 2: And this is 2016 and this is group members of our Boule who went to the Capitol to visit with Congressman Green, this is Congressman Green and these are members of the Boule and their wives and this is me and that's my wife.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure who that is but this is me and this is President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and I guess what year was that year was that?
Speaker 2: End of the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s] yes.
Speaker 2: And this is 1994, this is me, this is my wife and this is Attorney Anthony Hall [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.].
Speaker 1: This is '74 [1974] Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] when he was--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '76 [1976] to '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay this is a picture of me, I'm not too sure about who that guy is and this is Jimmy Carter--President Jimmy Carter.
Speaker 2: Who is that guy (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was 1973, and that's when I was justice of the peace--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --a picture of me.
