Story_ID: 187198
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Mahlon M-A-H-L-O-N, Mahlon from the Bible, middle name Tasker [ph.], and surname Puryear P-U-R-Y-E-A-R.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, January 27, 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, as we talk today, in about two months, I'll be eighty-nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187199
Speaker 1: What is this--the significance of your first name again?  It's in the Bible?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Mahlon.
Speaker 2: It's a--one of the great stories, love stories of the Bible.  It's a relationship between Ruth and Naomi.  Naomi had two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, who went down to Moab country to fight.  While down there, they married Moab women.  Both boys were killed and Ruth decided she would go live with her husband's mother.  The Bible is really not clear as to which one was married to Ruth.  In some stories, it says Mahlon was married to her.  Since she was good looking.  I chose to believe that's true because this Mahlon can choose them too.  She came back and the story ministers you, on Mother's Day is when Ruth said to Naomi, "Whither thou goest, I will go.  Thy God will be my God."  In other words, I have come home to live with you.  I'm gonna be a part of your family.  She was out in the field working one day and King Boaz passed and saw her, and took a liking to her, and married her.  I love to tell that story to ministers because they always get the Naomi, Ruth relationship, but do not get the Mahlon relationship.  And, since my parents picked that name out of the Bible, I like to tell it, you see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187200
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: The other part of that is, I was born at two o'clock in the morning.  Doctor H. H. Hall [ph.] was the physician.  I was born at home.  He went to city hall the next morning and recorded a boy being born at two o'clock.  My birth certificate says, Baby born two a.m., January 27, 1915.  Baby named June 28, 1945, because I didn't need a birth certificate until 1945, and when I went to get one--when I wrote for one, they had to record of my birth.  So, my sister had to go to city hall and certify that I was her brother born on January 27th.  So, all of those years when I wanted to get rid of that Tasker, I could have done it, 'cause it wasn't recorded in anywhere (laughter), but I never did change it.  You don't change names your parents give you.
Story_ID: 187201
Speaker 1: Now, where did Tasker come from?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My parents [Royal Puryear and Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] never told where they got that.  See, the family--my mother was born in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and only lived in three houses in her lifetime.  The one she was born in.  The one my father carried her to in 1911, when they got married.  And, the one we moved to 25th Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] when the neighborhood changed and we had to move from the 2nd Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] address.  There were seven children.  Interesting thing about that seven children is in 1926, my father who was a painting contractor, gathered the six of us around and told us, "You're gonna finish high school, if I have to whip you every day."  And, he meant it.  He didn't spare the rod.  You did something wrong, he punished you.  In 1928, he was doing better and he brought us together again, and he changed his tune and he said, "You're gonna finish college."  I wanna change the painting and decorating business to building construction.  And, want you to go to Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia] and learn how to build, and come back and we'll change the name to Royal Puryear and Sons.  My oldest brother [Royal Wendell Puryear] went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and majored in social sciences and retired years later as a college president.  But, Papa never forgave him for going to Howard (laughter) and not doing the business.  But, the other three brothers; Byron [Puryear], the one older than me; and Cortez [Puryear] the one younger, did go to Hampton.  We did graduate.  All seven of the children finished college; all seven.  All finished on time.  None of us worked.  We don't know 'til this day how Papa paid for it.  Because, when we got to Hampton, he went to the business office and worked out that.  And, we went to the registrar's office to register for classes.  And, he told every teacher he met, "My boys are supposed to do well, if they do not do what they're supposed to do, I'm as close as a telephone."  And, he meant it.  Anything we did, we were always aware of the fact that mamma and Papa were in Winston-Salem waiting for messages and what not on how well we were doing.  Six of the seven got married.  The baby never got married with the others.  And, the six of us had six children.  All six of them are college graduates.  Only one has a baccalaureate degree.  All the others have higher degrees.  And, they're all--my generation at some point was--taught.  Their generation, none of them was a teacher.  My older brother had no children.  I have two daughters [Ruby and Katherine Puryear].  They're both retired now.  One of them retired as a principal of the only public high school in New York City [New York] with a dress code.  And, in every year at graduation they say how many of the graduates had been accepted to college.  And, at graduation time, eighty and ninety percent of the graduates, already accepted in college.  And, by September, all of them are in some kind of school beyond high school.  Most of my own career has been devoted to staying in school, making good use of the time, finding out what the world is all about, then do what you have to do to graduate and go on to college.
Story_ID: 187202
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me get back to your middle name, Tasker (laughter).  'Cause I thought--we're gonna get to all the family history.  But, I was trying to identify these names at the beginning then.
Speaker 2: Mine--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Where did Tasker come from?
Speaker 2: My family never told me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, you didn't like it? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And, I didn't have--well, most of the time I say Mahlon T.  I don't even spell it out.  It's on some of the official documents, because they require it.  Otherwise, I'd never put it down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about Puryear?  What kind of name is that?
Speaker 2: That's the name me father [Royal Puryear]--if you remember, the way slavery operated, slaves took the last name of their owner.  It didn't make a different who their, who the father really was.  Because, a whole lot of mixed up stuff nothing new about miscegenation, it's always been around.  My father's father took the name of the man he worked with in Mecklenburg County in Virginia.
Story_ID: 187203
Speaker 1: My mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] was born in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] of a man and woman whose last name was Sharpe.  And, they had moved to Winston from Davie County [North Carolina], next door.  And, they worked for the Hanes', the underwear people [of Hanesbrands Inc.], in Winston-Salem as domestics.  The Hanes family and the Reynolds family, and some of those families in Winston-Salem, did a lot to encourage the people who worked for them to buy houses.  While they never talked about going to school, going to college, coming to the company to work, they never seemed to discourage the families who wanted their children to go to school and come back and be teachers.
Story_ID: 187204
Speaker 1: My father [Royal Puryear] only went to the third grade.  But, my mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] went to normal school, which was called Slater [Slater Industrial and State Normal School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So, we lived in a situation where Papa read all the time, good at math, good in civics, good in current events, and when--and my mother never worked.  So, when we went out to school in the morning, she counted us, one, two, three, four, five, six.  And, at 3:30 she counted us coming back, one, two, three, four, five, six.  And, in the family where ever we went, whatever we were doing, the oldest Puryear, and Papa pronounced it, "Preyer" not Puryear.  The oldest Puryear was in charge.  My younger brother [Cortez Puryear] was always mad, 'cause he was never the oldest.  But, he did get the first pair of long pants.  And, I have a picture around here somewhere with Cortez in long pants, and the rest of us in short, in stovepipes [trousers], you see.  Make no mistake, my father was in charge.  Everywhere we went, no matter what we were doing, there were somebody there who knew who we were.  And we knew, if we did anything we were not supposed to do, we knew that that phone was gonna ring.  And, when we got home, the report was gonna there, what we did.  As a matter of fact, I was twenty-five years old; had never been in a pool room.  And, I was going up 4th Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] one day, one evening, on the way home, past Mr. Scales Pool Room [ph.] and went in.  And, he was sitting over by his desk, and he said, "Puryear, does your daddy know you're in here?"  I said, "No, Sir," and walked out.  It never crossed my mind to say to Mr. Scales, I'm twenty-five years old now.  Papa doesn't tell me where to go.  But, it was built into me that I had places to go, there were things to do, there were ways to do them.  And, I just adopted them.  And, even now, I call my daughter, who lives here [Baltimore, Maryland], every morning to let her know that I made it through the night.  And, I tell her what my schedule is for the day.  And, they like that.
Speaker 2: That sounds like, sounds like a very close family.
Story_ID: 187205
Speaker 1: --What we were trying to do in the beginning was just slate the interview.  To get all the particulars down and then we'll get into a deeper discussion.  But, I wanted to ask you, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Winston-Salem--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: North Carolina.  January 27, 1915.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now.  But, along the way, I have been a painter.  I've been a builder.  I've been a teacher, been a college administrator.  I've been a social worker.  I've been with the American Red Cross.  I've done a program in administration in Indonesia.  Sometimes I have difficulty in figuring out how I put the packages together to get all those different kinds of jobs.  'Cause if you noticed, when I named them, when I went from painting to building, that's not a normal thing.  Building is different from painting.  When I went from building to teaching, I was teaching before I had to credential to teach.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  But, the jobs, we'll get to all that too.  But, I just wanted to find out, I mean, tell us the--now the two jobs you had with the Urban League, or the jobs you had with the Urban Leagues, the positions that you had.
Speaker 2: Now, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], at the last conference in July, I found out that I had the longest tenure with the Urban League than anybody there; starting in 1940.  I started as a volunteer on a committee set up by Julius [A.] Thomas, who was director of industrial relations to find machinists for Sun Shipbuilding & Drydock [Co.] in Chester, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't wanna get into all the history of it, right now.  But, what positions did--you were at one time assistant director of the [National] Urban League [New York, New York] under Whitney Young, right?
Speaker 2: I have had, in the sixty odd years I've been with the Urban League, I have, I have twenty-five different titles.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the highest one that you--
Speaker 2: The highest was deputy executive director of the National Urban League to Whitney Young.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: After I got through with that, I became president of the Urban League in Charlotte, North Caroline, and president of the Urban League in Orange County, California.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Which in the overall high anarchy, those presidents jobs were higher than the deputy jobs to Whitney.  'Cause Whitney's title was executive director when [HM] Vernon Jordan came along, he changed the title to president, because it came him more status when he went to corporations and what not.  President to president sounds better than president to executive director, you see.  Executive director sound like a hired hand--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the president, sound like you in charge.  So, he changed the title--that's why in Chicago [Illinois], [HM James W. Compton] Jim Compton is president of Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Now--
Speaker 2: The lady in Charlotte who followed me is president of the Charlotte Urban League [Urban League of Central Carolinas, Charlotte, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 187206
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: November 14th.
Speaker 1: Fifteenth.
Speaker 2: Ninet--2003.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's actually the 15th, I believe.
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: It's the 15th, I believe.  Isn't it?  Is it the 15th?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is the 15th?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, 15th.  I thought Sunday was the 16th.  Or, this is Saturday, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  This is the 15th [November, 15th, 2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my house.
Speaker 1: And, you don't have to give the address, but just in your home in--
Speaker 2: I'm in my house in Mount Washington.  A part of Baltimore, Maryland.
Story_ID: 187207
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what I like to do, there are five little questions we ask as a warm up.  But, you don't need a warm up because you already got (laughter) started.  But, I'm gonna ask them anyway.  And, these are the questions that we normally ask.  There're five questions that require just a short answer, and the first questions is, Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  I really don't because, I try to get some fun out of all of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  But, in my moving around, I've been to twenty-two countries.  And, if you tell me right now, I'll give you a ticket to go anywhere you wanna go, I can tell you where I'd go.  Hong Kong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hong Kong to me is one of the most fascinating places I've ever been.  I mean, I'm looking at London [England].  I'm looking at Paris [France].  I'm looking Rome [Italy].  I'm looking at Havana [Cuba].  Not Havana, but San Juan, Puerto Rico.  I'm look all over the world.  Hong Kong to me is fabulous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You can eat the food.  Tailors are great; be able to make a suit in a day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.  I've made some many speeches as an Urban Leaguer, and you know, in other capacities, that I have--I use a lot of poems.  I think the words to the poem, "I Believe"--I use the words "my task."  I use the poem from 'Songs of the Portuguese' [sic, 'Sonnets from the Portuguese', by Elizabeth Barrett Browning] by Ms. [Elizabeth Barrett] Browning; "How do I love thee, let me count the ways."  Because, when you're talking with students, you have to get their attention.  And, when you get it, you have to hold it.  There was a very famous minister, Howard Thurman, who when Dr. Thurman spoke, he stood up and he did the first sentence or two of a poem.  Then, he took off.  When he got back to that poem, you knew he was winding down.  So, you're sitting there listening to what he was saying, just wondering how long it's gonna take him to get back, 'cause the man was good.  You weren't going anywhere.  Then later Herb King [ph.], and Dr. Maze [ph.], we ran--as we ran into those men, they did the same thing.  So, when I started making speeches, I would pick, depending on the occasion, if I was talking at a football banquet, I'd be quoting something some football coach said.  If it was a basketball game, I'd be talking about same something [James] Naismith said--Naismith because he was one of the founders of basketball, you see.  I had a lot of chances to work with students.  A matter of fact, I do that now.
Story_ID: 187208
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about your family background.  What you know about your ancestors.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] side and your father's [Royal Puryear] side.  But I'mma start with your mother's side.  And, let me first ask you to give me your mother's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name was Beatrice B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Sharpe S-H-A-R-P-E.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother birthday was January 6, 1891.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, where was she born?
Speaker 2: Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace it?
Speaker 2: I can only go back to her parents.  I know they were born in Davie County [North Carolina].  I know they got married in the early '81s [1981].  I know they had nine children.  A lot of times, I can just rattle their names off, depending on how often I'm doing it.  And, including getting it, getting it in the order, you see.  'Cause my--the baby in that family just died a couple of years ago in '94 [1994].  I have some pages from her Bible which list the family when they were born, when they got married, and when they died.
Speaker 1: And, you made some copies for us too, right?  For our--for your folder, for those.  You made some copies of those for us, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think I have, I think I have copies I can give you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's--well, we won't discuss that right now, but you--
Speaker 2: Because, it's--
Speaker 1: Yes.  That, yes.
Speaker 2: If there's something I have that you see while you're here, sometimes it might be an only copy.
Speaker 1: Oh, Okay.  Alright.  So, we'll work that out at the end.
Speaker 2: We'll work that out, yeah.
Speaker 1: But--did your--what were your grandparents name on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Sharpe.
Speaker 1: Sharpe.  Okay.
Speaker 2: S-H-A-R-P-E.
Speaker 1: Your father names.  I mean, her father's name was?
Speaker 2: Floyd.
Speaker 1: Floyd Sharpe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He died in March, '99 [1999, sic, 1919], 1999, yeah.  Her mother was Josephine J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E.  My oldest sister's middle name is Josephine.
Speaker 1: You mean, your fathers' mother's--your mothers' father died in 1899, you say?
Speaker 2: No, 1999.
Speaker 1: Her mo--her father?
Speaker 2: My mothers' father died in 1999--1919.
Speaker 1: Nineteen-nineteen.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen-nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, there it is.  That's better.
Speaker 2: Nineteen-nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I was wondering.  He was really old if he--
Speaker 2: A lot of nines in there.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, sir.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, grandma died in 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  That's--I had to keep going back, because I said, "Well, that's a long time."  Okay, did they tell you any stories about growing up and what life was like for them?
Speaker 2: But you see, they were both born at the end of the Civil War.  So, when they talked, they couldn't tell you about experiences during slavery.  Because, they grew up in a different time.  They grew up when they worked for somebody, they got paid, you see.  Which was a different situation when working for somebody as a slave, you're not gonna get paid, you see.  You could record marriages.  During slavery, you couldn't.  Because, in many places slaves could have children but not do the official getting married and what not.  If you look at the black colleges, they all started after the Civil War, except one or two, like Alcorn [State University, Lorman, Mississippi] in '61 [1861, sic, 1871].  But, most of 'em started after the war was over.  And, most of them were not colleges as we know them today, because I know one school when it started had six students, ages six to seventy-one.  Nobody could read.  Nobody could write, you see.  Major colleges like Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia] had high schools because Atlanta [Georgia] did not have a high school for black children until 1924.  But, Morehouse goes back to the 1800s.  So, they had to have a high school in order to get graduates to go to college.
Story_ID: 187209
Speaker 1: We were talking about your mother's [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] side of the family.  And, you said, they [Puryear's maternal grandparents, Floyd Sharpe and Josephine Mason Sharpe] were born after slavery--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, didn't--they couldn't tell stories about slavery, but did they--were they told anything about slavery themselves by their parents, or their relatives?
Speaker 2: There was a cousin that we called Aunt Camyla [ph.].  Now, whatever her name was--I don't know what they--what--how you spell it and never saw it spelled, but she was old when we were little boys and little girls playing.
Speaker 1: What was her name again?
Speaker 2: They call her, we call her Aunt Camyla.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't know whether it was Cal--don't know what the name was, but that's what she was called.  My grandfather [Floyd Sharpe] had a sister, Avatna Garnes [ph.] who was very active with fraternities.  And, Aunt Sissy [ph.] was active with the Masons, the Household of Ruth, the Heroines of Jericho, every--all of 'em.  Worthy matron in the organization and we use to go to these meeting where they have a turnout where all the members meet, you know, and put on the uniform and regalia and--when you address somebody in the meeting, you had to recognize the highest level person.  The grand worthy matron.  You just couldn't just talk to this person.  You had to start of there and recognize all those folks.  Maybe ten before you could start talking.  This was a part of growing up, because my mothers' mother [Josephine Mason Sharpe] lived with us at some periods.  And, she was the one who taught us how to cook.  Taught us how to bake, how to fry stuff, because she was there.  I don't remember my mother cooking a full meal.  There was one of us in the kitchen with her as we were growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about Aunt Camyla?  You started to say something about her, but we didn't finish, we didn't finish that.
Speaker 2: She was an old person who was around.  But see, we were little boys and girls when she was there.  And in those days, see little children didn't get into the conversations with grown folk like they do now, you see.  I'm sure Aunt Sissy, Aunt Avatna [ph.] talked to her.  I'm sure my mother talked to her.  But, we didn't talk to her because she was grown--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we weren't supposed to be talking to adults.  See if I was, if my mother was talking with you and I come chime in the conversation, if I'm sitting over here, I'd get a left-handed, back-handed right across the mouth.  Because, that was not child abuse.  That was rearing the child (laughter) bring up the way parents wanna to bring up, you see.  My father [Royal Puryear]--
Speaker 1: But, can I just interrupt one second?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, Aunt Camyla, you brought her up for a reason though, right?  What was it?
Speaker 2: I brought her up just to say--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That there were people around who were alive during slavery--
Speaker 1: Right.  You didn't say--Okay.
Speaker 2: But, there was no occasion for them, or for us to talk to the about how it was during slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, there was nobody like that.  See, my grandmother, when she talked, she talked about the Hanes family [of HanesBrands, Inc.].  See, grandpa died in '19 [1919]--I was only four years old.  So, you know, I didn't do much talking with him, you see.  And, the nine years beyond that grandma outlived him, she talked about the Hanes', who she worked for, but--and I don't remember picking up anything about what it was like to be a slave--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, what it was like growing up on a plantation, for example, you see.
Story_ID: 187210
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your father.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full names was Royal Puryear, R-O-Y-A-L, and he pronounced the last name "Preyer", 'cause that's the way they pronounced it in Virginia, in Mecklenburg County where he was born.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I--there are a lot of black Puryears--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Whether it's a name--
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: And I know some in Chicago [Illinois], some in Ohio--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They're all around now.
Speaker 1: And, they spell it different ways.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--a few years ago my older daughter [Ruby Louise Puryear] and my brother's boy, Alvin [ph.], were both on the board of trustees, see they were there at the same time.  First time in history of the school; cousins were on the board of trustees.  And, you know it was the first time a black was on there, 'cause they just put blacks on these boards in recent years.  Papa [Royal Puryear] came out of Virginia.  None of us ever met his father [Nelson Puryear] or his mother [Eliza Taylor Puryear].  All we know is that his mother was married to him [Puryear's grandfather, Nelson Puryear] and she had a brother named Richmond Taylor [ph.] in Knoxville, North Carolina.  And, Papa [sic, Puryear's grandfather, Nelson Puryear] met her when she came to board an academy in Virginia to go to school.  That's when my grandfather met her and married her.  And, Uncle Richmond's youngest child just died three or four years ago, as the last living relative on that--on Papa's side.  Papa had a sister, Annie [ph.], and a brother Leslie [ph.].  And, he went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where he learned to paint.  But, somehow came back to Winston-Salem [North Carolina] to work.  Decided he wanted a wife, built a house, and his sister was the housekeeper, and he started looking for a wife.  Several men in Winston did the same thing; built the house and brought the wives to the house.  And, the wives didn't work (laughter); stayed home and had children.  All of 'em had (laughter), I mean, six to eight children, you see.  And, I mean children born next steps.  None of the mother's ever wore street clothes, 'cause they were pregnant all the time, you see.
Speaker 1: So, on your father's side of the family, you knew your grandparents, right?  You said, you knew your grandparents?
Speaker 2: We never met Papa's parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: Both died before we were born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you father ever talk about them and what they?--
Speaker 2: No.  No more than to give my second brother Byron his--my brother Byron middle name is Nelson Puryear, which was Papa's daddy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See that's the extent that we learned about Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We never knew--he had a brother name George who lived next door to us.  He worked at [R.J.] Reynolds Tobacco [Company] factory.  But, where our grandfather worked, we never found out.  It was never discussed.  And, where our grandmother worked, we never found out.
Story_ID: 187211
Speaker 1: Were there any stories from that side of the family about life in South Carolina--North Carolina rather?
Speaker 2: You gotta remember see, when I was growing up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], North Carolinian's didn't talk about South Carolina, because that was a, it's another world.  To a North Carolinian, when I was growing up--
Speaker 1: Okay, I just miss spoke.  I intended to ask you about North Carolina, where Winston-Salem is.  Where did--they talk about growing up there and what it was like?
Speaker 2: When we were growing up, both parents [Royal Puryear and Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] sang in the choir at church.  Papa was assistant superintendent of Sunday school and superintendent of Sunday school in alternate years.  Franklin Dexter was superintendent, Papa was the assistant.
Speaker 1: Now.  Let me ask you this, let me ask you--tell me about how your father grew up.  Now, he apparently went to school, right, and to be a--
Speaker 2: Nope.  He went to the third grade.
Speaker 1: Went to third grade?  And, he was superintendent of the school?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was superintendent of Sunday school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, Sunday school.  Alright.
Speaker 2: Where he got his math and where he learned to read--he never said, "I'm gonna tell you a story, here it is."  He never did that.  All we knew is that when we were doing our math problems, he's the one who helped us.  We got 'em right too.  When we had civics problems, voting, he was active with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], voter's registration.  The first time I registered in North Carolina, Papa carried, he carried us to register on our twenty-first birthday.  The day I went, professor of history from Winston-Salem State [University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was ahead of me and the man asked him to spell religion.  And, he said "R-E-L-I-G-I-O-N," and the man said, "You can't register 'cause you can't spell it.  It's a capital "R."  When I walked up, I--and the man said, "What's your name?"  I said, "Puryear."  He looked at me and he said, "Is your daddy the painter?"  I said, "Yes sir, and he's standing right over there."  He said, "Sign here."  That's the way I registered, didn't ask me any questions.
Speaker 1: So, it's a random and capricious process?
Speaker 2: Because he knew--the registration people knew that Papa was active in the NAACP, which at that time registering and voting was available, and they knew Papa.
Story_ID: 187212
Speaker 1: Tell me, is there a story about how your parents [Royal Puryear and Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] met?  Did they ever talk about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.  Because it seems that my mother, her family was at First Baptist Church [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and Papa's family was in Mount Zion Baptist [Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Not across the street but a long way apart.  And, best we can understand is Papa is this young man getting starting in business looking for a wife.  And, he spots my mother and picks her.  Marries her, and start having children right away, 'cause my oldest brother was born nine and a half months after they got married, you see.  And, I can tell you all the children's birthdays.  I know them all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because in our family, you did not forget a birthday.
Speaker 1: Well, what are your bro--who are your brothers and sisters?  Can you give us their names and, their names and then where you fit in? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My oldest brother is, my oldest brother--now, all seven of the children were born in the same bed, in the same room, between 1912 and 1928.  Six of us was born between 1912 and 1919.  My oldest brother is Royal [Puryear], Jr.  The second brother is Byron Nelson [Puryear].  I'm the third, Mahlon Tasker [Puryear].  The fourth brother, Cortez Marion [Puryear].  Then there were three girls.  Beatrice Josephine [Puryear], Erastine Estella [Puryear], and then Jack, Hazel Jacqueline [Puryear].  All seven of us taught at one time because when you went to college, you were supposed to be learning something you could teach.  And, we all got hired teaching.  When Papa decided to change the business from painting and decorating to construction and sent Byron, Cortez, and me to Hampton [Institute, Hampton, Virginia], we came back and we were there to build.  They called us schoolboy carpenters, and wouldn't nobody hire us to build anything, 'cause we were school boys, that's what they said.  So, Papa decided whenever he painted a house, in or out, you'd have to do the repair work (laughter).  Repair the roof.  Repair the broken shingles.  Replace the broken weather boarding, you see.  In order for people to find out that we really knew how to build.  When I got married in 1939, my house was one of the first houses we built.
Story_ID: 187213
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me take you back to when you were a little kid.  We wanna take you back there and get through that.  Now, can you tell me what some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up were?
Speaker 2: My--one of the things that I remember about growing up, my father's [Royal Puryear] sister moved to Southard, New Jersey.  And, one summer Papa decided to send the six children and our mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] to spend the summer with Aunt Annie [ph.].  He went to the station and bought the drawing-room on a Pullman.  And, the drawning-room on a Pullman was a compartment with an upper, a lower, and an extra couch.  With the six children, in those days, the porter on the train really took care of us.  He--we didn't have to go to the dining room, he went to the dining room and brought our meals to us.  We were going from Winston-Salem [North Carolina] on the North and Western railroad into Newark [New Jersey], where Aunt Annie [ph.] picked us up.  When school opened in September, teacher asked everybody, "What'd you do this summer?"  When I got up and told the class about this trip on the Pullman and the drawing-room, the teacher whipped me, for lying.  Said, "Black folks didn't ride Pullman."  Black folk didn't ride, certainly didn't get the drawing-room.
Speaker 1: This is a black teacher too, right?
Speaker 2: Black teacher.  When you got a whipping, you know, you cried and the solvent tears showed up on your face.  When I got home from school, there I am with the solvent tears on my face.  My mother asked, "What happened?"  So, I told her.  She didn't say anything but, we had a sit down family dinner every night, except Saturday and Sunday.  And, we had two sit down meals on Sunday.  With Saturday you eat when you can.  My father sat at the head of the table, and the seven children had a place at the table; Cortez [Puryear], me, Byron [Puryear], Royal [Wendell Puryear], sister [Beatrice Puryear], my mother, Jack [Hazel Jaqueline Puryear], Erastine [Puryear].  Through college, through college we sat in those seats.  Papa came to the table, which nobody buttered bread, nobody sweetened tea, nobody did anything 'til he said the blessing.  And, we recited the 23rd Psalm in unison.  When the meal was over, he'd push his chair back and said, "Dear, how did things go today?"  And, that's when she told him about the teacher whipping me for lying in class.  He looked at me and said, "I'll take care of it."  The next morning, he took me, carried me to school, went to the principal's office and told the principal, "Send for the teacher"; called her name.  And, when the teacher came he handed her the stubs from the railroad.  That lady was one of my best friends after that.  But, she whooped me for lying.  We went somewhere every summer.  My mother never rode a coach train until she came to my wedding in 1939 when I had gone--I had a round trip ticket on the train.
Story_ID: 187214
Speaker 1: What you're describing is a father [Royal Puryear] with a lot of means.  He had some money to be able to afford--to do that.
Speaker 2: Well, you see, he had four boys.  We worked for him.  He never paid us.  He told us, work for me. I won't pay you.  But, when times comes to go to school, the bills come to me.  None of the seven children knows what Papa paid, or how he paid it.  He never told us.  All he told us was, your mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] and I brought you here.  It's our job to feed you, clothe you, and educate you.  And, we're gonna do that.  And, he said, "What I want you to do is go to school, do what you supposed to do.  Learn."
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what kind of house did you all live in?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Great big house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Real--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Mom and Papa had that bedroom.  The boys had that big room.  The girls had that bedroom.  And, had a guest room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Living room, dining room, kitchen--
Speaker 1: Well, what was the neighborhood like?  I mean, what did--how did--what--
Speaker 2: When we, when he built the house, there were other houses in the neighborhood just like his, see.  But, over time, some of the vacant lots were brought by people who bought--who put up rental houses.  And, so you had a lot of people coming to work at [R.J.] Reynolds [Tobacco Company] and they did some of everything under the sun, you see.  So, in 1936, he kept the house on 2nd Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and bought a new house on 25th [Street, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And, that's where he--mama died and where he died, see.  He was--I don't remember growing up and my father working for as many as ten black people.  We painted all of what is known as Buena Vista and Ardmore where upper middle class and the money people, in North Caro--in Winston-Salem were.  We--Papa never asked for money.  You know, you want--if you want your room painted, now you know the painter come gets a third of the money to go buy the paint.  That way he primes it and gets ready to do the second coat against the other, it's another third, see.  My father would go around in the winter, this time of year, and prime houses and go back and finish 'em for Easter.  And, we worked right along with the rest of the painters.  He started out teaching us how to paint the banister sticks.  Then we--long time before we got to the weather boarding under the porch, on the front porch, 'cause that's where your best painter works out there, you see.  But, all of us could paint, all of us could hang paper, see.  We learned that before we ever went to Hampton [Institute, later, Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Story_ID: 187215
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about grade school.  Let me--what was the name of your school?  You talked some about it.  What--
Speaker 2: I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Depot Street [School, later, Atkins High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was the high school.  And, there were children registered at Depot Street from grade, first grade up.  But, the lower grades were not housed in Depot School.  I went to school one year in the basement of First Baptist Church [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  I went another year to an old renovated school, Professor [George Hamilton] Willis used to run, because the school population was growing.  And, Depot was already there and you couldn't add any more to that.  So, Miss [Ella] Haith, who was the principal of the lower grades, was principal of--of the school when we were with Ms. [Martha] Yores down in the first grade, and Ms. Mary Lunsford in the second grade.  All of these, see all of our teachers were full grown people, who knew Papa [Royal Puryear] and mama [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear].  And, they would tell us if they saw us doing wrong, ask us, "Is that what your daddy would approve?"  We were not supposed to fight at school.  So, if he hit me, I would get you after school, hold your books, while you beat him, then you take me home.  But, I wasn't supposed to be in a fight, and I didn't get in fights.  I finished high school [at Columbia Heights High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] before I was fifteen, and never learned to dance.
Story_ID: 187216
Speaker 1: So, you weren't allowed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)'til I was a senior at Hampton [Institute, later, Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: You weren't allowed to dance when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Papa [Royal Puryear] wasn't crazy about it, but our mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] was a dancer before she got married.  But, she didn't dance 'til sister [Beatrice Puryear] and Erastine [Puryear] reached junior/senior prom in high school, see.  We all took piano.  We took voice lessons.  We had a piano.  We had the first telephone in the neighborhood.  Everybody that got sick, came to our house to call the doctor.  It was the only telephone in the neighborhood [in Winston-Salem, North Carolina] (laughter).  When I mean neighborhood, I'm talking about several blocks, you see.
Speaker 1: What about radio?  Did you have a radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  See, radio didn't get popular you know 'til the '30s [1930s], see.  And, by the time radios got popular, the people was selling radios, you know, would bring a machine to your house and leave it.  So, you get used to it till--then they, then you wouldn't let 'em give it up, you see.  That's the way they sold it.  Same thing with washing machine.
Speaker 1: So, you were a teenager when radio got popular, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, T.V. didn't come out until during the war [World War Two, WWII], you know.  See, we had the radios--you can go to the store, you know, and buy hand radio; just get one stations, see.
Speaker 1: That's what they call a crystal set, then?
Speaker 2: Crystal set, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You see.  You get the one (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: So, you could get that fairly cheaply, right?
Speaker 2: Very cheap, and one that looked, looks like a--one that look, looks like a little thing that the electricity came into the house, but you don't, see.  And, the music was always distorted, you see.  See, they refined the stuff now.  All the difference in the world.  We--
Speaker 1: Did you go to church a lot, when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: The Sunday ritual was to get up and have breakfast.  And, Sunday morning breakfast was fried chicken, rice and gravy, and hot biscuits.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute, that's tough act to follow for dinner, now.  How did they--
Speaker 2: We had fried chicken, rice and gravy, or fried chicken and fried apples, or fried sweet potatoes with hot rolls, sometimes.  When we got to high school [at Columbia Heights High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], two of us, or after, after--and during that breakfast, we recited the Bible verse, we were gonna say at Sunday school.  And, when one of us got us to say the verse, nobody else got up until the six of us, said our verses, 'cause they knew we were supposed to get up and say it.  And, no "Jesus wept," stuff, I mean, in the beginning God created heaven and earth.  You gotta get the whole sentence.  When we got the high school, two of us could go home and fix dinner, because church started at eleven and didn't get out 'til one-thirty, quarter of two.  We'd go home, kill a hen, pot boil it, make the stuffing, put the hen in the oven and bake it.  Made candied yams, macaroni.  Cooked string beans and turnip (laughter).  That's for dinner.  And eat--and we would even make sweet potato candied yams, and sweet potato custards.
Story_ID: 187217
Speaker 1: Sunday dinner again, you--so your parents [Royal Puryear and Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] would pick two of the six [Puryear children] to go back, you're deputized to go back and make Sunday dinner.
Speaker 2: We would go home and fix dinner.
Speaker 1: And, you--while everybody else was still church?
Speaker 2: Still in church.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And, when they would come home from church, dinner would be on the table.
Speaker 1: So, that--
Speaker 2: And, we baked cakes, we baked pies, we baked cobblers, whatever we wanted to bake.  See, in 1927 Papa bought a store about three blocks away.  Folk broke in one night, and he had the store built next to our house, and we could go from the market part of the store into our kitchen.  So, the refrigerator (laughter) in the market was our meat; sausage, bologna, whatever we wanna cook.  So, we'd go in there and maybe have, decided to have bologna for dinner and we'd slice the bologna up, if they gonna--if all of us gonna eat and when you have parents and six children, see that's eight folks.  Two slices bologna a piece, that's almost the whole bologna, see.  And, we'd cut up onions and all and put it in and add it to the gravy.  And, we'd boil white potatoes, something you know to make it, make the meal run out.  Every now and then, Papa would say, "We ate too much."  We were fat, and he'll tell our mother, "Next week, we're just gonna have a bowl of beans and some cornbread"; this what he would say on Thursday or Friday.  Monday night (laughter) when he sat down and my mama would put a bowl of bean in front of him.  "Where's the meat, dear?"  We call our mother, dear mother.  And, then when we all started going to college, we started calling Papa, Big Fess, F-E-S-S, 'cause we were little fesses, you see.  I don't remember every growing up, reaching across the table for a piece of bread.  I don't ever remember my hand being knocked down 'cause somebody else wanted it.  It was always enough food on that table, and we ate well too.  When I went to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in 1931, I weighed 209 pounds.  In May I weighted 159.  'Cause I just couldn't get to that kitchen the way I did at home (laughter).  And, when I stayed out a year and went back, I weighed 227, 'cause my mother fed me every time she looked at me.
Story_ID: 187218
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you some questions about school, again.  Now, who was some of your favorite teachers in grade school [at Depot Street School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], before we get you to high school [at Columbia Heights High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: You see, keep in mind, I told you just now, that most of the teachers were full-grown adult married women.  So, we didn't relate to them as individuals.  Mrs. Bingham [ph.] was known to be a disciplinarian.  That's what she was.  Ms. Yolanda Wilkerson [ph.] was soft spoken.  Ms. Moore [ph.] taught music; had me singing 'Because' on programs.  But, I didn't get in the choir.  I was the youngest thing in my high school graduating class, 'cause I finished before I turned fifteen.
Speaker 1: Well, in high school, now you went to Depot Street--
Speaker 2: I went to Columbia Heights High not Atkins High [School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: You didn't go to Depot Street High School, right?
Speaker 2: When I was at Depot--see I was in Depot Street School in the third, fourth, and fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I got to the sixth grade, they closed Depot Street School and opened 14th Street School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And, they sent the six graders up to 14th Street.  I lived on 2nd Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  The next year, they did the job over and said I was closer to Columbia Heights Elementary [sic. Columbia Heights High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So, then I'm changing now from 14th Street to Columbia Heights Elementary, and that's where I stayed 'til I finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Columbia Heights was a High School, too?
Speaker 2: Columbia Heights was a high school.  You been to Winston-Salem [North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: No, sir.
Speaker 2: Where Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is located, they're on, they're on part of the land that was Columbia Heights High School, see.  Most of the cities had one high school for white kids and one for black kids.  Columbia High School was the black high school, and [Richard J.] Reynolds High [School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was the high school for white kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: As time went on, they built high schools all over town, you see.
Speaker 1: So, you when to high school when you were younger than, and you said--
Speaker 2: Ten years old (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you graduated when you were fifteen.
Speaker 2: Before, I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: That's 1930, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: January, 1930.
Speaker 1: Well, did you--how did you feel in high school being that young, where you--I mean, did you participate in high school activities?
Speaker 2: No.  I was a fourteen year old boy.  When my high school classmates were decorating the gym for the senior prom, I was outdoors shooting marbles (laughter).  The class had a party to raise money to help pay for the thing, and they had the party at Merica Golden's house on west 25th [Street, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], 24th [Street, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and I was living at 708 East 2nd [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  I walked from East 2nd, 700 block to the 400 block of West 24th.  Which means, I'm going seven to--down to zero and up to four, across this way and twenty-three blocks this way.  I never went inside the house.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: I stayed outdoors and played under (laughter), under the steps, 'cause I wasn't, I wasn't 'bout to put my arms around no girl and dance.  And, I did not learn to dance until I was a senior at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], in 1935.
Story_ID: 187219
Speaker 1: So, you entered Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] kinda early too then?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now--
Speaker 2: See, when I finished high school, Hampton would not accept you 'til you were sixteen.  So, I finished in January, '30 [1930].  But, I didn't get to Hampton 'til September, '31 [1931].  See, because I was sixteen by then.  Then I went to Hampton a year and I had a brother at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and two brothers in Hampton in 1931, '32 [1932].  And, the family asked me to stay out the second year and let two, let Royal [Wendell Puryear] finish Howard, let Byron [Puryear] finish Hampton, then I would go back.  In 1935, '36 [1936], Papa had four children in college at one time.  And, that's what I say, he never, all he ever said to us is, we work for him.  He wouldn't pay us and he'd take care of our bills.  We never worked in school either.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Hampton in terms of the academic scene.  I mean, what was Hampton like and who was some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: See, Hampton never gave a baccalaureate degree until 1927.  Hampton was organized and opened in 1868.  But, it opened as an agriculture, home economics, and trade school.  So, by the time I got there in 1931, it was still home economic, agriculture, and trades.  Business was just coming in.
Speaker 1: So, then they were calling it Hampton Institute, right?
Speaker 2: It was Hampton Institute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First, it was Hampton Normal [and Agricultural Institute] because everybody that went to Hampton got a two year certificate, which was alright to teach.  Then Hampton--then when the city [Hampton, Virginia] started certifying and requiring additional teaching courses, that's when they added, and made it a college.  And, Hampton Institute, when I was there, owned the high school that black children went to school-- went to--from Hampton.  The school--the teachers in George P. Phenix High School [Hampton, Virginia] was on the faculty of the School of Education at Hampton.  So, when you went--so you sat in my class discussing how you teach, then when I came to your class at Phenix to observe how you teach, you were teaching the way I had been taught you teach.  Then, when the next year, when I did my practice teaching and I came to you, when I wrote a lesson plan, I didn't have no problem because I had been taught to make it the way your were teaching it.  See, nowadays in the School of Education the students practice all over town and in the country.  And, very often you end up with a teacher who finished somewhere else.  And, they may be teaching a particular subject a different way.  And, that's confusing when the teacher from the college comes by to observe and they see you doing it the way the classroom teacher does it, but not the way they taught you to do it.  This is very confusing.
Story_ID: 187220
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers that you remember at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Keep in mind, also that because Hampton had this trade school, the students in the trade school had different teachers and a different schedule from those who were from the other side of the campus--
Speaker 1: In the Normal School [Hampton Normal Agricultural Institute, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: In academ--doing academics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the students in the trade schools, went to the trade school a quarter of nine and stayed 'til five o'clock.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in the trade school?
Speaker 2: I was in trade school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you were learning who to help your father [Royal Puryear], right?
Speaker 2: That's right; how to build, you see.  My brother Byron [Puryear] did the same thing.  My brother Cortez [Puryear] took painting, and when he got to the paint department--see, Cortez was working already beyond where Hampton was gonna teach him.  See, so he did a whole lot of side stuff.
Speaker 1: So, he's going there basically for certification, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  See, he went for credentials, you see.  It--I never--I only had four black teachers when I--after I finished high school [at Columbia Heights High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  'Cause Hampton's faculty was largely white, see.  I remember having Mr. Hayes [ph.], Mr. Coles [ph.], Mr. Loren [ph.], Dr. [Kenneth] Ken Clark [sic.], I don't--Sam [ph.], Sam.  I might've had five black teachers.  All the rest of 'em were white, you see.  'Cause Hampton had a lot of teachers who had retired in New England colleges and with their retirement pay, they came to Hampton [Virginia].  They worked and didn't take any pay at all; gave the money to the student scholarship fund.  That's why when my wife [Ruby Hamilton Puryear] died, I didn't have any problems setting up a scholarship fund in her name at Morehouse [Atlanta, Georgia] where she taught.  I looked up one year and Morehouse wasn't, wasn't making the awards.  I went down to see the president, he said, he didn't know they weren't making them.  Made it that year.  And, in the sixteen years the money was there, he made the award four times.  So, he took the money out and put it somewhere else.  Money's too hard--education is too expensive to have money laying around, you know, and not being used.
Story_ID: 187221
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you do when you graduated from high--Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?  Did you come back and work for your father [Royal Puryear]?
Speaker 2: When I finished Hampton in 1936, my brother Byron [Puryear], who had finished in '33 [1933] was teaching at Williston Industrial High School in Wilmington, North Carolina.  Byron came home that summer and Papa started Royal Puryear and Sons Builders.  And, we started the business in 1936 and did very well until World War Two [WWII] broke out, and Uncle Sam took all the lumber, all the paint.  We couldn't buy enough--by 1940, we couldn't buy enough lumber to do repair work.  'Cause Uncle Sam was buying it straight from the mill.
Speaker 1: The government took priority--
Speaker 2: Government took, yeah.
Speaker 1: On everything, yeah.  Right.
Speaker 2: And, the [R.J.] Reynolds [Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was making Camel Cigarettes to put in the serrations and the gyrations, see.  So, people who worked for Reynolds were working.  But, people who were in construction, trades, and what not, just had to give it up.  That's when I went back to Hampton to teach.  And, I was a different teacher from some of the teachers who had taught me because I was able to add that on-the-job experience for some of my teachers that never had, 'cause they had finished Hampton and start right working.  So, it was just routine and repetition of what they had been taught, you see.  But, the thing that schools cannot teach, it how to get up and get dressed; look the part.  See, teachers--classroom teachers wouldn't even deal with that.  That's the DMN's [ph.] job, see.  And, the DMN has no staff to go to the dormitory and check you out to see how you look before you go to class.  So, students go to class looking any, looking anyway they wanna look, you see.  Any kind of--they arrive late, you see.  It--see, added to a work--a work ethic is so important when you have a job.  'Cause, I knew you were due here at two o'clock, I was sitting in the chair ready quarter of two.  You notice, I didn't have on a tie.  I wanted to ask you, "Would this tie do alright?"  And, first thing you said, "Change your shirt."  I didn't question, I went in there took the shirt off, put on a blue one.  'Cause you said the blue comes out very well on the tele--for television, you put color, you see.  It--I would've been very disappointed if I had been in the bathroom when you got here.  When I knew three weeks ago that you were coming at two.  And the lady called last night to remind me.  So, I didn't have any (laughter), I didn't have any reason not to be ready, you see.  But, the changing I had to do might have been slowing it down 'cause we were looking at pictures, 'cause that was part of what we had to do also.
Speaker 1: Now, so you worked for your father for--
Speaker 2: And, they the way, after we, after he opened the business, from '36 [1936] to '39 [1939], he still didn't pay us.  'Cause he had never been in the habit of paying us.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have any spending money much, huh?  Or, you found that hard--
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't need any spending money, 'cause we could go to the men's store and buy all the clothes we wanted and charge it to him.  Byron and I were both married.  He ran the store, so all we do--when we built the house and got ready to do the mortgage; went to the building and loan and the man asked me, "What's your salary?"  I said, "Oh, Papa."  And the man--I said, "He asked me, what's my salary?"  Papa said, "What does he have to be making to make the mortgage payments?"  Man give him the figure; he said, "Put that down."  And, what my mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear] bought, that's what my wife [Ruby Hamilton Puryear] bought.
Story_ID: 187222
Speaker 1: Now, where did you meet your wife [Ruby Hamilton Puryear]?
Speaker 2: At Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't tell us that part now, you were shy when you got up there.
Speaker 2: She--I was a senior, and I played football.  I made a couple (unclear) when I was playing football.  I was secretary of the varsity club, and we had a dance after dinner, and before what happened in Ogden Hall [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] on Saturday night for the visiting dean.  For the first game, we invited senior women to be there, to be escorted to this dance by the visiting football players.  And, the coaches usually brought thirty-five guys.  So, we had to identify thirty-five senior women to be their date for that Saturday night.  And, we arranged for them to go to whatever happened in Ogden Hall at no cost.  I remember going to one of the dances, a girl asking me, "Don't you dance?"  And, I lied and said, "Yes."  And she said, "But I don't ever see you dancing on the floor."  I said, "Okay, I'll take you to the next dance."  I met her after dinner on Saturday night, escorted her to the museum where the dance was being held.  And, stopped at the door and said, "You wanna come to the dance, you're here, goodnight."  And, walked off.  I went down to my room, listening to the radio, and when I came back up to what was happening in Ogden Hall, it was a movie.  She was standing on Ogden Hall steps, and saw me coming and stood there until I got there and said, "I waited for you."  And, I said, "Go ahead and buy the tickets I'll meet you inside."  She went in there and bought herself a ticket go to--took her seat and left me standing outdoors.  And, I went and bought my own ticket and went to the movies.  And, a girl from Norfolk [Virginia] said to me a little later, "The reason I didn't dance is I didn't know how to dance."  She said, "I'll teach you to dance."  And, I said, "Okay, I'll come to the, the Christmas--no, the New Year's dance, for the students who did not go home, the school had a dance for them.  And, I was standing under the tree, under the light, wasn't thinking about any dance.  And, somebody tapped me on the shoulder, and it was Adeline Monroe [ph.] saying, "This is the New Year's night, and this is the night you promised to learn how to dance.  I dropped my head and went with her to the guy and we got there, everybody out on the floor dancing, I'm over on the side talking.  And, I didn't know where Adeline was.  And she was a good dancer.  At intermission time, she came over and said, "I know what you've been doing.  You've been trying to stay out of my way so you don't have to dance.  As, soon as intermission's over, we're going out there and dance."  And, she told me, you know, "You can march so you know how to keep time.  You just march to the music sideways and forward."  The students had never seen me on a dance floor.  So, I take Adeline and we go to the middle of the floor, into the crowd.  When the kids saw me, they all pulled away and left Adeline and me in the middle of the gym floor, and that's, and that's where I had to stay.  And, that's the first dancing I ever did in my life.
Story_ID: 187223
Speaker 1: Then, about two weeks later, in January I met this little girl [Ruby Hamilton Puryear] from Hackensack, New Jersey.  My roommate was telling her that I talked about her all the time.  I never said a word; didn't know who it was.  She was--he was telling me that she talked about me all the time and she wanted to meet me.  So finally one night, I told him that I would come by his table in the dining room and meet her.  The night I did it, she came by and said something to him but not to me.  So, after she left I went and caught her, and told her next time she come to the table to see my roommate, she should speak to me too.  And, I walked off.  My roommate went to the chapel, which we had after dinner, saw her crying and she told him what happened.  And, he told me that I should go to the library after chapel and apologize.  So, I went to the library--which she was on the honor roll, good student.  And, I took a piece of paper and wrote a letter, full page, apologizing.  She was an English major.  She took her pen, took me letter and made all the correction and sent it back to me.  I took another piece of paper, rewrote the letter.  I married that girl.  Only girl I ever had; only girl.  And, all these things I wrote in the Urban League, she looked at it before I turned them in, 'cause she was an English major.  She had ended up with a doctorate in psychology.  Did the study, wrote it up, and final form, and turn it in.  And, the committee called her and told her that's not the way you do it.  But, we scheduled a hearing and she went to that hearing.  And, the way you know you have a doctorate is they call you, "Mr. [Larry] Crowe," when the meeting starts.  And, if they vote yes, award the degree, they come back and next time they call you, "Dr. [Larry] Crowe," see.  I carried her to the hearing and left her there while I parked the car.  When I came back, she was back out in the hall and--I said, "What happened?"  She said, "They put me out."  And, about that time, the chairman came to the door and said, "Dr. Puryear we're ready for lunch."  And, those guys had a lunch all ready.  She was smart.  And,--
Speaker 2: When did she get her PhD?
Speaker 1: She had--at Columbia [University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: No.  I said, 'When', yeah, when was it?
Speaker 1: She got her bachelor's at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  A masters at Columbia, and a doctorate at Columbia.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, what year was that?
Speaker 1: She got the bachelor's in '42 [1942], the masters in '48 [1948], and the doctorate in '58 [1958] or '60 [1960] something 'round there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just wanted to know the date for that story.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was teaching at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] when she got the doctorate.  'Cause Dr. [Benjamin] Mays found the money for her to finish the doctorate, which she had started when we were working in Pine Bluff [Arkansas, at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff].  And, that's why I named this scholarship for her at Morehouse because he was very nice to the family.
Story_ID: 187224
Speaker 1: What, now, what happened during the war?  Now, World War Two [WWII]--
Speaker 2: See, I was teaching at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and Mr. Early [ph.] who was chairman of the draft board in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] had told Papa [Royal Puryear] the draft board were not gonna bother us four boys [Royal Wendell, Byron, Cortez and Mahlon Puryear].  Not gonna bother us.  My brother Royal [Wendell Puryear] became a minister and qualified for deferment because of the minister.  Cortez [Puryear] had flat feet and couldn't pass the physical, and Byron [Puryear] was building barracks and stuff for the defense department [United States Department of Defense] so they wasn't gonna bother him.  I was teaching at Hampton and Mr. Early told Papa that they cannot defer me for teaching.  I'll have to go to administration.  So, I left Hampton and went to Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] as director of the division of trades and industries.
Story_ID: 187225
Speaker 1: Were you conscripted into the [U.S.] Army at all?
Speaker 2: No.  What happened was, I went to Delaware State [University, Dover, Delaware] to be an administrator and I got deferred.  By the end of the school year, I was getting another call saying, "We cannot defer you for education anymore.  You got to go to industry."  So, I went to see a friend of mine I had met in 1940 at Mr. [Julius A.] Thomas' program with Sun Ship [Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock, Co., Chester, Pennsylvania], who was a personnel director for writing on an article called, 'Praising Paterson, New Jersey.'  And, he hired me as an employee counselor.  So, they deferred me for that.  Then after about eighteen months, they called me again and said, "No more deferment, you gotta go to production.  You got to get greasy.  You got to be on machines."  So, I took a job in production control, where I'm keeping timesheets.  And, when they found out what I was doing, they called me and said, "We give you thirty days to clean up your business."  Then I found out that the treasurer at Hampton [Institute, later, Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] when I was in school was in charge of American Red Cross activities in New York [New York].  And, I went to see Mr. [Robert O.] Purves and three days later I was with the American Red Cross.  Deferred from all Army activity and I ended up going to Okinawa with the rank of captain and I was there a little over a year.  And, by the time I got through, I was up to major and Red Cross gave an award.  With thirty clubs on the island, I had the only one staffed with blacks.  They gave an award for the club that was most outstanding.  And, on the scale of a hundred, I scored ninety-five and the nearest competitor was thirty-five.  They asked me to extend it two weeks so the others could catch up.  But, they didn't know I was gonna keep working on mine.  And, at the end of two weeks is was still 95/35.  My club was picked to--for General [President Dwight David 'Ike'] Eisenhower to visit to see what Red Cross was doing on Okinawa.  He came, supposed to be there five minutes and was there over an hour.  And, when I got ready to come home, Mildred Corey who was director [sic. supervisor] of club [and recreation] operations, call me to her office and told me she was going home and asked me if I knew who was gonna secede her and I said, "No.  I don't know."  She said, well my recommendation is you, but Red Cross isn't ready for a black director."  And, they picked a guy named Jones [ph.], who was white, and sent him to me for training.  And, I trained him just like it, just like he was getting a Ph.D.  And, I came home and went to Arkansas [University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] as dean of the division of mechanic arts.
Speaker 1: At the University of Arkansas, Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: See, when I got to Red Cross, I took my industrial arts, my construction, my architecture, my painting, all that stuff put together; the football, the basketball, track, and presented myself as an recreation worker.  And, I--and when I got to Okinawa, they told me there's the club.  And, it was a bunch of Quonset huts stacked up on the ground, and I had to supervise construction, which I did.  I had the only club on the island that required first class uniforms.  All the other clubs, you could come in any way you looked.  But, I used first class uniforms to control the crowd, you see.  Anybody that wants to come in Club Naha, go home and take a bath and come down with a clean shirt.  And, I had six women.  And, those guys would go home would bathe and shave to get to spend some time with those girls, see.  It was a nice experience.  I've had two jobs in my life that I had so much money to run the program, I couldn't spend it.  One was, the Red Cross job in Okinawa and the other was the Tuskegee-Indonesia program [Tuskegee Institute's Technical Education Program in Indonesia] after I got back.  I spent money for everything I could spend it for, but I couldn't spend it as fast as it became available.  Because, they really funded the program very well.
Story_ID: 187226
Speaker 1: They funded the Tuskegee [Institute, later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] [Technical Education] program [in Indonesia] just like they did the University of Oregon [Eugene, Oregon], you see; salaries and everything (laughter).  So, I didn't have any problem with amount, and I bought everything I could get my hands on.  It was just so much money, couldn't do--we had a program in Indonesia--the people I hired, couldn't speak Indonesian at all.  They taught Indonesians, speaking English, and Indonesians didn't know anything they were saying and they had counterparts who as the teacher said it in English, the counterpart would say it in Indonesian and the classes went like that.  It's amazing what you can do if you have people who want to learn, you see.  Because we were teaching the people who were gonna take the Indonesian schools over, because it was during that time Jakarta in Indonesia was getting away from China and Japan, and all that stuff, see.
Speaker 2: About what time was this you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so you--
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is the '50s [1950s, sic. 1957].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause I was at Tuskegee, Indonesia about an hour.  I never got to Indonesia.  I did it all from Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you never actually went to Indonesia?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was supposed to go, but the Dutch starting fighting.  See, and the [U.S.] State Department wouldn't let me go.
Story_ID: 187227
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get involved with the Urban League?
Speaker 2: In 1940 when Julius [A.] Thomas came to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], he came to meet with the Committee on Fair Employment [sic. Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC)].  The president of Hampton [Malcom MacLean] was the chairman of the committee.  [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt, President, signed the order setting up the committee, but [U.S.] Congress wouldn't give them any money; like a hundred thousand dollars, that's no money.  So, all the meetings of the committee were held at Hampton, where Dr. [Malcom] MacLean was, you see.  And, I happened to have arrived at Hampton to teach at the same time the committee was in session.  'Cause I taught on the night program, and these meetings were during the day.  Julius Thomas, who represented the [National] Urban League [New York, New York], I did not know at that time that Julius Thomas' mother and my grandmother was sisters.  I didn't find out 'til eighteen years later, eighteen years later.  I happened to be in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and my grandmother's brother Bob--Cortez [Puryear] carried me by, and he said "How's your cousin Julius?"  I said, "I don't have a cousin Julius."  He said, "Don't you know Julius Thomas at the Urban League?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well, he's my sister's son."  That's how I found out.  I was working for the man all those years.  In 1949, Julius Thomas got some corporations to come to, to meet at Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to talk about the automated programs that were coming.  It was also computer work.  And, they were meeting at Tuskegee to get Foster [Dr. Luther Foster, Jr] the president, to let these corporations put up the money to set up a training program so the kids could take the program and go to work.  The mistake was made in calling it maintenance because as soon as you said, maintenance, to black students, you're talking about mopping and sweeping.  And, the students wouldn't come to the sessions.  If they came to the sessions, wasn't answering the question.  They don't need to come to a meeting this much for a mop job.  They were at Tuskegee to learn how to do better than that.  After about a day and a half, I realized what had happened, and I got with Mr. Thomas and some of the corporate folk, and said, "We got to change the name."  And, we called it, 'Industrial Technology.'  And, boy the students came out of the wall.  Because that was a new name, and they found out that all these tools, and the processes and corporations were having that requires automated equipment wasn't any good unless there was somebody on the scene to keep it working.  And, this was the program they wanted to set up at Tuskegee, see.  And, Mr. Thomas, for some reason liked the way I operated it, and his mind went back to 1940.  Then to 1950.  And, I looked up and they had gotten a grant at the National Urban League to run career conferences in selected black colleges.  And, he told Ms. [Ann] Tannehill, who was running the program to get in touch with me.  And, that's how I got on the staff of the Urban League.  See, I had spent sixteen, seventeen years as a volunteer with the--with Mr. Thomas and with the Englewood, New Jersey Urban League [Urban League of Bergen County, Englewood, New Jersey].  And, now I'm on the national staff, and I took off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what year was that when you--
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Story_ID: 187228
Speaker 1: And by the time, I retired, I had held twenty-five different titles at the National Urban League [New York, New York].  Five titles, they created for me to handle an assignment.  And, when the assignment was finished, they never used the title since.  Five times they did that.  I'm the only vocational guidance secretary the Urban League ever had.  I'm the only program director the Urban League ever had.  I'm the only managing director the Urban League ever had.  I'm the only deputy exec--deputy director the Urban League ever had.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were deputy director, the director was--
Speaker 1: Well, see that title was deputy--see they created the title deputy.  But, nobody would deal with me--and I was supposed to be in charge when Whitney [Young] was away.  Nobody would deal with me while he was away, 'cause when they would come to me and say, "I wanna make a trip."  I'd ask, "How much--is there enough in the budge to cover it?"  Then meet Whitney on the elevator and say, "I got a call from Denver [Urban League of Metropolitan Denver, Denver, Colorado], they want me to come and deal with a problem they have."  Whitney said, "When you leaving?"  So, they wanna deal with Whitney.  Then Whitney looked up one day and found out, it didn't make a difference whether he was there or away.  When he got back, his office was full of people who's supposed to be dealing with me.  That's when they changed the title from, deputy director to deputy executive director, with full responsibility for the administration of the agency (unclear).  The guys, you see, they couldn't invite me across the street to the cocktail bar and give me two or three drinks of liquor and get a yes on a trip they weren't supposed to make, you see.  If the Super Bowl was in LA [Los Angeles, California], somebody always had to make trip to LA, and get out there and couldn't even get in the game; look at the game on TV in a hotel room.  I say, "Well, I know you can't get into see it 'cause the game sold out."  I say, "Well, you're trying to fool me, get out to LA to see the football game."  Just be honest and say--and Ron Brown [Ronald Harmon Brown], you know, the [United States] secretary of commerce was my deputy.  And, he kept this big floor chart of who was where.  If you were in Portland [Oregon] and somebody in Denver [Colorado] said, "We need you," Ron would look on the wall and see that you were in Portland and instead of sending anybody from New York [New York] to Denver we'd ask you stop off in Denver on the way back home.  We got that thing organized.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because that's what the board said they wanted.  Travel was getting all out of hand.  Department heads sending people on staff and nobody looking at the budget, see.  And, when I took over, we sat down and worked out a budget.  And, if you wanted something that wasn't in that budget, we had to sit down--if you needed a typewriter, get it in the summer, don't wait for March.  'Cause when things got tight, we cut that typewriter.  But, if you bought over in July and August, you'd have it, you see.  So, you--some of those pamphlets they asked me to do on guidelines, I--my name is signed to the one on indirect costs.
Speaker 2: What was Whitney Young like?  You were a close associate of Whitney Young.
Speaker 1: You see, Mr. Young was a social worker.  But, by the time Whitney became head of the [National] Urban League [New York, New York], the head of the Urban League spent his time raising money, and around the country making speeches.  While he was away, somebody had to be in New York keeping in touch with things, you see.  And, somebody had to--even when we did proposals for foundations and the government, Enid [C. Baird] could sign Whitney's name look--you--there's no way you could tell whether he signed it or she signed it.  But, see the staff who were working on these proposals and things were under me.  And, when we got, we got it all finished--you did that or I did it--when we got it all finished, it's time to go to Washington [D.C.], and he just sign it and go.  Whitney come back, we'd tell him what we did, see.  He didn't, he didn't know how to say no.  He liked to say yes.  And, they knew I didn't mind saying no.  They could've got somebody else run it, they could've picked to be the deputy, but they knew I was gonna be there 'cause I hated to travel.  And, that suited them just fine, see.  It's like throwing a rabbit in the briar patch, when then that means you don't travel.
Story_ID: 187229
Speaker 1: Sir, if you could just explain to people how the Urban League functions and what its, what its mission is.  I know there's a lot of research that goes in--that's involved in the Urban League and a lot of counseling with employees and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: See, I have a piece over there called 'What Every American Wants.'  And, it's a map of the United States and it says in the middle of that map, 'Economic Security.'  Economic security is having a job, which you cannot get unless you have education that prepares you for the job.  You can't get the education unless you live somewhere, the schools are good, so they can offer the kind of program you need, to get the preparation you need to get the job.  You can't live in the neighborhood that you had a house which you cannot buy if you don't have a job (laughter).  So, the Urban League was in the business of helping the school people find out what jobs were down--coming down the road.  The Urban League was in the business was working with agencies and government to make sure people with good jobs could not be turned down by the lending agencies no matter what the job was.  We worked with schools to be sure what they offered was in line with what employers were looking for, you see.  So, you had the combination of being in business to help with economic security, which is a good job, a good education, good housing, and adequate medical and health resources to keep you healthy enough to hold a job.  We had sixty Urban Leagues in 1960.  All Urban Leagues did not do the same thing.
Speaker 1: These are branches, correct?
Speaker 2: Some Urban Leagues had no job program like my--like Atlanta [Urban League of Grater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  Some Urban Leagues had no school related program like Atlanta.  They had a housing program where the housing people actually went out and found tracks of land on which housing--houses could be built.  In New York [National Urban League, New York, New York], Reginald Johnson wouldn't dare go out and find a track of land.  'Cause he believed the way to get the housing was to change the rules to make resources, money available for people to want to buy, see.  So, the committee added discrimination against, against discrimination housing, Reggie [Reginald Johnson] worked very closely with them.  But, Bob Thompson [Robert A. Thompson] down in Atlanta [Georgia] couldn't pay--didn't worried about whether black folk or white folk, if it turned out all black, all white, that was alright with Bob [Robert A. Thompson], folk got housing, you see.  'Cause he had to operate under the rules of Georgia, and Reggie operating under the rules of New York, you see.  In another place, like Memphis [Memphis Urban League, Memphis, Tennessee], [Reverend James A.] McDaniel had a big program of working with the schools on career choices and career development.  And, he had--he knew so much about what the industries were hiring for that he would separate the jobs that required high school, these area trade schools and what not, and college, and grad school.  And, I used to go out to Memphis [Tennessee] and stay a week or two, going from one school to the other talking about careers, because they knew I could do that.
Story_ID: 187230
Speaker 1: Even--
Speaker 2: There was a story in that regard that we heard when we interviewed [HM] Ed Dwight who was the first black astronaut, chosen to be an astronaut.  And, the story that Ed tells is that, the [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy administration held a meeting in which Whitney Young attended to discuss jobs for black people.  And, the Kennedy Administration would be moaning the fact that there weren't enough--
Speaker 1: You see--
Speaker 2: --jobs and Whitney Young supposedly said, "Why don't--why doesn't the federal government open up some jobs within, you know, certain categories that are all white?"  And, they said, "Well, give us an example."  And, he said, "Well, how about the astronaut jobs (laughter).  Why can't we have a black one?"  And, do you know anything about that story, at all?
Speaker 1: Now see, Julius [A.] Thomas in the '40s [1940s], set up a program he called, 'pilot placement.'  And, he would go to a company that had never hired anybody black for anything, and talk them into hiring.  In one place it could be a secretary.  In another place, it could be a chemist, another place it could be an assembler.  It's based on what was available in that town, see.  Detroit [Urban League of Detroit and Southeastern Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] had a terrific program in industrial relations and employment because they had General Motors, Ford, Chrysler, and Studebaker.  A lot of places you could go, you see.  And, when people coming into Detroit [Michigan] looking for jobs, the Urban League was ready to go.  The federal government and the state government were the last ones to take a position on employment because the employment service and the [United States] Department of Labor got a black office and a white office.   They were in no position to say, integrate, when they wasn't even integrated themselves, you see.  So, you had to do a whole lot of work.  And in Atlanta [Georgia], the [Georgia] state employment service moved the employment service in the capitol building.  And, actually built a wall between the white office and the black office.  And, the federal government finally came down to Atlanta and told 'em they had to put a door in the wall because the, the man who was in charge of the employment service had his office in the white side.  He couldn't even go over to the black office without going outdoors.  So, at least the door gave 'em access inside.  Crazy stuff, crazy.  Absolutely crazy.  The Urban League had what they called an Equal Opportunity Dinner.  And, I went to [Georgia] Governor [Marvin] Griffin in Atlanta and asked him to sign the proclamation declaring the November 19 as equal opportunity day.  He said, "I'll sign it, but I want you to understand, I'm talking about equal opportunity for white people, equal opportunity for black people (laughter)."  And, he didn't mind saying it.  'Cause this was those days of Lester Maddox and all those folks, see.  And, you had to deal with what you had, you see.  But, when I went to see him, the attorney general carried me to his office, and he told the general, told the general to close the door.  He said, "I'ma sign it."  I believe in equal opportunity.  I believe in equal opportunity for white people, equal opportunity for black (laughter)."  Clear as that, and didn't crack a smile.  All I wanted was the proclamation signed.  And, we could input any interpretation on it we needed to get our jobs done, you see.  As I stayed at the Urban League, I became a troubleshooter.  If a League was having problems--see, I had been in the national office, see I had worked in a local office, a regional office, and the national office.  Nobody else had done that.  So, when I showed up in town "A," see I didn't tell 'em what it said on page six in the textbook.  I told him how we resolved that problem in a town about the same size, about the same makeup of the population, you see.  And, very often the problems were that the board people who's supposed to provide leadership, were just leaving it to the executives, you see.  When you cannot get the Urban League job done unless you can find a way to involve the volunteers, the staff, and the money folk.
Story_ID: 187231
Speaker 1: You were discussing the strategy of the Urban League and--
Speaker 2: See the strategy, number one, in a union, UAW [United Auto Workers Union], when the contracts are ready to run out, the union makes a study of Ford, Chrysler, General Motors, and whoever else is out there.  The one with backorders, the one with no warehouse and no cars in the warehouse, that's the one they're gonna strike.  They not gonna strike a guy that's got plenty cars in the warehouse, 'cause he'd welcome a strike to clean out the warehouse.  But, the Urban League had to find out, we didn't have the man power to take on five companies.  We had to take the one that's most vulnerable (laughter), you see, and go with that one.  And, find somebody on the board that we could work through.  James Hanes, who was president of Hanes hosiery [HanesBrands, Inc.] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] was on the commerce industry counsel of the Urban League.  He didn't have a black worker doing anything other than driving a truck, and loading trucks.  But, when he came to the meeting, we didn't jump on him about hiring practices, you see.  We work on him and before Mr. Hanes left the counsel, he was running a training program (laughter) to introduce women to the jobs.  See, you don't, you don't come in swinging.  See, CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], they were the picketers, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would wanna take you to court.  Students brings manpower.  But, the Urban League was where you came if you were looking for a job, you see.
Speaker 1: Well, the Urban League did the negotiations, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You see--
Speaker 1: I mean, the pressure might come from the outside--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --but, the Urban League would do the negotiating--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. See, we tried to get on local boards, the movers and shakers.  'Cause in the Urban League, like Tampa [Tampa-Hillsborough Urban League, Tampa, Florida] had thirty-nine members, half black--nineteen black and twenty whites.  And, all the black work at the school system.  And, the assistant superintendent of schools was on the board and he was white.  So, all nineteen just kept quiet 'til the assistant superintendent spoke.  That's a sorry board.  My job is to go down and have different representation.  See, you need a preacher with a big church.  You need a lawyer.  You need a couple business men.  You need a couple of housewives, 'cause you need that mix, you see.  'Cause those housewives can't raise a dime.  'Cause when you getting ready to raise money, you get somebody in a corporation and the chairman who can pick up the phone and call another chairman and say, "I helped you two years ago, I need you now."  That's the way to raise money, you see.  That's the way you raise money.  The preacher, he can't raise no money.  'Cause every dime he gets, he puts in the church, you see.  But, he's got people who looking for jobs who got mortgages to pay, you see.  So, your board is made up of all these different groups for different reasons, you see.
Story_ID: 187232
Speaker 1: Now, everywhere there's an operation, an Urban League in prog--in place, they're a member of the United Way [of America, later, United Way Worldwide].  San Diego [Urban League of San Diego County, San Diego, California] and the Charlotte Urban League [Urban League of Central Carolinas, Charlotte, North Carolina] are the only two Urban Leagues I've organized that opened with every dime they needed for the first two years of operation.  I had a quarter million dollars in CDs [Certificate of Deposit] when I opened the Charlotte Urban League.  And, had a letter from the United Way saying that they would pick up the entire budget for the third year.  So, I never had a dinner (laughter).  I never had a fundraising campaign; didn't need to.  Because I had representatives of every business in that town on the sponsor committee and on the board.  And, all those guys have direct lines to United Way.  See, a corporation is happy to give the money to United Way 'cause they only had to do it one time.  But see, when you have to come--you from the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and here somebody else from the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], it gets--it's watered down.  And, when I put that book together saying that you could not have an Urban League unless you had the first two years of money in the bank and the commitment from United Way.  That did not stop a town from raising thirty thousand of its own then some additional money.  But, Charlotte [North Carolina] and San Diego [California] are the only two towns where every dime--when the Charlotte Urban League board met, the president--the chairman of the board said to me, "We don't need to meet every month.  The board meet every other month and executive meet every month."  And, he was the executive vice president of First Union Bank, and said, "We'll have the executive committee meetings in my office and we'll serve lunch."  So, and the meetings were one hour long brother.  'Cause the agenda was ready and we only dealt with what's on the agenda, you see.  There is no one--Los Angeles [California] is not San Diego.  San Diego is not San Francisco [California].  Winston-Salem [North Carolina] is not Norfolk [Virginia].  Every Urban League is tailored to meet the needs of its clientele in whatever town it is.  And, you go the one town--[HM James W. Compton] Jim Compton makes a big deal out of raising money with those dinners he had.  [HM] John [W.] Mack does the same thing in LA [Los Angeles, California].  But, Rochester [Urban League of Rochester, Rochester, New York] gets every penny of its budget from United Way.  They don't raise a dime in Rochester.  I ran that League one summer.  If the executive of the Rochester Urban League has a dinner--a luncheon to talk to someone about program and has four dollars left over, he has to let the United Way know he had the four dollars.  And, the next month when his check comes, its four dollars short (laughter).  'Cause he supposed to run that League on the budget that they submitted.  [William A.] Bill Johnson [Jr.], who was head of the Urban League, ran for mayor with five people running against him and got 73 percent of the vote.  He was very popular, very popular.  And, Rochester [New York] had a good Urban League.  In Rochester, it's the only Urban League in the country that does not serve black folk.  The Rochester Urban League is the family service agency of the United Way.  And, anybody who needs help as a family goes to the Urban League, black or white.  When people want jobs in schools and employment, that's somebody else.  The Urban League doesn't do it.  So, there is no Urban League, per se, you see.
Speaker 2: There's not one--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --description (unclear)--
Speaker 1: There's no.  No.  Leagues do what they--what the studies say the problems are.  And, the problems are gonna be in housing, education, jobs, health and welfare and sometimes voter registration, stuff like that.  But, you have to be very careful when you get out there in voter registration, not to get political.  'Cause the Urban League have a 501(c)(3) tax exemption.  And, you're not supposed to get into lobbying and stuff like that, see.  But, at one time it was the only one of the Civil Rights groups with a 501(c)(3).  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] organized a legal defense fund, which was a separate entity from NAACP and it was tax exempt.  But, they had to be very careful on how they took cases and what they were doing, see.  So, it's almost an education.  I'd be a pretty good teacher in the school of social work now.  Yeah, I'd be a pretty good teacher--
Story_ID: 187233
Speaker 1: In fact, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: It's a very interesting question.  See, if you listen to what I said just now, you can't say to black people, be homeowners, if they got no jobs.  You can't say to black people, get the training, and you look around and they're no training opportunities where the jobs are, you see.  You're almost saying to the black community, you don't have to close the black church and get white folks to come so it's integrated just for the sake of integration.  Black churches represent a tremendous amount of ownership for blacks.  They're not gonna give it up.  They not gonna give it up.  Because we let people from Greece call themselves Greek-American.  We let people from Italy call themselves Italian-Americans.  We Russian be Russian-American.  What's wrong with black folk (laughter) owning a piece too and having an identity?  Because sometime you been--see you been asking me questions all night about the back, back here.  I happened to come from a family that didn't spend a whole lot of time worrying about what great-grandpa did during slavery.  My family was trying to educate us for today.  Every one of us was a homeowner.  I'm in this place now 'cause it got no steps.  'Cause I don't go upstairs to Mr. Smith.  I take a piece of mental or something and beat on the steps and he comes out and see what, what the problem or I'll phone him and he comes.  I can call him right now and say, "I baked a cake, come get it" and he'd be at that door before I can get away from the phone, you see; neighbor.  There's no record of when we were integrated in the schools.  Where the superintendent of schools called all the principals together and said, we're gonna integrate these schools.  And, you the principals and you're the ones I'm expecting to make it work.  Find out who it is on your faculty that can't deal with this and we'll put 'em somewhere else, 'cause they not gonna mess up the program.  The University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] had Hamilton Holmes and [HM] Charlayne Hunter [-Gault] applying.  The University found some white girls who went to court and said if they accepted the black board, they'd be scared to walk across campus.  The president of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, formerly Georgia School of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] read what they did down there to keep black folk out, and he called it administrative account--administrative council.  And said, "We have accepted six.  And, they're gonna be Georgia Tech students.  I want them to be just like any other stu--and if you can't deal with it, let me know.  We'll have a meeting in my office and we'll move this thing along."  You had no difficulty at Georgia Tech, you see.  Baltimore [Maryland], when you wonder up that hill, there's a Jewish school right out here; Catholic school at the foot of the hill.  Just added wings to both of them.  How many black kids you gonna see in the Jewish School?  Not many, 'cause they teaching Hebrew.  Look at a basketball game, cheerleaders out on the floor just hopping and dancing and soon the games are over they were hugging the basketball players.  But, the camera goes over here 'cause they not ready to show that, you see.  My older granddaughter is married to a boy born in Bombay, India.  His sister just married an American.  Jennifer [ph.] is married, with the two babies, her husband's white.
Story_ID: 187234
Speaker 1: It isn't gonna work unless we can figure a way to cut out these barriers that come up. It's not color.  White people go to the beach to get this color.  But, when the summer's over, they lose it.  I have it all year long, can't lose it.  But, when people deal with me, they have to stop looking at color, but look at what it is I'm trying to do.  And, they'll soon find out that what helps the little fellow, helps him.  'Cause he's still the owner; he's still the boss, you see.  And, whatever that worker puts together, he gets the profit.  The worker gets the job.  Takes the money, buys a house in a neighborhood where the schools are good.  So, he don't have to bus his children all over the place.  There's a park and a playground.  My great-grandchildren, (unclear)--two years old, got in the jeep the other day and said, "Swimming pool," not quite two, "swimming pool," 'cause that's where he usually gets in the jeep to go.  Because that's where his daddy takes him.  I grew up in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] never put my, never put my foot in a cement pool 'til 1978.  'Cause we didn't have any pools, you see.  If anybody tries to give you a one, two, three solution, you could look at him and you could say, he's either reading what somebody--he's telling you what he read somewhere.  He's not telling you what he's dealing with because it is not that simple.  You cannot talk housing unless jobs and resources are available.  You cannot talk education, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is thirty-five thousand dollars a year.  A man who works at minimum wage can't send his boy to Harvard, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], 'cause he can't pay for it.  But, my daughter finished Yale, husband finished Yale, daughter finished Yale because they have the resources to do it, you see.  I'm an integrationist because I think we have to find a way to do it together.  We have to find a way to do it together.  See, he's [Scott Sterns, videographer] white, you're [Larry Crowe, interviewer] black; working together getting this job done.  He came in to set it up.  You and I were over there talking.  He knows his job.  You know yours.  That's what I'm talking about.
Story_ID: 187235
Speaker 1: Sir, at this juncture what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think it would change if it go from one town to another.  Because if people at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], where I have gone every year since 1988, I've given them a week of my time and they have never had to reimbursement for air travel.  They've never had to reimburse me for car rental.  They never had to pay me a fee.  That's the legacy.  And, I have picked up the phone and called the dean of the school of medicine at Wake Forest [University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and said, "I want you to take a good look at these two children."  I see something in them that makes them the kind of doctor I would want if I got sick.  And, the only reason Dr. [Bill] Applegate didn't take them, the scores they made on that medical aptitude test, were just too far from what's real, see.  So, it isn't a questions whether a black can get into medical school.  That black kid has got to be in the school that prepares him to get in.  Not just give him chemistry and biology, but look at all the requirements, you see.  And, if testing is a requirement, it's almost inhuman to make him stay four years and not get in, when you know in front what it takes, you see.  But, if the chemistry teacher is talking about elements and atoms and what not, and not talking about how you use them in the med school.  Those two boys who was separated the other day, joined at the head, the doctor said, they couldn't have done it six years ago.  'Cause the equipment they used to trace the nerves and blood vessels and what not, wasn't available.  So, you're not just talking about pushing pills.  I swim with a hand--with a finger doctor.  "This is the hand," he says, "I'm a finger doctor."  The man who removed the cataract, he's an eye doctor.  He's a medical doctor, but he's an eye man, that's all he does.  And when I go, he doesn't ask me about my hands.  He looks in my eye (laughter), he's an eye doctor.  The man who replace the hip, doesn't even replace knees.  He's a hip surgeon.  That's how special it is, you see.  I want that chemistry teacher to talk about medical school; talk chemical research.  All these drugs and stuff that are being made, how you--not H;2SO;4 Sulfuric Acid, but how you find a cure for the common cold, for AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome], for cancer, and you're not gonna get it from a guy who's teaching chemistry.  You're gonna get it from somebody--a Dan Carson [ph.], or a [HM Dr.] Levi Watkins.  Levi Watkins finished Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and went to Vanderbilt [University, Nashville Tennessee].  And, George Rogers [sic, Richard Ross] had hired him and brought him to med [medical] school, the Ku Klux Klan burned crosses on Rogers' yard the whole time Watkins was in school at Vanderbilt.  And, when Rogers was named dean of the John Hopkins School of Medicine, he brought Levi up here on the staff and he's the associate dean of the School of Medicine [Baltimore, Maryland].  He's the one who replaced the heart valve.  I'm saying, when I talk to sixth grade students, I don't talk about heart valves and what not.  I talk about writing.  I talk about reading.  I talk about speaking, you see.  'Cause those are basic.  Any decent job in the world--I see you taking notes.  Any, job in the world worth its salt, is gonna require you to write (laughter) and read it later, and put it with something to make sense, you see.  So, you asking a sixth and seventh grade kid, deal with the basics, deal with the basics, and we'll add these other things.  When Valerie [ph.] told me Sunday, I can draw a rectangle Papa.  And, her mo--grandma said, "What's a rectangle?"  She said, "It's got four sides, two long ones and two short ones."  She said, "I can draw a square, too.  All the sides are gonna be the same."  Then she drew, then she drew a triangle; four years old.  She doesn't need a teacher.
Story_ID: 187236
Speaker 1: Sir, is there anything that you would do differently when you look back on your life?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, I don't know how to do it.  You see, when they picked the executive of the National Urban League [New York, New York], they never asked me if I wanted the job.  When I look at what the executive does, I'm not gonna do some of the things they do to get the job, you see.  I'm a family man.  I told you my granddaughter was here this morning.  I talked to my daughter this morning, you see.  Going to spend Thanksgiving with the other daughter.  I'm a family man.  I ain't gonna change that.  I would do--I wouldn't change that.
Speaker 1: So, there's a trade-off for certain things, I guess? (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I'm not gonna pick up smoking.  I'm not gonna pick up drinking.  No gonna pick up going out with Suzie-Q to get a job.  'Cause I'm going home, when my wife [Ruby Hamilton Puryear] was alive, I go home to her.  Told you my wife had a doctorate.  That's as much education you can get.  Pretty little girl.  You saw a picture over there.  See, she wasn't no big fat girl, half big as that wall, you know, I'm scared to show anybody; real proud of her, you see.  I wouldn't change that.  There are times when I might like to have tried it.  I could've raised the money.  I did raise money.  I did raise money.  But, I told you I baked a cake and I got ice cream in there.  We can have cake and ice cream, in my house, sitting at my table.  I do that.  If you said, "Come on let's down to the bar and get a drink."  I'd say, "I'm not going."  Not because I don't wanna let you drink.  I just don't do it, you see.  I've had a good time.  I told you I'll be eighty-nine next month, in January.
Story_ID: 187237
Speaker 1: Sir, now this is like legacy but not quite the same thing, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's a problem too.  See, because I think the colleges that I have given my time and have taken no money, somebody in these schools, somebody, I don't know who it is will remember I came along.  And, they'll remember that I did not do like that.  Sam Proctor [Dr. Samuel DeWitt Proctor] told me when he read that report of what I was doing, he said, "When I go, they'd find the money and they'd pay me."  I said, "Sam, that's your agenda, not mine."  The college--see, I don't go to state schools.  'Cause states have money and they waste it.  I go to the small private schools that can't afford to pay me, you see.  'Cause if they pay me, they're waste five hundred dollars a day, they don't have it, you see.  I go in on Saturday and teach twenty to thirty-five classes during the week.  When I'm in the physics class, I'm a physicist; in the chemistry class, I'm a chemist; biology, I'm a biologist; accounting, I'm an accountant.  I can do that.  Not teach the content, but tell you how you could use that background to get a job in that field, you see.  So, I know the kids who get the Ruby Puryear Scholarship at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] where I have it now.  One of the guys is a manager of a Walmart store in Georgia.  One is in med [medical] school at the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi School of Medicine, Jackson, Mississippi].  The girl that's teaching in--one is a principal of a school in Georgia.  This is leadership for tomorrow.  That's all the--what it is; staying in school.  And, the award only goes to a senior, 'cause that thousand dollars he gets, keeps him from working.  He can go to the library, you see.  He can go to class.  And, when I go to these campuses--down at Paine College [Augusta, Georgia], I'm on record as saying that, the science majors all look like chemist at least one day a week.  And, you go to Paine College Thursday, science day, every science major got a long white coat; like you see in the hospital, you see.  That's the kind of stuff I wanna be remembered for, see.
Story_ID: 187238
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: The lady at the top is my mother [Beatrice Sharpe Puryear].  And, this picture was made in 1911 when she got married to my father [Royal Puryear].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And what is her name, again?
Speaker 1: The one on the bottom is my father and his picture was made at the same time.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us her name and his name?  This for the sake of the (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Beatrice Sharpe, and my father's name was Royal Puryear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now, this is my grandmother [Josephine Mason Sharpe].  My mothers' mother, and I don't know when that picture was made.  It looks like it was made before 1900.  And, the--that's my mother on the bottom in later years in the '20s [1920s], during the 1920s.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead and describe this one.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I'm on the left, and my brother Royal [Wendell Puryear]'s wife Bright [ph.], and my wife Ruby [Hamilton Puryear], and my brother Royal.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and when was this taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, was there a particular occasion for this photo.
Speaker 1: It was in a career conference at Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in Winston-Salem.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.  Alright.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brother Royal and me with my two daughters.  My younger daughter Katherine [Puryear] is in front of him, and my daughter Ruby [Puryear], the older daughter is in front of me, in the lower picture.  That picture was made when they were about three or, three or four years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, you are the man with the tie, correct?  The man wearing the tie is yourself?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: And that is a picture of me when I was eleven months old.  Taken in 1915.  And that picture was submitted and I won a diamond ring as being the healthiest baby in North Carolina--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: From a photograph (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I lost the diamond ring; don't ever remember having it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And, this photo?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in my American Red Cross uniform as I left the country for Okinawa in 1945, 1944.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife and me taken at AM & N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College, later University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff] in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, Christmas 1945.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This picture was made at a football game at Am & N College.  And, you can tell looking at me that I was a heavy boy, 'cause I was weighing 265 at that time.
Speaker 1: Is that you with the coat?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  In the hat.
Speaker 1: With the hat.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Are there--should we--are there any other people that you would want to identify?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Thompson [ph.] who's sitting to my left--to my right in the picture was a young man I played football with at Hampton [Institute, later Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This is a photo (laughter) of my brothers and sisters.  That looks like it was made about early '20s [1920s], and I'm at the top of the row on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the--of my parents children that was taken when Papa died in 1962.  The only people living who appear in that picture, is my two sisters and me; everybody else is gone.  And, that picture was made in front of our house on 25th Street [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good, next.
Speaker 2: This picture was made at the same time, in 1962, but it's an extended family.  It has a lot of cousins on it.  Aunt Sissy [ph.] who's third from the left on the front row was about one hundred when that picture was made.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This picture (laughter), this picture was made--Sister [Beatrice Josephine Puryear] on the right (laughter) in the small chair.  Looks like she was about five years old.  But, beginning on the left is my brother Cortez [Puryear], my brother Byron [Puryear], oldest brother Royal [Puryear], then me with my head leaning, and that's our first cousin standing in the back.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was made at Florida Memorial College [later, University, Miami Gardens, Florida] in Saint Augustine, Florida, when we were on a summer trip.  My oldest brother [Royal Wendell Puryear] is on the left, my wife is next to him.  Then my older daughter, Ruby, and Katherine the younger daughter.  Next to her my brother Royal and his wife in back. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife and me the night we got married on June 24, 1939, at Varick Memorial A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion Church in Hackensack, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: This was a picture was made in my brother's school after he moved down to Miami from Saint Augustine.  I was on program to speak that night.  He retired as president of Florida Memorial, and the administration building has been named for him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Did we get a date for this?
Speaker 1: A date for that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know but it had to be in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good enough.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture that was made in the early days (laughter) back in the '40s [1940s], 'cause I have a head full of hair.  My best estimate on that is the '40s [1940s].  It might be picture I gave my wife when we were, when we were in school.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was made at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] the day they--I received an honorary doctorate degree from Miles College.  The president of Miles is second from the left.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And you're on the right?
Speaker 1: And, I'm on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was made in 19--in the spring of 1936, when I was a senior at Hampton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in 1964 when my wife and I were on a trip to Europe when we were celebrating our 25th wedding anniversary.  The leaning tower--it was taken at the leaning tower of Pisa [Italy].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, I mean, go ahead with this one.
Speaker 2: This picture was made at the Urban League Conference.  I'm not sure the year, but the person on the picture with me is Jim Queen [ph.], who was dead less than ninety days after that picture was made.  He was one of the early sales representatives hired by Exxon [Mobil Corporation].  They owned nothing but oil.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That was 1965.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. Go ahead.  Tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to place that one.  (Simultaneously) do I say on the back who it is?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That must been when I was making a commencement speech at Miles.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.  Do you remember much about this one?
Speaker 2: This one?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, it looks like commencement speech, 'cause I'm standing up there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Senator Brooke [HM the Honorable Edward Brooke] from Massachusetts, James Linden [ph.] from Time Incorporated and me.  And, that picture was made, I believe at an Urban League dinner 'cause everybody's in tuxedo.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And what--approximately what time frame?
Speaker 2: It's in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is a picture taken at the Urban League Conference.  And, in the picture a lot of the people from corporate America and government who attended the Urban League Conference.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And, did we get a date on this?
Speaker 2: I can't--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's like maybe the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be the '60s' [1960s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a meeting of the National Urban League Commerce and Industry Counter--Council.  The council was made up of representatives from the largest fifty corporations in the country.  And, when we did a program to expand job opportunities, we went to the membership of the council and asked them for their support.  And, all of these men are vice presidents.  And, of course, the one on the left standing is an Urban League staff person.  The one on the end sitting, toward the--on the left side of the table is an Urban League staff person.  And, the two people on the other side are staff.  But, everybody else is at least a vice president in a major corporation.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This was taken at a dinner.  Lee Archer of General Foods is in the center.  I'm on the right.  Lee Archer was one of those people who came out of the military as a colonel and was hired at General Foods and entitled urban affairs director.  Our job was to work with those people, work with those ex-[U.S.] Army people and get them involved in Urban League.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About when was this?
Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s] because Lee was supposed been named a general but he had a fight with an officer and they took his name off the list.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This picture was made in 1967 at the Urban League Conference.  I'm standing.  Whitney Young, the executive director, is seated in the dark suit.  And, Lindsley Kimball who's chairman of the board is in the seat next to the press conference, in the '67 [1967] conference.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was made--the National Urban League [New York, New York] called a meeting in Washington [D.C.], volunteers from Urban Leagues all over the country.  And, we got the President of the United States, Lynden B. [Banes] Johnson to come to that meeting and speak to the group.  Mr. Johnson was a good friend of the Urban League.  And, he saw to it that we got a lot of Federal Programs funded during his administration.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This another picture was made at the 1967 Conference of the Urban League.  Mr. [Whitney] Young the executive is looking at something I was pointing out to him as his deputy.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: My older daughter has two daughters and these are my grandchildren--my granddaughters and that picture was made on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of their parents wedding.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Their parents will celebrate their 43rd anniversary on December 30th.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: And, this is a picture of me with my older great-grandchild.  When Valerie [ph.] was born, she was the eighth girl born in the secession of Urban Leaguers.  Harry Robert [ph.], her brother, was born last December, or December a year ago.  The first boy born in the family in fifty-three years.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Wow.  Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: The National Urban League gives a Whitney M. Young medallion to staff and volunteers who have rendered valuable service to the Urban League Movement.  And, this picture was made the night I got my medallion.  And, in it are my younger daughter in the red dress and my younger daughter in the center seated.  And, the other people are family members and friends.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was made with [HM] Hugh [B.] Price and the certificate I got with my son-in-law and my older daughter to the left, my niece directly behind me and my son-in-law, Fred Kelley on the other side.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was made that Ron Brown sent me, when he was chairman of the Democratic Party.  He came to the Urban League Conference and autographed that picture for me.  The lady in the picture is Ms. Ann Tannehill, for whom the Ann Tannehill Award is named being given to Urban Leaguers with ten or more years of service.  She retired in 1970, and I got my Ann Tannehill Award in 1978.
