Story_ID: 475691
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And Mrs. Ponder [Eunice Wilson Ponder] is an observer.  Can you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Henry Ponder, H-E-N-R-Y, P-O-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March 28, 1928 in Wewoka, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Wewoka?
Speaker 2: W-E-W-O-K-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation, or former occupation?
Speaker 2: Before retirement, I was in higher education as president of colleges and universities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is taking place in my home in Hilton Head Island, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 29th, 2007.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 475692
Speaker 1: We're going to begin with a few questions that I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is oysters on the half shell.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year?  Oh, that's an easy one.  March 28th of every year is my favorite time.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Senegal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Take your time, not your life.
Story_ID: 475693
Speaker 1: Okay, so now we're going to begin by talking about your mother and father [Frank Ponder, Sr.].  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born January 4th, 1896.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we're going to talk about your mother in a minute.  But you said you do remember your grandmother, your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name was Lou Edwards.
Speaker 1: L-O-U?
Speaker 2: L-O-U.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Edwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she lived in Seminole, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you remember about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I remember my grandmother on a number of occasions.  I guess the thing that I remember as a youngster, she had a caged black bear called Sam.  And she was crazy about that bear, and that bear would do anything almost she asked him to do.  I remember as a kid she'd go there and say, "Push your food pan over here, Sam."  And he'd push the pan over.  "Push your water pan over here, Sam," and he'd push it over.  He was in a cage, he was a big huge bear.  And they, she had it from a cub on up.  Now during the early times there were a number of cubs running around loose around the countryside, so she just ended up with it.  I've heard my older brothers talking about this bear, and that they would swim with it, and that the bear would play with them, and they would play ducking each other under the water; and the bear would do that.  And they had to have the older boys get the bear sometimes, because it got rambunctious if you'd hold it underwater too long.  So, I remember that.  And the other thing I remember about that bear is that when my grandmother died, the bear knew it, instinctively, I guess, and began to become very rambunctious, almost wanting to tear the cage up.  And my uncle, her son, had to shoot the bear so that it would not get out and cause some disturbances.  So I remember that, and then we had bear meat for a long time after that.  So, that's one thing about my grandmother.  The other thing I remember is the times that we would go to visit her.  And she had a number of guineas, and we would go look for the guinea eggs.  And I remember once before we got to the guinea nest, we saw a long, black snake.  And that black snake crawled itself around a sapling and crushed itself.  It had swallowed about thirty guinea eggs, and crushed itself so that the eggs would crush.  So, I remember that about her.  I also remember my grandmother coming to visit us.  And we lived about a hundred yards from the highway.  And she would ride the bus and get off at the highway and come down.  And my grandmother was very, very fair.  And I remember she would come, and we'd be on the porch looking, and she would just keep walking past the house.  And we'd say to our mother, "I wonder who that white woman is going down the street?"  And then she would go down the road about twenty paces and then turn around and come back, and we'd all have a big laugh about it.  So, those are the things that I remember.  And she always came to visit us, and we always enjoyed visiting her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You don't remember anything about your grandfather?  Or, was he not alive?  Or what do you remember about him?
Speaker 2: I just remember my grandfather, but I don't remember anything about him.
Speaker 1: About him, okay.
Speaker 2: But I do remember him.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ladd, L-A-D-D, Ladd Edwards.  And he did die before my grandmother.  So--and keep in mind I'm talking about my age, around six, when all this happened.  So you--that's why it's so fuzzy with me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 475694
Speaker 1: Where your [maternal] grandmother [Lou Edwards] lived, did they own the land [in Seminole, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: They had about eighty acres of land that they owned, and it is still in the family.  To this day, it is still in the family.  The sons and daughters inherited it, and a couple of them have lived on it ever since then.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.  I never heard that discussed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any talk of slavery in your family line?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say that my family is not a product of slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't say that in any kind of boastful way.  I say that just to get the facts straight.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: My family migrated from Ireland in the 1850s.  They had a potato famine in Ireland, and the people were starving in Ireland.  And my ancestors caught the boat and came over to North Carolina, and that's where we entered this country, from there.  And we have, I would say that goes back to--my grandparents' parents would be the ones that came over in that group.  And then after they got here, they got married.  They were youngsters, and got married and came to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Any other stories about your grandmother or where she lived?
Speaker 2: No, that's about all I know about her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--okay.
Story_ID: 475695
Speaker 1: Now, your mother, Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder, tell me about your mother.  Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She married early, that much I know, and she had fourteen children.  And she was a widower from about 1934, and never remarried.  And she took care of fourteen kids very well.  And she only had a third grade education, that much I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, third grade.  Do you know about your grandmother's [Lou Edwards] education at all?
Speaker 2: Not at all, I know nothing about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about, tell me more about your mother.  She obviously took care of a very big family. Did she sew, did she encourage you?  In what ways did she encourage you as far as your education, and going out into the world?
Speaker 2: My mother was a farmer.  She, she rented 160 acres and she farmed this with the siblings, they being the ones doing most of the work.  Obviously, you know that.  But that was the way she did it.  And she was a gardener.  She had about an acre of a garden, and she always planted an outstanding garden.  She had almost everything that you could grow in a garden there.  And she was a canner.  She would can goods out of the garden.  And she would go in the spring and pick blackberries, she would can those blackberries.  And my mother was, she knew the snakes were always around berries, and yet she was never afraid of snakes.  It always puzzled me that she was never afraid of snakes, and most women are.  That's the reason it puzzles me.  I never had the opportunity to ask her why, but I'm sure that she just knew that she had to pick those grapes, I mean those berries (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Berries.
Speaker 2: --in order for us to be able to eat.  And she didn't just let the snakes keep her from doing it.  But she, she canned enough for fourteen children to have enough to eat all the winter, after the food stopped producing.  So, I remember that much about her.  And I remember that she was a very churchgoing lady.  She went to church every Sunday, almost.  And she never remarried, and I remember asking her once why she never did that.  And she just said she didn't think she could ever find a man that would treat her kids the way she would want them treated, so therefore, she just never got into it.  And plus her kids were big enough so that she didn't need a man to help her make a living, so that made it all very good.  So that's the thing that I remember very much about her.  And she did tell all of her kids, "Get an education.  That's one thing nobody can take from you.  They can take anything else from you, but if you get an education, it's in your head and nobody can take it."  And she saw all of her kids through high school.  And if you go back to these times, for a widow woman it was very difficult times.  But she insisted that we all finish high school.  And then after that, we had to go to college on our own.
Story_ID: 475696
Speaker 1: With fourteen children at home, did you have any special time alone with your mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder]?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure we ever had any time alone.  But I'm not sure that was really important, either.  Because we always had company.  We were never lonesome, we were never friendless; we always had something to do.  We played with each other, you know, three boys in a bed together.  We had fun all night long, and didn't want to sleep.  My mother had to make us go to sleep sometimes.  We did all the things that kids, siblings, do.  We fought, but we really had a good time.  And I think that somehow it was the bonding that we got there that really comes through, even right now.
Story_ID: 475697
Speaker 1: What was the greatest lesson learned from your mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder], for you?
Speaker 2: I believe the greatest lesson was, she would always say to us, and to me, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], don't do anything in the dark that you would not want to do in the daylight."  And that kind of stuck with me.  It was a moral lesson that I thought was very, very important.  Another thing that she said was--we, we lived four miles in the country [in Oklahoma], and the kids always wanted to go to town on Saturday night.  And she would say, "Okay, you can go."  But we had a time when we had to be back, and that time was before midnight.  And I remember complaining that all of my friends were staying out late, and why did I have to come home?  And she said this to me, she said, "Henry, there is nothing important going on after midnight in town.  And if it is, you can do without it."  And that kind of stuck with me.  Another thing, she had a sundown curfew when we were younger.  When the sun went down, we had to be in our yard.  That was seven days a week.  We could go all day long, and play as long as we wanted to.  But when that sun started going down, we knew as kids the height of the sun from the horizon, to tell us how long it would take us to get home before that sun went down.  And we would always play it to the hilt.  Now we did that, but we were always in that yard at sundown.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember those things now.
Story_ID: 475698
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: My father was Frank Jerry Ponder [Frank Ponder, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in June, I think June 17th of 1894.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said you didn't remember much about his mother.  But do you know her name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her name, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And his father, your grandfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His father's name was Henry [Henry Ponder].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I am named for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in North Carolina, in Polk County, early on there was an elementary school named for him.  And in my later years, I visited my aunts on my father's side, my father's sisters.  And they were still in North Carolina, Tryon--and they took me and showed me the foundation of the school.  The school was no longer there, but the foundation was still there.  So, that's one of the things I'm very proud of concerning my father--my grandfather, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 475699
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your father [Frank Ponder, Sr.]?  Any stories about him?  Did he share any stories about him growing up?  He grew up in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: The odd thing about it is my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] and my father grew up in Polk County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they did not meet until they came to Oklahoma.  And they came to Oklahoma and got married.  But both sides of the family came from Polk County.  And later on the siblings got to know each other, but they didn't know each other at my father and mother's level.  Now my father, I can remember a few things.  First of all, I was about six years old when my father deceased.  So, I was very little, but I have some very good stories.  I'm writing some anecdotal stories about this time, up to age six.  So let me just tell you one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember once I was standing in the yard.  And we had an old flatbed truck that my father drove.  He said, "Hey, boy, want to go to town with me?"  "Yes, sir."  And I jumped off and got in.  Now, this truck just had a windshield.  It didn't have a top on it, and it didn't have a seat.  It had a box for a seat, a wooden box for a seat.  That's what we used for a seat.  And we drove four miles to town and we got out.  I don't know what he was bringing to town, but he was bringing something.  And he parked the truck and got out, and we started walking down the street.  And I had a hole in the seat of my pants.  And I was walking down the street with my hand covering that spot, at least I thought it was covering the spot; I had it back there.  And as we would go down the street, apparently the people that we passed were noticing this.  And my father noticed it, and he took me in the store and bought me a pair of new overalls.  I remember that distinctly.  I thought I was the sharpest little boy in town.  And then we came on back home.  He never said anything to me about the hole in my pants.  And he got home and never said a word about it.  And I always felt that my father must have had a good conscience, to know how to treat a young fellow.  Because if he had balled me out about that, I probably would have been crushed.  But he didn't.  And I now have good memories of my father, because of that one incident.  The other thing I remember, he told my mother that we were too young for him to whip us; she had to do that.  He said, "Because I might kill them." (Laughter) I remember that.  Those are the things I remember about my father.
Speaker 1: What did your father [Frank Ponder, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer.
Speaker 1: He was a farmer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you all, what did you grow?
Speaker 2: We grew row crops, cotton, peanuts; those were the cash crops.  And then we grew cane, we grew sorghum cane.  And every winter, every year we'd cut the cane and grind it and make syrup.  And we would invite--the neighbors would bring their cane over, and we'd grind that for them and cook it.  And so, I remember that about him.  And I--the mill was a horse-drawn one; you'd have to walk around in a circle to make it grind the cane.  And I remember one of the jobs I had as a youngster was to ride that horse and keep it moving, going around that--.  So I remember those things about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What else do you remember about your father?  What was the greatest lesson learned from your father?
Speaker 2: I believe that I learned from my father, patience.  And I go back to just that incident that I told you about, which is about the only one that I can remember about him.  And-and--he must have had tremendous patience, and I think I got that from him.  And I seem to have patience that will go a long way sometimes.  So, I think that's what I got from him.
Story_ID: 475700
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest brother's name was Roy [Roy Ponder], R-O-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he left home early and went to Fort Worth, Texas.  We were in Wewoka, Oklahoma at the time, and he went to Fort Worth, Texas; he was a hotel manager in Fort Worth.  And he expired on December 7th, 1941.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: So, I have two reasons that I always remember December 7th.  So, I don't remember much about him; I just, I just remember that about him.  Then my next siblings were twin brothers, and they were named for presidents.  One was Theodore Roosevelt Ponder.  The other twin was William Howard Taft Ponder.  We called them Teddy and Taft.  And I remember them.  Taft joined the CCC camps, the Civilian Conservation Corps, is what it was.  This was one of the New Deal things that Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] started, trying to put people back to work.  And he'd take youngsters and put them in camps, and they were trained to seed, farm, plant grass, plant trees, just beautifying the place.  That's what he did.  And he did that up until the war [World War II, WWII].  And then when the war came, he had a job.  He'd gone to California and he'd had a job in the defense plant, and got deferred working the shipyard.  So that's what--and he lived a long time.  And he finally came back to Wewoka.  So, I remember him from that.  But most of my growing up--when he came back, I was gone. So I don't--I didn't spend much time with him.  But the one we call Teddy was sort of the breadwinner of the family.  He worked at the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] during that time.  He brought home his check--and I think these are things that are almost forgotten today.  This young man worked for the WPA.  And when you got fired from the WPA, they called it a 403.  That means you're fired, a 403.  I don't know what it stands for, but I remember that name.  He never got fired, but if you took a team to work--they were building roads and bridges and everything.  And this was before everything was mechanized, keep that in mind.  This was the '30s [1930s], and he would take--if he took a team, then they paid you for the team.  So, you got his salary plus for two mules to help do the work, and he would always do that.  So, he made, he made pretty good during the time.  Today, it wouldn't be much, but it was fine.  And he, every time he got paid, he took that check and brought it home and gave it to my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder], and she cashed it and bought groceries for the rest of us.
Story_ID: 475701
Speaker 1: You were telling me about your siblings, and you just finished talking about Teddy [Theodore Roosevelt Ponder].  So, who was next?
Speaker 2: The next would be Tinch [Tinch Ponder].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Tinch, T-I-N-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he deceased very early.  I'd say he was probably somewhere between sixteen and seventeen years of age, and he died of typhoid fever.  And it's interesting here.  I'd like to say that we had a doctor that was looking at him and taking care of him.  And the day after he deceased, the doctor came by the house and asked my daddy [Frank Ponder, Sr.], "How's your son?"  And my daddy lit in on him with all four feet (laughter).  And my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] had to catch him, to keep him from doing some bodily harm to this doctor for that.  Now, I only mention that because it points out that the doctor had driven two and a half miles from town [Wewoka, Oklahoma] to see him, and he had done this every day.  And during that time there was not much you could do about typhoid fever if you recall, during the '30s [1930s].  And so, it wasn't the doctor's fault that he died.  But again, it's the time that we're talking about.  Today, if someone is deceased, the next day the newspaper carries a note about him.  Well, we were in the country, so the rural areas didn't get all of this.  And plus, I'm not sure that the daily paper would have carried it, because we were African Americans anyway.  So, the doctor had no way of knowing that this had happened.  And I say this because I think sometimes we castigate what happened in the '30s [1930s] using today's technology, and not realizing until we--and I'm writing some short stories about this to try to help bring that to light.  But my father was, he couldn't understand why he didn't know this at the time, and my mother had to explain it to him.  So, that was it.  So, my brother died early.
Story_ID: 475702
Speaker 1: Then the next sibling, a sister, Katheryn [Katheryn Ponder Brown], she lived until the last two or three years.  And she's my older sister, and I have a story about her that I want to tell.  We lived in the country [in Oklahoma], and I am less than six years old, that I know.  And we had a pond about a quarter of a mile from the house.  So during these times, in the summertime we'd take a bath in the pond.  You didn't use the number two tub, you'd go to the pond to take a bath; you'd take your soap and towel and everything.  So my sister went to the pond, and asked me if I wanted to go with her.  And I said, "Yes, I'd be glad to," so I went.  I could not swim.  She was a great swimmer.  And she swam and then she took her bath, and she got out and was drying off.  And I knew to stay in the shallow part of the water, she knew--but for some reason I wandered out of the shallow part into the deep part.  And I began to go up and down, up and down.  And my sister just happened to look around and saw me doing that, and she jumped in and got me and brought me out.  So, she saved my life.  And I think there's something in that, when that happens to you.  I know the Native Americans have a feeling that if you save one's life, then you're forever tied together.  But I think that my sister and I had a relationship that transcended siblings, for all the years until her death about two or three years ago.  We were just close.  Everybody knew that, and I think it stems from the point that she saved my life.  That's the great thing about my sister.
Story_ID: 475703
Speaker 1: And then the next sibling would be a brother named Paul Harding Ponder, also named for a president [President Warren Gamaliel Harding].  He was in the [U.S.] Army, he was in World War II [WWII].  He landed in France on D-Day, minus six.  He landed six days after Normandy [France], after D-Day, he landed six days after that.  And he went through the war.  And I remember something here that I think is important here.  There a lot of things that people say about the American Red Cross, good and bad, mostly bad.  But I have a good story about the American Red Cross (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: My brother was in the combat zone.  And he had gone, we had gone fifteen or thirty days without hearing from him; my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] had not heard from him.  She went to the Red Cross, and the Red Cross got in touch with him and said, "Write your mother."  And he wrote my mother.  So I remember that about him.  And he got out of the Army and was a government worker until he was deceased, about nine years ago, yep.
Speaker 2: All right. Who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And another thing, when I got ready to go to college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] I said to him, "I'm going to college."  And he said, "Well, what is it going to cost?"  And I told him what it would cost, and he said, "Okay, I'll give you half of it."  So he did that for my first year in college.  And after that I got a scholarship, and he didn't have to give it to me.  But for the first year he gave me half of the cost of my going to school.
Story_ID: 475704
Speaker 1: And my next sister that I'm going to tell you about, Mayme [Mayme Ponder Jackson], M-A-Y-M-E, gave me the other half.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was a social worker with the Oklahoma State Employment Agency [Oklahoma Employment Security Commission].  And the thing about her, every summer that I got out of school, I'd go to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] and she'd give me a job, she'd send me on a job.  And all of my friends that wanted to work, if they went, Mayme would give them a job.  So that's the thing I remember about her.  She did that right up until the time that she retired, and now she is deceased also.
Story_ID: 475705
Speaker 1: Let's see.  And my next sibling died in childbirth.  Her name was Lillian [Lillian Ponder], and she died in childbirth.  Don't know the cause, I've never heard that.  Then my next sibling is a sister, Dorothy [Dorothy Ponder Cooper].  She's still alive, and she's a government worker.  And I remember her--I guess I'm trying to say the things that happened in a family that's important.  When I got out of college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] and got my first job and I wanted to get an automobile, I went to Dorothy and said, "I need help with my down payment."  She gave me the money for my down payment for my first automobile.  That's one of the nice things that happened.  So, I visit her every time I go to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  So we have a great time together.  Then my next sibling is a brother, Frank, Jr. [Frank Ponder, Jr.], who retired from the [U.S.] Air Force.  He did twenty-eight years in the Air Force.  He retired and has a family, and is doing very well as an upstanding citizen of the city.  So, I see him every now and then, and enjoy chatting and reminiscing with him.  Then my next sibling is Alonzo [Alonzo Ponder], A-L-O-N-Z-O.  And he rose to be a bishop in the Church of the Living God.  He's deceased now.  He has a family, and the kids are doing well.  But in the religious vein, he got to the top of the heap, and we were all proud of him for that reason.  So, that's it.  And then my next sibling is a girl, Anne [Anne Ponder Bell].  She's still alive, and she's the poetess of the family.  She can recite poetry that we didn't even know existed.  But she's still alive and doing well.  And my baby sister, who incidentally is seventy-two years old, (laughter), seventy-three, I'm sorry, she's seventy-three years old, and she lives in Las Vegas [Nevada].  And we chat with each other and I go to visit her every now and then and enjoy reminiscing with her.  So, that wraps up my family.
Speaker 2: What, what was her name?
Speaker 1: I beg--
Speaker 2: Your baby sister, what's her name?
Speaker 1: Eva [Eva Ponder McGough], E-V-A.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so, you were born right before her?
Speaker 1: No, I should have told you.  I'm after Frank.
Speaker 2: Oh, you're after Frank, okay.
Speaker 1: I'm between Frank and Alonzo.
Story_ID: 475706
Speaker 1: Well, great, okay.  Let's talk about your growing up.  Thinking back, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My very earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Um-huh.
Speaker 2: It's, we're in the country [in Oklahoma].  We have about an eighty acre farm, that what we were farming.  And our house is on the side of the road, the highway, Highway 56 [U.S. Route 56].  And I guess if you count it, we're about fifty yards from the highway.  I'm only describing this.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, that's fine.
Speaker 2: And these are times when you built homes off the ground.  You put them on bricks or rocks to hold for the foundation; you didn't dig a foundation.  And you could crawl under the house.  That's the house we lived in.  And I remember once, I'm about three or four years old.  And I was outside, and I found a dime.  I didn't know what it was.  I knew it was money, but that was it.  And this favorite sister [Katheryn Ponder Brown] of mine that I told you about said to me, "Hm. I'll give you these three coins for that dime."  And I said, "Fine."  Because, you know, three is more than one anytime.  So, she gave me three pennies for a dime, and I thought I'd made the biggest trade in the world.  So, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's the earliest that I can remember.
Story_ID: 475707
Speaker 1: Tell me about life on the farm [in Oklahoma].  You said you had eighty acres.  Did your mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] and father [Frank Ponder, Sr.] own that land?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, we never owned land when we were growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we moved from that eighty acres to a hundred and sixty acres, and that's where did the real farming of peanuts and cane, sorghum cane, and cotton, and so forth.  And as a youngster, my role was to work that.  But there were three of us together, if you noticed, Frank [Frank Ponder, Jr.], Henry [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], and Alonzo [Alonzo Ponder], three boys together.  And we had all of the chores from the time I can remember.  Now, we had the chores of getting ready for night, and getting ready for the day and the morning. And that means these chores.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cutting wood for the stove.  We had woodstoves for cooking and heating, so we had to cut wood for that every day.  And then we had to bring it into the house so it would be there in case it rained or snowed.  So, that was a chore that we had.  We had hogs, so we had to feed the hogs every night and every morning.  Those are chores that we had to do.  And then we had cows.  So, first we had to bring the cows in every night.  Somebody had to go in the pasture and get the cows, and then we had to milk them.  And then the next morning we had to milk them again.  So, these are chores that we had to do every day, seven days a week.  So those were the chores that we had.  And I didn't, I didn't learn to milk.  Milking was one of the things that as a kid I just didn't like to do.  So, I would do all the other work.  Now, this is how much I didn't like to milk cows.  To keep from milking the cows, to help milk the cows--now I didn't have to milk them by myself, but with these other two boys.  To keep from doing that, I would cut the wood for the cooking stove and for the heating stove for the rest of the house.  After cutting it, I would bring it in the house.  Now, this is from the woodpile, another fifty yards maybe.  I'd put it on the porch and bring it in and put it in the kitchen for the kitchen stove, to keep from doing any of that.  And, I would feed the hogs every morning and every night.  So, those were the jobs that I had.  And my other two brothers then had to milk the cows and bring the cows in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it worked fine, because we knew our jobs and we did it.  And the thing about it, our parents knew that if any of those jobs were not done, they knew who was responsible.  And you didn't get everybody for it; you got the one who was responsible.
Story_ID: 475708
Speaker 1: Describe your home [in Oklahoma].  Describe what your house was like.
Speaker 2: You mean the physical house?
Speaker 1: Yes, the physical house.  You said that you had a wood burning stove--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for heat and cooking.  Tell me about the rest of the house.
Speaker 2: Well, we had four rooms.  We had a kitchen which served as a kitchen and a dining room, with a living room which served also as a living room and a bedroom.  And then we had two bedrooms that served for bedrooms.  And all of us, I remember that in the living room there were two beds.  And the women in the family slept in the living room, and the boys in the family slept in the two bedrooms.  And we ate in the kitchen.
Speaker 1: Where did your mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] and father [Frank Ponder, Sr.] sleep?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember much about my father, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --he passed too early. But he and my mother slept in the living room, and my sisters slept in another bed over in the other corner (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's where all the women slept.  And I'm sure that that's where my father slept while he was alive.
Story_ID: 475709
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were given the responsibility of doing chores?
Speaker 2: Probably around six, six or seven, around six or seven.  Mind you, the reason for it was because it was a necessity.  Let me make sure that it was not punishment and it was not brutality, either.  But my father [Frank Ponder, Sr.] is deceased, so that happened when I was about four years old, or six years old, yeah, six.  Then we now have to make the family go.  My oldest brothers, twin brothers--my oldest brother [Roy Ponder] is in Texas [Fort Worth, Texas], so he's not there.  My twin brothers [Theodore Roosevelt Ponder and William Howard Taft Ponder], one is in the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] camp, and the other one is working with the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration].  Now with the WPA, you had to get up very early to get there in time to clock in, and you worked until after dark.  So, when they got home it was dark.  It was a necessity.  Someone had to do the rest of this, and I'm sure the other brother that was there, Paul [Paul Harding Ponder], did his chore.  But then in '41 [1941], he's in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, the three boys at young ages just had to take over and do all these things.  So, we looked on it as just a job that you're supposed to do.  And there was no one else to do it, so we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 475710
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in the time of the Depression [Great Depression].  Did your family really know that there was a Depression going on?  Did you feel it?  Or did you have enough food and clothing during that time?
Speaker 2: One thing I can honestly say is that I have never gone without a meal, not one day of my life during all of these hard times.  Now, I can say that we had three meals a day every day.  Now, somebody might question what those meals were, but we had plenty to eat.  And I mentioned earlier that my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] canned a lot, so we had a lot of canned food.  We had plenty of good food, so that's number one.  So, in regard to that, no, we did not know there was a Depression on.  Clothing--my mother washed, hand, on a scrub board until very late in life when she got a washing machine.  But with a rub board.  She did that, and she washed I know once a week for all the kids.  And I never went to school raggedy or filthy, never.  Now, I went to school, as they say, with patches on patches.  My mother was good at patching, so she would patch my overalls in the knees.  And when that one would wear out, she'd put another one on.  So we did that.  We had a pair, each one of us had at least one pair of dress pants that we could wear for a dress affair.  That we only wore for dress affairs.  Now a dress affair during those times, was not going to church.  We wore our regular school clothes to church.  A dress affair was when you had big evening at the school, where you had a Christmas program, an Easter program, or something of that sort.  And you dressed up for that.  You put on your store bought pants, you know, those that you had to send to the cleaners.  So, we knew that times were hard, but we never, we never suffered for anything.  And we never talked about being poor.  Our neighbors didn't talk about being poor.  And we were all poor.  As I look at it now, we were all poor.  And I know that my mother borrowed from the neighbors, and the neighbors borrowed from us.  I'm aware of all of that, I can remember it now.  But it was just an everyday occurrence, nobody thought anything about it.  So, yeah, there were hard times.  But with my brother [Theodore Roosevelt Ponder] working, we had money to buy stuff.  And another thing, people were different then.  My mother would go to town [Wewoka, Oklahoma] each Saturday, and would buy the kind of groceries that you had to buy.  Now when I say this, I'm talking about sugar, salt, pepper, flour, meal, you know, those kinds of things; she had to buy that.  And every now and then she would buy a few apples, a few oranges, you know, just to pacify us I guess.  And at the grocery store where she shopped, every time, every Saturday after she bought her groceries, the storekeeper gave her some candy to bring home to her kids.  And we always had candy, you know.  It's miraculous, that's the best way I can put it.
Story_ID: 475711
Speaker 1: When you think about those times, what sounds, sights, and smells just takes you to a memory during those times?
Speaker 2: The thing that I remember is that the movies cost ten cents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we could walk four miles into town [Wewoka, Oklahoma], and usually my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] would find a way to give us three boys fifteen cents apiece.  And that was--when we got to town we could, we'd usually hitchhike to town; you could hitchhike into town.  But when it was over, we had to be home before dark.  So we started walking, we'd always walk back.  But we'd pay--we'd go two blocks into town, and one block to the right, a left turn, and go right one block to the movie.  And we'd pay a dime and go in the movie; no popcorn, none of that.  And we'd see the movie, and we'd walk back out, that same three blocks.  But on the way out, about in the second block after we got out, there was an ice cream parlor.  And with a nickel, we would buy a double dip of ice cream.  Now, that's an ice cream cone with two cones on it.  It's not like what they do now, where they put two dips on top of each other.  This was just like this (demonstrates), and it was one here and one here.  And the thing that I remember about that is that I could eat that two dips of ice cream and walk a mile before I ate it all up.
Story_ID: 475712
Speaker 1: I think the sounds that I remember would be what you would see and hear if you lived in the country [in Oklahoma].  We always heard the birds.  We could, we could recognize different varieties of birds by their songs.  So, I remember that.  I also can remember just the sounds of wild animals.  You could, you could hear a coyote, and you would know it was a coyote.  The smell would be the skunks (laughter).  There were plenty of skunks in my neighborhood, and we would always run into them and then run from them.  So, I remember that.  Again, that's what kids did.  And I think that the sights that I can think of would be the setting sun, and on my way home to get there before it went down.  That's a sight I can see right now, getting there before that sun goes down, yes.
Story_ID: 475713
Speaker 1: All right well, tell me about school.  When did you start school?
Speaker 2: I attended a rural elementary school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Johnson School [Johnson Grove School, Wewoka, Oklahoma], J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  It was named for an African American.  His name was J. Coody Johnson.  And he owned a lot of land, including the land that we rented; we rented from him.  And he owned, at the time, about a square mile, and he gave the land for the school to be built on his property.  And I suppose that's the reason they named it Johnson.  But I attended school from first through the eighth grade there.  And they didn't have kindergarten then; you just, you started in the first grade.  I remember my first grade teacher.  Her name was Charlesetta Bruner [ph.], a dynamic person.  Again, in retrospect, if you're fortunate enough to have good teachers early in life, you can do something with yourself.  If you don't, you have to struggle.  I was fortunate to have good teachers in first through eighth grade.  Charlesetta Bruner taught me to read and to write--we used to do all of these--she taught all of that, and did it very well.  So, I remember her and give her a lot of credit for putting me there.  Then when I went to the fifth grade, fifth through the eighth--now remember we're talking about a two-room school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was one teacher from one to four, and one teacher from five to eight.  And I had a teacher named Theodore Malone, and he really put the finishing touches on motivating me to want to be something and getting me to understand that I could be whatever I wanted to be, and that the only way you can be anything is that you've got to know something.  And he would teach English, for example, and he was teaching parts of speech or whatever.  He would turn the whole class, the whole room, grades five through eight, into this.  Because he said, "Those that--."  He came to the school when I was in the fifth grade.  So, he reasoned that the people before me--the sixth, seventh and eighth, had missed all this.  Because he'd ask them some questions about it, and they didn't know.  So then he would teach all of us the parts of speech.  And when he'd come to arithmetic, he'd do the same thing.  And then after that, he discovered which one of us students looked smart in math, or smart in arithmetic, or reading, or English, or history, and then he would let us teach.  If we were in the seventh grade, we could teach the fifth and the sixth grade.  So, we learned something from doing that.  And then this was the time when you could spank in school.  And I don't know if that was brutality, because the teacher used it very well, I thought.  And for example I remember spelling, we'd have spelling.  Every time you misspelled a word, you'd get a lick.  And that was encouragement not to miss a word.  So, these are the things that I remember.  And he told me, "One of these days, you're going to thank me for what I'm doing here."  Because I thought he was really tough, I really thought he was tough.  And I've come to thank him many times for it.  So, that was my elementary school.
Story_ID: 475714
Speaker 1: And I finished elementary school [Johnson Grove School, Wewoka, Oklahoma] in '42 [1942] and then went to Douglas High School [Wewoka, Oklahoma].  I came onto a number of good teachers here, also.  My vocational/agricultural teacher, C.J. Hope [ph.], a very good teacher.  My freshman English teacher, E.A. Gorman [ph.], a very good teacher.  And she would encourage us to read more.  She was also in charge of the library, and we'd do book reports.  And we wrote up a book report, and she'd give you a certificate if you read, I think you had to read ten books.  And if you read more than that, you'd get a certificate.  If you read twenty, you'd get another certificate.  She encouraged us to do more.  And I had an algebra teacher that was very good.  Sudder [ph.], was his name, a very good teacher.  And then my science teacher, A.O. Dunlap [ph.].  You know, I'm surprised that I can even remember these names now.  And I hadn't thought of them until just now.  So, let me make sure I didn't rehearse this.  They're just coming to me, because these teachers really, really meant something.  My principal in high school, Mr. Jordan [ph.], was an outstanding principal.  He would come into the classroom when the teacher was absent.  We didn't have substitute teachers.  He would come into the classroom and would teach what was going on, what needed to be taught.  And so, we got to know him.  So, we had quite a few good teachers in high school.  And I was in the plays, so I got a chance to do this kind of work.  I was the president of my student council my senior year in high school, and president of my class.  So, I got some chances of leadership.  And the teachers always told me, "You need to go to college.  You can be something."  They always impressed on me that I needed to go to college.  And I am as poor as anybody that could come through the school, and yet they're talking to me about going to college.  How can I go to college as poor as I am?  But they kept saying, "You can do it if you want to do it."  Encouraged me, and that was the thing that was important.  And I think if you get this through your formative years, I think it helps you tremendously to become whatever it is you want to become.
Story_ID: 475715
Speaker 1: Had you thought about what you would like to become?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  And this is another anecdotal story that I'll tell.  When I was in the seventh grade [at Johnson Grove School, Wewoka, Oklahoma], I heard, and I don't know how I heard this, because I didn't read it in the newspaper, that's my point.  And we didn't have television, and I know it wasn't on the radio.  So, I heard it, that Mary McLeod Bethune was speaking in Wewoka [Oklahoma] at a Methodist church one night.  And I said, "I'm going to go hear her."  Now during this time--let me back up a little and say that during this time, the greatest person in the African American community, when I was in the seventh grade, was a college president.  I mean that was something that nobody thought you could ever become.  It was like you're flying to the moon now.  But this was a college president, and I'm four miles in the country, and I walked four miles into town to hear her speak.  And my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder] let me go, she thought--and again, I think about all these things and say that my mother even knew how important it was for me to hear this person speak, because it might do something for me.  I mean she never told me this, but now as adult, that's all I can make of it.  And I walked in and listened to Miss Bethune speak.  She had on a mink coat, I remember that.  And apparently, it was fall, or chilly, and the church wasn't heated apparently, because she didn't take her coat off.  All of this is in retrospect now, I'm guessing.  And I listened to her speak, and goodness, I was so impressed with this woman.  She was just outstanding, she was a dynamo.  And then I walked four miles back home from that.  And in that trip from that church to home, as a seventh grader, I said "I'm going to be a college president."  So, Miss Bethune was my role model.  And now let me just hasten to say, when I made that decision, I had enough realization to know what it took.  If you're going to be a college president, first of all you've got to finish the eighth grade.  I mean, these are things that just fell into place.  Then you've got to go to high school.  You got to graduate from high school, then you got to go college.  You got to graduate from college, and then you've got to go to graduate school, you know, all these things.  As I progressed, I realized that all these things had to be done.  And that thought is the thing that drove me to do the education that I have been fortunate enough to get.
Story_ID: 475716
Speaker 1: So at Douglas High School [Wewoka, Oklahoma] you had already formed in your mind that you wanted to become a university president, or a college president?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Besides academics, what other activities went on?  Even with your brothers and sisters at home, were there any other activities that you participated in?
Speaker 2: I participated in athletics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I participated in drama.  And those were about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was music a part of your life?
Speaker 2: Music?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now for some reason, I never participated in the music department.  We had a teacher that was young enough for all of the fellows to talk about how beautiful she was, and all of that.  And she was the choir director and the music teacher in high school.  And my brother, Frank [Frank Ponder, Jr.], joined the choir for four years and stayed in it, but I never did.
Story_ID: 475717
Speaker 1: At home, did your family listen to the radio?
Speaker 2: I think later on, somewhere down--we were able to come up with a radio.  But it was a long time coming.  I can't remember when, but let me tell you why I know it was a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was the time when Joe Louis was in his heyday, in the '30s [1930s].  And when Joe Louis would fight, they would broadcast it on the radio.  We walked a mile and a half to the only place I remember now that had a radio.  A family had a big standup Philco radio that used an automobile battery to charge it.  And we would go there and watch and listen to--I'm sorry, listen to the fight.  So apparently, we did not get a radio until probably in the '40s [1940s], the early '40s [1940s] I'm sure.  Now, we were fortunate enough to have--during this time a newspaper came.  I think it came once a week, the Kansas City Call [sic. The Call].  I remember that, and I read that.  And so, there was a little dog that I remember.  I can't remember the dog's name now, but it was a Scottie, that they had a little cartoon about.  And I remember, that's all I remember about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we also had a magazine called the Capper Farmers [sic. Capper's Weekly].  Senator Capper [Arthur Capper] from Iowa [sic. Kansas] started the magazine, and we had that.  So, those were two things that we had that we got a chance to read every now and then.  I don't remember anything else.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 475718
Speaker 1: They call Oklahoma the Dust Bowl.  I mean, tell me what that means to you.
Speaker 2: Well, it really doesn't mean anything to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me say that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have read about the Dust Bowl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I cannot remember--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Dust Bowl activities as I have seen in movies, and have had described.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think it was because on our farm, we farmed in such a way that the soil did not blow away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, we, we, now mind you, I joined the 4-H club very early.
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: The 4-H club (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Club, okay.
Speaker 2: That was a rural organization that helped, that talked about how you ought to farm and how you ought to do things.  And they told us about rotating crops, and all of that.  And we learned that, and we passed that on to my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder].  And she would plant cotton this year, and the next year it would be peanuts.  And then the next year it would be sorghum cane, and the next year it would be something else.  So we kept rotating it, and for some reason our soil just did not blow away.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 475719
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your high school years.  Anything else happen in high school [Douglas High School, Wewoka, Oklahoma] that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything of--
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you decide what college you would attend?
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated from high school--
Speaker 1: And what year was your graduation from high school?
Speaker 2: In 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: College was not even an option for me at that time.  I stayed out of school a year.  That was one of the best things that happened to me, and I'll talk about that later.  But I stayed out and worked.  I had, remember school was out in May.  And we had all of our crops planted, and they had to be harvested by November.  So I stayed and harvested the crops, because my brother [Frank Ponder, Jr.] older than I am, was in the [U.S. military] service.  And my baby brother [Alonzo Ponder] was younger, so I was the breadwinner so to speak, and I had to harvest the crops.  Because we'd put them in, so I had to harvest them.  So I didn't go to school.  And then after we got all the harvest in, in January I decided to go to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] to get me a job.  And Mayme [Mayme Ponder Jackson] helped me get a job, she was on the unemployment commission [Oklahoma State Employment Agency; Oklahoma Employment Security Commission]. So I got a job at Armour packing house [Armour and Company].  And I worked there, and I made good money, from January until September.  And that summer friends, my college, my classmates--persons who were a year behind me--I remember the person (pause), Emory, Cecil Emory [ph.]--came through Oklahoma City and said, "I'm going to Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] to go to college."  And a few other of my friends came by and said, "I'm going to Langston to go to college."  And I said, "Boy, everybody's going to college but you.  What's wrong with you?"  And I remember I went to see my sister, Mayme.  It was on a Sunday--a Saturday, I'm sorry, a Saturday.  And on the way back from her house, going back to mine, the light bulb went off.  I said, "Boy, you need to go to college."  And I didn't go home.  I went to the bus station and got me a ticket to Wewoka [Oklahoma], from Oklahoma City to Wewoka, a bus ticket.  It didn't cost but $2.25, I remember that.
Story_ID: 475720
Speaker 1: And I went home and I said to my oldest sister, Katheryn [Katheryn Ponder Brown], and my mother [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder], "I'm going to college, and I just wanted you to know that."  They said, "Well, we wish you the best," or words of encouragement, whatever they were.  No money, just words of encouragement (laughter).  And I went back to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and I went back to see my sister Mayme [Mayme Ponder Jackson].  And I said, "I'm going to college."  And she said, "I'll pay half of whatever it costs."  And then I went over to my brother Paul [Paul Harding Ponder], and he said, "I'll pay half of whatever it costs."  Now, I had met a young man that lived in the City of Langston [Oklahoma], and he said "Well, Henry [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], if you want to go school, you can live with us.  I'll talk to my mother, and you can live with us."  "Okay, do that.  What's it going to cost?"  Fifteen dollars a month, that's what my room was.  I had to eat the best way I could, but that was my room.  No, I had supper, she did give me supper.  And I had to walk about two miles to get to the campus from there, but I'm going, I went to school.  So that's, that's how I went.  There was no where I was going.  I went to the only place that was open to me.  I didn't have any--first of all, you couldn't go to any of the white schools.  That was before you could do that.  There was only one black school in the state, and that was Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma].  So, that was my school.  I didn't have the money to ride a bus to go out of the state.  I was lucky to get to Langston, you know.  So that's how I ended up at Langston.
Story_ID: 475721
Speaker 1: Well, you said when you worked at the--at Armour [Armour and Company], you were making good money.  What was good money during those times?
Speaker 2: I guess, and I don't, that I don't remember.  But I'm going to guess and say it must have been something like, somewhere between ten and twenty-five cents an hour.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: That's my guess.  But again, it was good money for then.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, you go off to Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  And what was it like being away from home, and entering into college?
Speaker 2: That wasn't much of a problem, being away from home, because I had been away from home since January anyway in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  So, that wasn't the problem.  And I was staying with a person that I knew, so I wasn't a complete stranger.  And a number of my homeboys were in school, so I had that as friendship, and we'd sit on the campus and talk.  But the first year, I had to walk to campus every morning and walk back every night.  That was the thing that I had to do.  And every month I got my fifteen dollars from my sister [Mayme Ponder Jackson] and my brother [Paul Harding Ponder], so I was able to pay it.  And I guess I picked up some change every now and then.  No, Katheryn [Katheryn Ponder Brown] sent me spending money.  So that's how I got my spending money.  And I decided that I was going to get up every morning and head for the campus by eight o'clock, regardless of when my class was.  I made all my classes, I didn't cut any classes.  And anytime from eight o'clock to five o'clock during the day, if I was not in class, I was in the library studying.  I said, "I'm going to study from eight to five every day when I'm not in class."  And I did that, and I reasoned that all the fun takes place after five o'clock.  So if study during the day, then if I want to have fun at night, I've already done my studying, so I can do that.  So, that was my reasoning.  I didn't, didn't do much fun anyway, but that was the reason behind it, and I did that religiously.  Well, the upstart of that is I did pretty good on the honor roll.  And I came out about 2.65, 3.65 [grade point average] on the honor roll and, you know, as a first semester freshman, I was a big, big shot on campus with that.  But during that time, something else happened, and we can talk about it more detail later.  But I signed up for, I decided to major in agriculture.  And we, all of the agriculture fellows had chemistry class at one time, and we had to go to that chemistry class.  And Dr. Moore [L.G. Moore] was the teacher.  And he was a very good teacher, and we enjoyed that.  But something happened in that class that I'll tell you about later.
Story_ID: 475722
Speaker 1: You were telling me about Dr. Moore's [L.G. Moore] class.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Dr. Moore was also the dean of instruction [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  He taught freshman chemistry, and this class was primarily for students majoring in agriculture.  And these were the freshman students, primarily.  There were a lot of us in agriculture then.  And we showed up for this class the first day, and he talked to us and then he assigned us lab space.  And in the lab, he gave two people to a locker with a Bunsen burner on it.  And my roommate and I, Roscoe Scoby [ph.], and I, took the first ones on this side.  When we looked up, and across from us on the other side--see, there was a double thing--two people on this side and two people on that side.  Two beautiful ladies were on the other side.  Not but two ladies in the class--a bunch of men and two ladies.  And somehow, I was lucky enough to get a locker across from the two ladies in the class, okay.  Now I looked across, and here's this charming lady sitting over there with hair down to her shoulders and smiling.  And I said, "You know, these girls are smart."  And I'd never had chemistry in my life.  I'm going to need some help with chemistry.  So, I'm going to date one of these girls, so that I'll have somebody to help me with my chemistry (laughter).  Now that's, that's what happened.  So that night or shortly thereafter--maybe not that night, but shortly thereafter I went to Sanford Hall, which is the women's dormitory, and called for Eunice Wilson [Eunice Wilson Ponder].  She came down and we started chatting, talked.  And that was September 29th, 1947.  And to make a long story short, now she's my wife.  We dated four years in college, and one year after college we got married, and we've been married now for fifty-two years.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Speaker 2: Fifty-four years coming up.  So, pretty good.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: So that's what happened in my first year in college.
Story_ID: 475723
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, it was just college life after that, doing all the things that you do, but remembering--I was able to remember that in order to enjoy college life, you must make grades that will keep you in college.  And they were sending people home for poor performance and all--discipline problems, and all of that.  And I didn't want to get caught in any of that.  So number one, I said I had to take care of the discipline side of it.  I couldn't get into any trouble, and I had to make my grades.  So I continued to study from eight to five [o'clock], and then ended up on the honor roll every semester I was in college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  I graduated with high honors, magna cum laude, I think.  So, so that was uneventful--
Story_ID: 475724
Speaker 1: Let's see, I had some--I had some good college instructors [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  Let me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I might, ought to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The man who was head of agriculture--I was majoring in agriculture, agricultural education.  And the head of agriculture department was named D.C. Jones, and he was a legend in his own time, I mean he was outstanding.  He pushed us to do all the things that we should have been doing, and he talked about us when we didn't do right.  He told us that we ought to try to be smart; that we ought to try to be something; or try to--you know, he just pushed us, "You can do it, you can do it, you can do it."  So, that was it.  I had another teacher that taught dairying, Jimmy White [ph.].  Both of these teachers only had master's degrees.  So I learned then that it wasn't the degrees you have, it's what you have inside that you can put out to the students.  And these two men put it out so that we could get it, and encouraged us to do more.  And because of that, I graduated with the honors that I had, and I would say I had four years of interesting and enjoyable college life.  I cannot understand, on the basis of my experience, why any student would spend a semester in college and then drop out.  I just can't understand that.  There's too much going on; there's too many friends and all of that.  And I see now the whole thing has changed, where students drop out of college and it's okay, so--
Speaker 2: Do you think it's the lack of discipline?  Because you were very disciplined, you know, as far as getting your studies, you know, and getting good grades.
Speaker 1: Well, I hadn't looked at it that way, but that could be it.  You have to put things first.
Story_ID: 475725
Speaker 1: Someone told me, I don't know who it was, and I picked this up myself, that, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], you ought to get three things out of college."  And I remember that.  I tell youngsters the same thing now, because I think it's still true.  Number one, you ought to get an education.  Number two, you ought to join a fraternity or a sorority.  Now, the reason for that education of sorority is that you've proven--this was explained to me, and I buy, I bought into this.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's that it helps you socialize.  You're in a group, and this group pushes you to excel, to do things cooperatively; you're always doing things together, and that sort of thing.  They push you.  If you have a talent, they push you, and give you a chance to do that and so forth.  So, and not only that, it says two things about you that not being a sorority or a fraternity person would say.  And that is, number one, you have a grade point average that's higher than--because you have to have a grade point average to get in.  When I was there, you had to have a C plus average to get in.  So, it said that about you.  No one had to ask me that question, you knew that.  And the second thing it said about you was that somebody else wanted you; somebody else wanted you, to be a friend to you.  So, all of that was important, those two things.  And the third thing, you ought to meet the person that you want to marry.  I think those are three things that youngsters ought to still be--I think it would still be good advice for youngsters.  But what I've discovered now is neither of those three seem to be very important to youngsters going to college anymore.  I mean, they don't try to make outstanding grades; they don't care about getting in a sorority or a fraternity; and they certainly don't care about looking out for who they're going to marry and spend the rest of their lives with.  So, I was able to locate these three things in college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], and I think that's what has made my college life outstandingly important to me.
Story_ID: 475726
Speaker 1: And what fraternity did you pledge [at Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I pledged the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about fraternities for a minute.  'Cause right now fraternities are in the news a lot with hazing.  Tell me what you think about that, and what the differences are from your time and what's going on today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think part of the difficulty today is the lack of discipline on the part of college students in general; that's one thing.  Number two is that we now have had to recruit into college, students that I would say twenty or thirty years ago wouldn't have had a desire to go to college, and certainly would not have been recruited to come to college.  We're getting gang members, we're getting people off the street.  And I'm not anti all of this, but that's the lack of discipline.  Because when you go to college, you've got to have discipline enough to study and to stay out of trouble so that you can continue.  Now, if you come up without discipline--staying out all night long, going wherever you want to go--this is what we're now having to recruit.  And I think that's another part that I need to talk about--how we need to do something about that.  But that's it.  So, we're getting into our fraternities now persons who are this.  Persons now are looking at fraternities almost with a gang mentality.  That's not what they're supposed to be.  They're supposed to be more uplifting than that.  But now it's: "If I do something, shh, don't tell it; you can't tell."  But when I was coming through, that may have been the case.  But we knew not to do something we weren't supposed to do.  Because if you did, the fraternity members would do something about it.  See, when I was coming up, if you did something outrageous, we had a fraternity meeting and we talked about what we were going to do about this, and we would ostracize you.  Now, they say don't tell it.  So, you're still doing things.  Now, all of the sororities and fraternities have outlawed hazing; it's illegal to do that.  Most of the states have laws against that, and yet these students still do it.  And I think it's simply because of lack of discipline to do that which you know is right, and a gang mentality that pushes it.  Now, I've said all of that, but fraternities and sororities are still important in the life of a college member; you still ought to join.  And what you ought to do is to help make that fraternity or that sorority live, the members, live up to what the fraternity or the sorority set as its aims and objectives.  The national body has set those aims and objectives, this local chapter just isn't following them.  And you need to come in and say, "We're going to follow those things.  And if you don't do it, we're going to do something about you."  And we have to start disciplining our members ourselves.
Story_ID: 475727
Speaker 1: Joining a fraternity or sorority also helps in community activity and volunteerism.  Is that not right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is another reason that would help a college student to learn how to give back in the community?
Speaker 2: If you are a disciplined person, and you're really about being a college student--you know, grades and all that--then, if you join a sorority or a fraternity, then you learn that you have to help pull the people up who are behind you to your level; you learn that.  You learn that you need to go out in the community and mentor young men and young women.  You learn that you need to decide to be a tutor for students who are slow in mathematics, slow in reading, slow in this.  All of that is a part of it.  Now most of the national bodies are asking you to perform community work, service.  And if you do all of these things, then you become a better person.  And that's what a fraternity or sorority is supposed to be.  Now, I've been fortunate, because I have been in my fraternity, the Alpha Phi Fraternity, Incorporated [sic. Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], for a long time.  I've made the national conventions; I know what we're all about.  And I've been fortunate enough to serve as the general president of my group.  So, I'm aware of what should be done, and I'm aware of the shortcomings that we're making.  And I'm saying that it is time now for the fraternity members themselves to start saying, "We're going to stop this, and we're going to make sure that you do right.  And if you don't do right, we're going to do something about it right here on this campus."
Story_ID: 475728
Speaker 1: So tell me, what year did you graduate from Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: May, 1991 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, from--
Speaker 2: Correction, May, 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter).  All right, so now tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated from Langston, and again, graduate school was not even on the horizon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have the money.  And again, I'll try to put it in context.  The major institutions--now remember, I couldn't go to graduate school at the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma], Oklahoma State University [The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], or any of the white schools that had master's degrees.  I couldn't do that, because of segregation.  And the major institutions around the country--the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], all of these, they were not really out there looking for African American students.  If you wanted to go, you had to pay your way, because they didn't care whether you came or not.  So, graduate school was just off for me.  I didn't have any money; just got through college; and barely got through in terms of--I had to work my way through all of that.  So I decided to go and get a job.  And I went to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], and again, Mayme [Mayme Ponder Jackson] put me in a job at Tinker Air Force Base [Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], and I worked there for a while.  And then a person that came to my high school [Douglas High School, Wewoka, Oklahoma], my elementary school [Johnson Grove School, Wewoka, Oklahoma], before I got in the fifth grade, came there and he taught my older siblings in the fifth, sixth and seventh grade.  His name was Wayne C. Chandler, and he had been promoted to the position of superintendent of the Boley training school [State Training School for Incorrigible Negro Boys; John H. Lilley Correctional Center], which was a school for incorrigible boys in Boley, Oklahoma, and he was the superintendent.  And this, the concept of the training school is that it is self-sustaining; they grew all the food and all of that.  So, he called me one day and said, "I need a farm superintendent, and I'd like for you to come in.  You majored in agriculture, and how would you like this job?"  And he offered me the job.  And the job paid--you asked me about salary before.  Some, I remember and some I don't.  The job paid, please, two thousand dollars per year.  And I said, "I'll take it."  Now, let me just say here that my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] was teaching school, and she was making two thousand two hundred and twenty-five dollars a year; that's what she was getting for teaching, so she was making more than me.  But I'm moving closer to her.  This put me, this was more than I was making at Tinker Field.  So I went there and worked for two years.
Story_ID: 475729
Speaker 1: Now this, the job I had kept people out of World War II [WWII].  I mean, that was a deferment.  World War II, it was considered critical.  Now the Korean War is going on, the Korean conflict, and I couldn't stay out.  They drafted me from this job into the [U.S.] Army in the last of November, the 25th of November, 1953.  Now, but I missed something.  In 1952, November 22nd, I got married.  And then a little less than a year later, I'm on my way to the Army.  And so, I spent time in, my basic training was at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas [sic. Camp Chaffee; Fort Chaffee Joint Maneuver Training Center, Arkansas].  And I spent the first eight weeks there, and then I discovered--the grapevine is something.  The grapevine said, "If you sign up to be a paratrooper and to go to paratrooper school, then you'll do your second eight weeks here at Camp Chaffee."  And my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] was just about two hundred miles from there, and she would come visit me every weekend.  So, I signed for paratrooper school.  I remember coming home telling my wife that I signed up for paratrooper school, and she said, "I would rather see you in Korea than to think of you jumping out of airplanes."  (Laughter) "Okay, I've signed up for it now.  What am I going to do?"  So, in the eight week term the paratroopers came around--and you always do PT [physical training] in the Army.  There's various different kinds of PT, physical training.  And they would, the paratroopers were there monitoring all the people who had signed up to come to paratrooper school.  Because you had to make certain scores on these things, or else they wouldn't take you in paratrooper school.  So man, I was, I'm in good physical shape; I'm doing all of the things.  And the paratrooper man that's there says, "You're doing fine, you got it.  You got one to go."  And that was about a 2:20 or 4:40 run, and you had this time you had to do it.  And I said, "If I make this, I'm in the paratroopers.  My wife doesn't want me in the paratroopers, so I can't pass this."  The only exam in my life that I deliberately flunked was that run, and I deliberately flunked it.  And the man told me when I got to the end, "Well, I'm sorry, we can't take you."  And I said, "Oh, I'm so sorry."  I acted like was about the most disgusted person in the world, the most disappointed person in the world.  But I was sure happy.  And then I didn't go to paratrooper school.
Story_ID: 475730
Speaker 1: So, I had made pretty good on my test that the [U.S.] Army would give, so they invited me to join the leadership school.  So I joined the leadership school, that's another eight weeks at Camp Chaffee [Fort Chaffee Joint Maneuver Training Center, Arkansas].  And incidentally, I think my class was number 178, I think that's the number.  But it was the last leadership class at Camp Chaffee, and I came in second in my class.  Well, the top three people--everybody looks, and at the end of the time, they put up on the bulletin board where you're being shipped to, now that all of your training is over.  Now, you've got to go someplace.  The person who was number one in the class went to Germany.  The person who was number two went to Korea.  The person who was number three went to some island in, I think it was Guam, in the Pacific.  So, I'm the only one going to a combat zone.  So, I shipped out from Fort (unclear)--not Fort (unclear)--camp Yakima [Yakima Firing Center; Yakima Training Center, Washington] in Seattle, Washington.  It was an eighteen day ride on the boat to Incheon, Korea [Incheon, South Korea].  And they unloaded us--the ship could not come into the harbor.  It had to stop about a mile offshore, because the water--at low tide, it couldn't get in.  And we had to walk with our duffle bags for about a mile.  And when we got to there--I'm only saying this because it's interesting to me now that I think about it.  And they put us in cattle trucks, these big, long, semi-trailer trucks.  They loaded the whole ship up in about fifteen or twenty of those cattle trucks without a top on them, and drove us from Incheon to our camp.  And it was dusty.  Korea is a country where it rains, and an hour after it rains, it's like it never rained.  The trucks just ran dust everywhere.  We were so dusty when we got where we were going, we didn't know what to do (laughter).  But we got there and got hooked up.  And I got put, because of my scores, in the headquarters company of the IX Corps [Ninth Corps].  And I became, I got the position of chief computer in a fire-direction control unit.  My position called for a sergeant. I was a PFC [private first class], but that was the job I had.  And they don't automatically give you the rank just because you're in the position.  So I did that job, and I was with the 240 howitzers.  278, was the battalion I was with, the 278 battalion.  And I was with the 240 howitzers, that's the largest artillery piece the Army's ever had.  And when I got through with that, when we got through with that, they disbanded the company, and they no longer have that piece in the American arsenal.  It's now in the museum someplace.  And we went to, after that we went to Big 8s artillery pieces, the next largest.
Story_ID: 475731
Speaker 1: Were there other interesting stories about your stay in the service?
Speaker 2: Well, one I'd like to tell.  We were having an exercise, a firing exercise.  Every now and then the [U.S.] Army takes its troops out into the field, and you go through a simulation of war.  So we were, our job, again, was fire-direction control, and we controlled all of the artillery batteries for A, B, and C companies.  Now, there're three pieces in each of those, so that's nine pieces we have.  And we have to call in the directions, as to where to aim the pieces that they have.  So, that's our job here.  And we had, we had been trained that when you are in a mission, that nothing disturbs a mission; you concentrate on the mission.  So we were in this tent, and we had a simulated mission going, and I was giving instructions to my men who were computing the altitude of the weapon.  You had to get that, and you had to get the distance.  All of these had to be figured in, and we were calling it down.  And I was busy making sure that all of this was going on, and a brigadier general walked in the tent.  And he came over to the table where I was, and asked me what I was doing.  And I told him what I was doing, and how it was going and so forth.  And in the end, he looked up at me and said, "Private, I've been in the Army a long time, and you're the first person that didn't salute me."  You can imagine how I felt.  Well, I said, "Sorry, sir," and saluted him and went through all of that.  Then my battalion commander said, "I was gonna promote you," I had made corporal then.  And he said, "I was intending to promote you, but I can't do that on this.  I just can't do that."   So, I missed the promotion because I did not salute the general.  And I learned then, when a general comes around, nothing is more important than the general.  That's the lesson I learned from that.  Well, the long story of that is we went back to our campsite [in South Korea], and we were sleeping in tents.  And the natives would come into our tents every night and steal something.  And the battalion commander had ordered that someone, that the top person in each tent, which is a sergeant, would now have a guard posted every two hours of the men in the tent so that nobody could come in and steal.  So in one tent the sergeant didn't do that, and the people came in and stole something.  The major busted him from sergeant back to corporal, and gave me his stripes.  So, I ended up a sergeant.  And the thing about this is, in two years in the Army, I became sergeant.  It's almost unheard of.
Story_ID: 475732
Speaker 1: Any other interesting stories about Korea, about the country, about how you were treated as a soldier?  Because it was segregated then, was there anything that happened in that vein?
Speaker 2: The Koreans were very, very nice to all of us; they didn't have any segregation at all.  And keep in mind, I was in the first desegregated [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the first war that this country fought where the troops were intermingled, so I was involved in that.  And we didn't have a lot of that going on during that time, so I would say that I learned a few of the words.  I didn't learn to communicate in Korean, but I would go up to the DMZ [demilitarized zone].  Our headquarters were about a mile from the DMZ, the demilitarized zone, which is a twenty-five mile spread.  And we would sit up there with our binoculars and watch the North Koreans, who were the enemies, playing basketball and other things.  So we came to realize that they were soldiers just like we were, and chances are, thinking the same kinds of thoughts that we were thinking.  But the other thing that was interesting about the Army is that my salary in the Army was seventy-five dollars a month.  And my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] got, I think I put twenty-five--no, I put twenty-five dollars on hers so she could draw her money from the government.  And then I took out a war bond from that, so that's another $18.50.  So now, I'm down from $50 down to $32.50.  And I drew $32.50 for two years in the Army and never had a broke day, I always had money.  I could go anyplace I wanted to go and could buy anything I wanted to buy, and bought everything.  And the reason was the soldiers knew that I had money, and they would come and borrow money from me, and I would charge them whatever the going interest rate was, and they would pay it.  And on the first of the month, I'd get all that money back.  So not only did I have my money, but I had all of this coming back in.  So, I had plenty of money.  I was able to send home everything that I needed to.  And then I left Korea and went to Tokyo [Japan], and I spent the last twelve months, six to twelve months in Japan, and that was a good tour of duty also.  Nothing really interesting happened, except to be able to travel around Japan and see Mount Fuji and to go to different towns, Kyoto [Japan] and Yokohama [Japan], and visit, and just enjoy being there.  But I never learned the language there, either.
Story_ID: 475733
Speaker 1: So you come home in 1956?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five [1955], okay.  Now, you talked about the [U.S.] Army being desegregated, but you come home to a segregated town.  Tell me about that, how you felt about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I came home in November of '55 [1955].  And, now mind you, if you're drafted into the Army, your job is still yours when you get back.  So, my job at the training school [State Training School for Incorrigible Negro Boys; John H. Lilley Correctional Center, Boley, Oklahoma] was still mine.  And I went by to see the people at the training school and said, "Well, I will not be coming back.  So you can go ahead, whoever you have in this job you can go ahead and keep them."  I decided then I was going to college, I'm going to graduate school.  And my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] was working, and I decided to go to Oklahoma State University [The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University] in Stillwater, Oklahoma.  And I enrolled, and got out of the service about the 25th of November.  And I enrolled in graduate school in January of '06--no, of '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Of '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: And I had a good time.  I had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] with me, so I didn't have to worry too much; I had some money. The first time I had money to do something with.  Now I also got an assistant--a research assistantship, which paid for my schooling and paid me some money, and I saved my tuition money from the G.I. Bill.  So, when I finished in eighty--in '58 [1958], I had some money in the bank, first time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a good experience in Stillwater [Oklahoma].  I was the only African American in my department for the two years that I was there.  So everybody treated me I guess like I was somebody important, and they worked with me to help me get my master's degree.  And I stayed there for two years until '58 [1958], not that I was slow getting out.   I finished prior to the year before, but my wife was getting her master's degree in '58 [1958], so I stayed around so that we could march together, as we had done as undergraduates.
Speaker 1: And this was Oklahoma State?
Speaker 2: Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: (Pause) And you got your master's, you received your master's in--
Speaker 2: Agricultural economics.
Speaker 1: Okay, agricultural economics, okay.  So your wife also graduates, and her degree is in?
Speaker 2: Business education.
Story_ID: 475734
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, while I was--that last semester of '58 [1958], Virginia State University [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] recruited me.  John Larkin [ph.], who was dean of the school of agriculture at Virginia State University recruited me.  And I decided, my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] and I decided that we would go there in August of '58 [1958].  Now, interesting about that is I remember the salary for this one.  The salary was forty-eight hundred dollars for nine months of work; I'd get paid in ten months.  And I remember trying to decide whether I ought to drop out of school instead of staying at Oklahoma State [The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma] to get my doctorate, or go to work.  And I talked to my brother-in-law, Dorothy's [Dorothy Ponder Cooper] husband, Lee Cooper [Lee E. Cooper, Sr.].  I said, "Lee, I got a job offer in Virginia, and I'm trying to decide whether I ought to take it or not."  He says, "How much does it pay?"  I said, "Forty-eight hundred dollars."  He said, "I would go anywhere for forty-eight hundred dollars."  So I went there for forty-eight hundred dollars, and that was good (laughter).  I went there was an assistant professor and chair of the agribusiness department.  And I stayed there for three years until '61 [1961], and I enjoyed it.  I remember working late trying to be a good professor.  I worked with students; I tried to impress students to be something, like someone had done for me.  And I think I did a pretty good job of that.  I enjoyed the work, and took on all of the extra assignments that they would give me.  And I remember one year the person who was teaching economics in the school of business died suddenly.  And they had all of his classes and nobody to teach them.  So I went to the president and volunteered to teach his load.  Now, some people would say, "Boy, you sure are stupid."  Maybe I was, I don't know.  But I taught my courses and his courses, and got no increase in pay; the president did not offer to give me an increase in pay.  But I told him that I wanted to go to graduate school, and he said, "Very good, I'll help you."  And he then contacted the Virginia higher education authority [State Council of Higher Education for Virginia].  And during this time--and someone really needs to write about this.  In the South, since you could not go to graduate school in the South--an African American could not do that, segregation--the state department of education [Virginia Department of Education] provided a stipend for anybody who wanted to go to graduate school outside of the region.  So he did the paperwork for this, and I received, I think, twenty-five hundred dollars per month for every month I was at Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  Now with that, plus my research assistantship at Ohio State, plus my G.I. Bill [Serviceman's Readjustment Act of 1944], I was doing all right (laughter).
Story_ID: 475735
Speaker 1: So in '61 [1961], you left to go back to Oklahoma State [The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: No, no, Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Ohio State.  You went to Ohio State, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: For my doctorate, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ohio State, okay.  And that was in '61 [1961], right?
Speaker 2: In '61 [1961], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: September of '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: And, well, you were doing really well (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I spent two years there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I finished in August of '63 [1963] with my Ph.D.  I had a good two years there.  I had a good major professor.  I told my major professor that Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] had given me a two-year leave of absence.  I said that they might give me more if I need it, but I didn't know if they will, and that I'd like to finish in two years.  And he said, "Well, if you're willing to do the work, I'll help you finish in two years."  And I said, "I'll do the work."  And I did the work.  And this is, his name was Sherman, Dr. Sherman [ph.], he was my major professor.  And when I got down to my dissertation writing, I would write out my dissertation and my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] would type it.  And the next morning--she'd type it that night.  The next morning I would put that on my major professor's desk, Dr. Sherman.  At 4:30 that afternoon, it was back on my desk with red marks.  I took it home and gave it to my wife, and she typed in the corrections.  And by the time I finished writing, my dissertation was done and it was accepted.  So, again, I was the only African American in my department for the two years I was there, and everybody treated me very well.  And my major professor, I couldn't ask for anyone any better.  And when I finished there in August, I went back to Virginia State.
Story_ID: 475736
Speaker 1: At this time, civil rights are really heating up.  King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is marching in Washington [D.C.]. A lot of things are going on the Civil Rights Movement.  What's your thoughts about the climate of the country at that time?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I was very much aware of what was going on with the March on Washington in August of '63 [1963].  I was finishing up my dissertation, a bus, two or three busloads of persons left Columbus, Ohio at Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], going there.  I was not a part of it, because I was trying to get through.  But there was a lot of discussion about it, and everybody wanted to be a part of it.  And many of the students at Ohio State were involved in it.  I remember distinctly we would sit and talk about it when we had time for hours, what we were going to do about it when we got back to where we were going?  What can we do now?  How can we make Ohio State better?  All of those kinds of things we were talking about.  But we definitely were keeping up with what was going on; we definitely kept up with all of that, yeah.
Story_ID: 475737
Speaker 1: What about voter registration drives?  Do you remember the first time that you voted?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Let's see.  In '46 [1946] when I reached eighteen, I voted in the local election in Wewoka, Oklahoma.  And I have been a registered voter ever since and have participated in all of the elections.  I think my first presidential election--I'm thinking its Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], but it may not have been Eisenhower.  I may have voted for Truman [President Harry S. Truman] in his last election.  But, no, I didn't; it was Eisenhower, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember having any problems, or anyone in your town having problems voting?
Speaker 2: That's very interesting.  In Oklahoma we were fortunate.  There was segregation, let me say that right out, and things were not like they should have been, okay.  Now that I've said that. But I only discovered how bad segregation was when I left Oklahoma and went to Virginia to work [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and then left Virginia and went to Georgia to work [at Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  That's when I really found out how bad whites had treated African Americans.  Because in Oklahoma they didn't do--we never had to walk around whites.  We never had to call whites Mister, you know, none of those things.  We just had to go to the colored fountain, we had to do that.  So things were, things were different, and we knew they were different.  We knew we were African Americans and they were white, and there were places we couldn't go and they couldn't go.  But as a kid, I remember I would sneak in the white movies.  You know, I would do it on a bet.  My schoolmates would say, "I bet you could go in there if you wanted to."  And I said, "Oh, no, I couldn't."  Somebody said, "Yes, you could."  And then somebody would say, "I'll give you a quarter if you do it."  And then I'd do it; and I did this many times.  So, it just wasn't bad.  I remember as kids we played softball with the white softball team.  The parents didn't come out to watch it, but we played.  That's what we had.
Story_ID: 475738
Speaker 1: So what made the difference when you went to Virginia?  Was there something that happened that actually made you say, "Wow, this is so different from Oklahoma."
Speaker 2: Well, the difference was they made a big issue out of it.  Now in Oklahoma they had segregation, and you could not sit down at the counter.  You could not sit at the counter and drink a soda, you couldn't do that.  Now we knew that.  So we'd go and order--we'd go up to the counter and order what we wanted and then walk out with it.  That's the way we did it; we didn't try to sit down, okay.  But whites didn't make no big thing about it.  When I walked in the store, nobody got hefty and wanted to fight; I just bought what I wanted and walked out.  That happened wherever you went.  When I got to Virginia, they made a big thing about it.  If you weren't supposed to be in the Woolworth Store [F.W. Woolworth Company], and if you went in the front door to buy a hamburger, they wouldn't sell it to you.  They'd tell you to go around to the back.  That was, that was the difference.  They made big things about it, and that's when I first participated in the desegregation problem.  There was a store in Richmond, Virginia named Thalhimers.  And we all--it was just the department store.  Everybody had charge cards for Thalhimers.  And I remember at Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] we had a meeting one night and said, "Okay, we want everybody to tear up their Thalhimers cards."  And we tore up our Thalhimers cards because they wouldn't let us eat in the place.  So, that was the beginning of my getting involved in it, yeah.
Story_ID: 475739
Speaker 1: So of course, you heard about the bombings in Birmingham [Alabama], and Emmett Till, and when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, all of those things.  Were you--well, let's take one.  Let's talk about the assassination of President Kennedy.  What were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I was a young teacher trying to make it.  That was in November of '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I had just gotten back from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] with a brand new Ph.D., and I knew I was the baddest teacher there.  And when, I had a class at that hour, and some student came to me, came into the class and said, "They just shot Kennedy.  Can we go watch it?"  I said, "You can't get out of my class to watch nothing. Nothing was more important than my class."  So I remember this.  I made them stay in that class until it was over, and then I immediately went out afterwards and watched the news until late into the night as to what was going on.  But it was a lot of remorse.  My wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] came in and said that she was over in a little place called Colonial Heights [Virginia], and they laughed about it over there.
Story_ID: 475740
Speaker 1: So you said your wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder]--they were laughing about it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why were they laughing?
Speaker 2: The elementary school kids were laughing about it, she came in and told me that afterwards.  There were, now, everybody was not disappointed in Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] death.  I think that's the moral of that story.  I mean remember, now this is the president that said we're going to treat everybody right, and he had the National Guard out in Alabama and Mississippi and places.  So, these staunch segregationists didn't like that at all.  So that's why some of them were glad that he was shot.  So (nods).
Story_ID: 475741
Speaker 1: So you stay at Virginia--you're at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And you stayed there how long?
Speaker 2: Well, I stayed there four years total.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what happens next?  You have your Ph.D. and you leave there and go where?
Speaker 2: I left there and went to Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University] in Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now, your family is growing now, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes, Ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your family.
Speaker 2: Well, let's back up a little on the family.  My oldest daughter was born in 1958, November 27th of 1958 in Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what is her name?
Speaker 2: She was born in '59 [1959], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959], that's right, in Petersburg General Hospital [Southside Regional Medical Center] in Petersburg, Virginia.  And let me just tell you about this; I remember this.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name.
Speaker 2: Her name is Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder], C-H-E-R-Y-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I left the hospital--she must have been born about 1:06 in the afternoon.  I left the hospital and came back to Virginia State.  And there was a little hill you'd come up to get on the campus.  And when I turned the corner to go on the campus I put on my horn, and I went up the hill.  And everybody was looking, and I said, "It's a girl, it's a girl, it's a girl, it's a girl, it's a girl," and I did that all around the campus.  I was, I was really something.  And for my daughter Cheryl--you know, most people during that time would pass out cigars when kids were born.  Well, I decided to be different.  I went and bought some little Christmas angels [sic. bells], about this big; I still have a few of them.  And I wrote Cheryl.  Now, I took the time to write Cheryl on about a hundred or so of these little things.  And then I went to all of the five and dime stores and bought all that they had, so that I could do it.  And that's what I passed out commemorating the fact that my daughter was born.  So that was in '59 [1959] before I went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and it was fun.  My wife [Eunice Ponder Wilson] did a job of taking care of her while I was being stupid as a teacher, but it worked.  And then when I got back in--I came back in fifty-'63 [1963], and stayed one year. And in September of '64 [1964], I went to Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  But my baby girl, Anna [Anna Ponder], was born September the 14th of '64 [1964], and she was born in Petersburg General Hospital [Southside Regional Medical Center, Petersburg, Virginia] also.  And I also went out and bought--no, I got that backwards.  I bought some Christmas bells for Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder], and I bought some angels for Anna, and put Anna on all of them and passed those out.  So, everybody thought it was something.  Plus, at the time of each one's birth I went to a department store and I bought an African American doll that they probably--it's stored in here someplace even now, so that was it.
Story_ID: 475742
Speaker 1: Now, this becomes interesting.  Then I go to Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  Now, they offered me chair of the Department of Business and Economics, a full professor, to come there.  And, I about doubled my salary.  I don't remember exactly what it was, but it was close to double.  Well, I said--I remember talking with my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] and I said--.  This is what I said.  I had signed a contract to come there in probably June, and I said, "Georgia can't be that bad."  Now, this is the desegregation era now.  And I said, "Georgia can't be that bad."  That summer before I left going there in August--if you remember, there was an incident that happened.  An [U.S.] Army major was murdered on the highways of Georgia, and then I'm taking my family into Georgia.  So now I'm thinking, now I've got to think differently.  So, that's the part.  So, segregation now is becoming more personal, because I have a young family that I have to make sure that they get proper education, you know, all of that.  And I'm aware that since the public schools are being desegregated, that the whites are flying to private schools and all of that.  So, all of this I'm thinking about.  So then I--I've already signed the contract.  So, I'm now driving to Fort Valley with my wife and two daughters [Cheryl Ponder and Anna Ponder] in the automobile.  And I look in my rearview mirror after I get into Georgia, and I see the Confederate flag on a tag in the front of the car that's behind me.  And that car stayed behind me for a long time.  And I'd look up and see it, and I would just get angry, angry, angry, angry, angry.
Story_ID: 475743
Speaker 1: That went on for fifteen or twenty miles, you know.  Now, the person didn't bother me, they were just behind me.  And then in that process, I said, "Henry [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], something's wrong with you.  That flag has done nothing to you.  Why are you so upset?"  And I said that war [Civil War] was fought by all the men who believed differently from what I believed, but they were honorable nonetheless.  Now, this is a thought process.  I said the problem is we have let a few rascals make that flag ugly, and we need to do something about that.  And I said as soon as I get to Fort Valley [Georgia], I'm going to buy me a Confederate flag and put it on my automobile, and that's what I did.  Now, let me tell you, that was just my thinking.  None of my friends had any appreciation for that at all.  Ooh, they talked about me.  And I kept trying to point up that this was an honorable war (laughter), and just think what would happen if every African American here in Fort Valley would put one of these on his car; it would just completely take the stigma out of it.  It didn't work, but that was it.  And I kept it on my car for the two years I was in Fort Valley, yeah.
Speaker 2: Did anybody white ever approach you about it?
Speaker 1: Any whites?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No, never.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I, but I fought the civil rights battle almost every day in Fort Valley.  And I had a good experience at the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], let me say that.  So, that was great.  I'd say it was a great experience.  Now the community, that's where we had to fight.
Story_ID: 475744
Speaker 1: Now, again, I knew about the Hill-Burton Act [Hospital Construction and Survey Act of 1946], that set up hospitals all over the country.  And I knew that anything the federal government puts money in cannot be segregated.  You know, I'm armed with all of these facts.  And I'm going to give you a few incidents of how I was fighting this battle in Fort Valley [Georgia].  One, I noticed on my bank statement from the bank that somebody had written, Mr. Henry Ponder [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder], and erased it, and put Dr.  I said, "I've got to do something about this."  So I went to the bank, and I noticed--I didn't say anything about this--I'm just going to see what happens here.  I'm in line, and as I move up, white people--there's no segregation in this line, now.  All of us were trying to get our money put in or taken out.  A white guy in front of me, "How are you, Mr. Jones?"  A white woman in front of me, "How are you, Miss Jones?"  When I come up to the bank, "How are you, Henry?"  And that's where I developed the proclivity for foul language.  In the line, right there, I proceeded to use the vilest language I could to tell her or him that, "I don't like what you're doing, and you're going to treat me better than this."  I mean, I--but you just think of sailor's language telling her that.  So that's, that's what I did every time they would do that.  And then another time I went to the store and it was E.W. on the account; my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] had opened the account.  And instead of calling me Mr. Ponder, they called me E.W.  And, foul language again.  I didn't care if the person doing it was ninety-five years old, or thirteen years old, they got the same foul language.  So, that permeated through the community; that they got a nut up there at the school [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  That was one thing.  Now, that's trying to do business.  I'm insisting that you treat me the way you treat everybody else.  And they started doing it, I want you to know that.  When they discovered I wasn't going to take it, they started doing it a little differently.  So, I got a little courage.
Story_ID: 475745
Speaker 1: Then I went to the hospital.  My wife went to the hospital to see the doctor.   And while she was seeing the doctor, Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder] and I went to the waiting room where the television was.  Now, Cheryl is three or four years old, and she's crawling around on the floor and doing what kids do, and watching the show.  And somebody said something, some white man said something out of the way to her, I've forgotten now what it was.  Boy, I lit into him, wow.  And I stayed there, didn't leave, I stayed there.  Because I went to Hill-Burton [Hospital Construction and Survey Act of 1946] on him.  "This is Hill-Burton, I have as much right here as you," but I was using foul language to do it.  So, that was one thing.  But the real crowning blow--my wife got ill and went to a black doctor in Fort Valley [Georgia].  He suggested we go to Macon [Georgia] to the hospital, so I took my wife to the hospital in Macon.  I checked her in, and got on the elevator to take her up.  And everybody looked at the chart, "Eunice [Eunice Wilson Ponder], how you feeling?  Eunice, how you feeling?  Eunice, how you feeling?"  I know my head was turning red.  Ooh, I was getting mad.  I finally got her in her room.  I came downstairs and I said, "I want to speak to the manager of this hospital."  He said, "What do you want to see him about?"  I said, "I want to talk to him."  They tried to say, "Well, you can talk to--." I said, "No, I want to speak to the manager."  Finally, they got the manager.  The manager came in and said, "Yes, Sir, what can I do for you?"  Now, again, I know this is Hill-Burton, right.  So, that's the key, the Hill-Burton stuff.  I said, "Sir, ever since I've been in this hospital, persons have disrespected my wife.  Everybody has called her Eunice.  Now, at least you can call her, Miss.  And I went on.  He said, "Oh, you're angry about this?"  I said, "Yes, Sir."  He said, "Well, now, let's not have a chip on our shoulder."  I said, "Sir, if you think that insisting my wife be treated with dignity in this hospital is an indication that I have a chip on my shoulder, oh, you're so wrong.  I have a whole damn tree on my shoulder."  And he said, "Oh, that's the way you feel?"  I said, "Yes, Sir."  He said, "Well, I'll take care of that."  Then I go back to Fort Valley, and I leave my wife.  I go back to Fort Valley and I tell one of my buddies what I'd done.  He said, "Man, are you crazy?"  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "They might poison your wife over there," (laughter).  Then suddenly I realized, you know, they could do that.  Now, I've got 'til morning (laughter).  The next day I'm on my way to the hospital.  So, I head to the hospital.  I go up to her room, and the first thing my wife says is, "What did you say to these people?"  And I just knew things had fallen apart.  I said, "What have they done to you?"  She said, "They have treated me like I'm a queen in this place."  I said, "Oh, thank you."  So, those are my experiences which led me to believe that if you insist on being treated right, then unless you're just with the wrong crowd, you'll be treated right.  And after that, things were a little better.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 475746
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then we left there [Fort Valley, Georgia] (laughter) and went to Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] in Huntsville, Alabama as vice president for academic affairs, another promotion (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year was this?
Speaker 1: I went to Alabama A and M in 1966.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this was another promotion?  You say this was another promotion for you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the vice president for academic affairs.  You notice on my resume that every move I made was a step up.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Was there anything that happened there that you want to talk about?
Speaker 1: I had a tremendously good experience there.  And let me say that Huntsville, Alabama, during the time I was there, '66 [1966] to '73 [1973], was almost like not being in Alabama.  And everybody talked about north Alabama as being different from the rest of Alabama.  Nobody mistreated me in words or deeds.  African Americans were treated with respect in Huntsville, Alabama.
Story_ID: 475747
Speaker 1: One-I'll give you an anecdotal story.  When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, I lived right off the campus.  And I looked out and the students were marching past my house.  And I walked out and said, "Hey, what's going on?"  They said, "Martin Luther King's been assassinated."  Well, I knew that, because I was watching it.  I said, "But what's going on here?"  They said, "We're marching down to the courthouse and protest."  I said, "Okay."  They said, "Come on and go with us."  I said, "Okay, I'll go with you."  And on the way down there--now, this is at least two hundred students, probably more than that.  And we're marching down the main highway to get from the campus into the city.  And the police cars came out to meet us, and I said to the students, "Wait here and let me go talk with them."  And the chief of police was a person who was enrolled in a class at Alabama A and M University [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], and there had been some question about whether he should wear his weapon during the class.  And I came to his defense and said, "He told me that a police officer is never supposed to be without his weapon.  You know, that's just the rule."  And I came to his defense and suggested to the teacher and everybody else that, "You know, let's ignore this.  This is the first time we've had a police officer in class, so let's see if we can't go along with it."  So, it worked.  And he was in charge of the group coming out to meet us.  And I talked with him, I said, "What's going on?"  He said, "You know we, I want to make sure that we don't have any trouble."  I said, "Well, I don't think we're going to have any trouble."  He said, "Well, what do you want me to do?"  I said, "First of all," they had riot guns.  I said, "First of all, put these guns out of sight.  You won't need those."  He said, "Okay.  What else do you want me to do?"  I said, "I'd like for you to give us a police escort to the courthouse."  He said, "Okay, I'll do that."  And this is in Huntsville, Alabama, and we had to go under an overpass.  Before we got there, this chief of police sent two motorcycle policemen up on the overpass on both ends of it.  Stopped all the traffic.
Story_ID: 475748
Speaker 1: This is a major highway, now.  And they stopped all the traffic coming.  Nobody could cross that bridge until all of our students got through it.  Then when we got into town, he put an officer at every intersection, every street, and stopped all the traffic until we got past that.  And then we got to the place.  And when we got to the place, the county police had riot guns, and were circling the building; we couldn't do anything about that.  Then the students said to me, "Well, Dean Ponder [HistoryMaker Henry Ponder]," that's what they called me, "We want you to say something."  Now here I am speaking to this crowd of students, and I got a chance to see how easy it is for words to start a riot.  I would, I would try to get emotional and say something great, and I could feel the surge of the students, ready to explode.  Then I'd have to ease off that and say something to quiet it down.  And I talked for about thirty minutes, and when I finished talking the students said, "Well, we're ready to go back home now."  And I said, "Well, we got buses here."  The business manager had brought buses to bring them back.  And one of the students said, "Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] didn't ride buses, we're going to walk back."  So now I've got to get the policemen to get us back to the campus.  And they did the very same thing, got us back to the campus without an incident.  That's just an idea of how I got involved in a lot of things that I wouldn't have been involved in otherwise.  But Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] was just an outstanding experience.
Story_ID: 475749
Speaker 1: You stayed [at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] until 1973?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did the thought in your mind go back to the time when you first decided that you wanted to be a university president?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm still thinking about that now.  And, and, and, from the time I left Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] with my doctorate, that was the number one goal in everything that I did.  Because every time I made a move academically, I moved myself closer to the presidency.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from Alabama A and M, as vice president for academic affairs, the next position is the president.  I had a number of offers to go places for positions of vice president for academic affairs, for research assistant at major institutions in the country.  But that was not getting me closer to the presidency.  I had an offer to go to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], and I turned that down because I wanted this.  And then somewhere in there, it must have been about '70 [1970], they offered me the position of president of Saint Paul's College in Lawrenceville, Virginia.  And I did the interview, and they announced that [HistoryMaker] Henry Ponder is the president of Saint Paul's College; it was on television and everywhere.  And my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] said, "You know, I haven't seen this place."  I said, "Okay, let's go."  So, we caught a plane and took the kids to Greensboro [North Carolina], and from Greensboro we drove to Lawrenceville.
Story_ID: 475750
Speaker 1: So you're on your way to Saint Paul [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia].
Speaker 2: My wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] said, "I'd like to see the place."  So we drove over and went in and they treated us royally, and we spent the night.  It was a weekend, so we spent Saturday night in a Holiday Inn.  And the next day we came on back to Huntsville [Alabama].  And my wife said, "You know, I don't believe I can go to Lawrenceville [Virginia]."  Now, mind you, we drove around the town on a Saturday, and it was just like my childhood.  On Saturday, all the African Americans come to town and stand on the corner.  That's where they were.  We had discovered that all of the whites in the community had gone to private schools, and the only people in the public schools were African Americans at that time, and there was no chance in Lawrenceville for them to participate in Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and Cub Scouts, and dance, and all the things they were involved in.  So she said, "You know, I just can't see us giving up what we have for that."  So we talked about it, and I said, "Well, if I turn this down, it might mean that I'm stuck here at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] for the rest of my career."  And we talked about that, and she said, "Well, probably it won't happen.  Let's give it a chance."  So I called the chairman of the board and told him, "I'm sorry, but I cannot accept the job."  And I wrote him a letter and explained that it was not, it was all personal, and had nothing to do with how I was treated when I was there.  I tried to make sure that he understood that the people there did not turn me off.  It was hard for me to convince him of that, and I'm not sure I did.  He just assumed that somebody did that.  But I turned that one down.
Story_ID: 475751
Speaker 1: Then a few years later in '73 [1973], I was offered a job as president of Benedict College in Columbia, South Carolina, and we took that.  And that was a good experience, a very good experience.  We had all the things that we wanted, and we were able to do some things to make sure that the college grew.  We increased the endowment, added some new programs, increased the enrollment, and increased the number of Ph.D.'s on the faculty.  We did all the things that we should do.  We raised money; we were able to raise quite a bit of money, and we left the place with about $13 million in the endowment.  So--
Speaker 2: The endowment was very--well, let's talk about Benedict College.  Because historically it was a college that was established for recently emancipated African Americans.  Is that right?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: So, how did you feel about that part of the history of the school?
Speaker 1: Well, I took pride in that part of the history.  It was, it was started by the, the first president was Henry Tisdale [sic. Timothy L. Dodge].  And a lady from Boston [Massachusetts] gave the money to buy the land to set up the first school, to set up the first building for the recently emancipated African Americans.  And I felt very good about this, and felt that the school needed to stay true to that heritage, rather than trying to hang out its shingle as educating the elite.  Rather than that, we ought to make sure that we try to educate those youngsters that have difficulty getting into colleges and universities on a general basis.  So in other words, I took the position that if I had a choice--if I didn't have but five positions left in my freshman class, and had a choice between five students who had the highest GPA [grade point average] possible, or students who just barely had a GPA for admission--I would take the five on the lower end, because those on the upper end could always go someplace else if they wanted to, and those on the lower end couldn't.  So, I took that position.  I also took the position that we hang our shingle out as an open admissions college.  And an open admissions college means that you accept students where they are, and proceed to move them to where they ought to be at graduation, so let's stay true to that image rather than trying to compete for the high scoring students.  And I also reasoned that if we tried to compete with Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we can't do that.  Harvard knows how to educate smart people, they know how to do that.  If we tried to compete with them on that, we'd lose every time.  But Harvard does not know how to educate youngsters who need to be motivated.  We know how to do that.  Let us continue to do that, and let Harvard continue to do what they're doing.  If we do that, then there will always be a place for a Benedict College.
Story_ID: 475752
Speaker 1: This was a Christian school, and at one time they trained teachers and clergy.  How did that change?
Speaker 2: That changed before I got there.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But it was still the thrust when I got there, if you add into that, teacher education.  Teacher education and the seminary would have been the things that they were dealing with.  And I just simply said let's expand this.  Let's not lose that, but let's expand it.  We can do that and add business, and add science, and add these other things, and then we're catering to what students need today rather than what we started out to do.  And the point was let's be ready and able to change as we go through, depending on what society is asking for.  And we were able to sell that idea, and it worked very well.
Speaker 1: So you stayed at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] for how long?
Speaker 2: I stayed at Benedict for eleven years, '73 [1973] to '84 [1984].
Story_ID: 475753
Speaker 1: And what was your next move?
Speaker 2: And in '84 [1984], I was recruited to go to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and I accepted that challenge.  Most of my colleagues said, "Man, don't do that.  Fisk is in deep trouble."  They had been in the paper for not being able to pay their bills.   And student enrollment was down and they couldn't get any money, and they were standing on the street corners with cups collecting money. "You ought to not go there.  You've got a good thing here at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina], you ought to stay."  So I said, "No, I'll accept that challenge."  And again, Mary McLeod Bethune was the thing.  She accepted the challenge to start a school with no money, fifty cents, a dollar and fifty cents, you know.  So I said if she can do that, I ought to be able to go to Fisk.  Plus, I reasoned that right after slavery uneducated African Americans set up these schools and financed them up to this point.  Now, I have a Ph.D., and I don't have enough sense to do what they did.  And at this time, this is what is needed now, not some other place.  And if I don't go to Fisk and it closes, I would forever ask myself, "I wonder what would have happened if I had gone."  So, I went.  I'd rather go and fail and know I tried, than to live forever on the what if side of the question.  So I went, and things worked out very well.  We were able to raise money; we increased the student body; we did some remodeling of the buildings that we had; and had some good support from all around at this university.  And we were able to increase that endowment to about ten million [dollars] when we left.  And we added some courses, and we were involved in research.  So, it was just a good experience.
Story_ID: 475754
Speaker 1: So now you have achieved at least one of your goals, and that goal was to become a president at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina], and now at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  What were you thinking when you finally became president of a university?
Speaker 2: Of those?
Speaker 1: I mean the first time--I mean Benedict was the first time you became a president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of a university.  What were your thoughts?
Speaker 2: Well, my thoughts were that, you have it now.  What are you going to do with it?  You must make a name for yourself and for this institution.  You want people to say that the institution is better after you, because of you, than it would have been had you not come.  And everything that I did, that was the test that I would put to it.  Will this make the college or the university better if I would come?  You know, you look in the mirror, and you can't fool that person.  And if I came up with the answer of, no, this will not make it better, I would not do it, I didn't care what it was.  But if the conclusion was it would be better, I would do it.  And that's what I, what I lived by, just trying to make it better, trying to do something for the youngsters entrusted to me to make sure that they have a good experience and make sure that they leave here able to do all the things that they should be able to do, and have parents and alumni feel good about the fact that you were here.  That was it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So you stayed at Fisk until what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996].
Story_ID: 475755
Speaker 1: And then they had an opening at the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education [NAFEO] as a CEO and president.  And I applied for this, since I was retiring from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] at the end of '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when this came open, I said, "Let me see what will happen."  I applied and they hired me.  And the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education is the umbrella organization for all of the 118 historical black colleges and universities [HBCUs] in the country.  So I had that as the membership, and gave leadership now not to one college, but to 118.  And I felt that that was a bigger arena, and let's try to do something here.
Story_ID: 475756
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other organizations did you belong to at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness, I probably was a member of all of the higher education organizations going--the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, which was the accrediting body, I was an officer in that.  The United Negro College Fund [UNCF], I was the chair of the membership there.  ACE [American Council on Education], that's the umbrella organization for all of higher education, white and black, I was a board member there.  The higher--the Teacher Education [American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education], a higher education group, I was a member of that.  I was a member of the counselors' group.  They have organizations on a national basis that are the super numen for all of the organizations.  For example, all the Catholic schools have a national organization.  All of the Methodist schools have one.  So, I was a member of all of these.  And the big one is ACE, the American Council on Education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I tried to participate and give a voice.  I discovered that in all of these organizations, if African Americans are not present when they're sitting down talking about what the policies ought to be, they have a tendency to ignore us, or not even think about us.  Not ignore, that's a different word; they don't even think about us.  But if you're sitting at the table and you will speak up when they say something that is not appropriate for our institutions, they will listen.  And if you articulate your view, chances are they will go along with it.  So I took it on myself as a responsibility, along with many others, that we ought to be there--that our presence ought to be there, so that we can make sure that we're treated properly, fairly, and equitably.
Story_ID: 475757
Speaker 1: So you stayed there how long?
Speaker 2: I stayed there [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] for five years.
Speaker 1: Five years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, until '01 [2001], 2001.
Speaker 1: And what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, then I was talking to a friend in Washington, D.C. one day.  And he had a friend from Oklahoma that was running a business, and he needed a man in Washington to help him get federal funds for his small business.  And I said, "Well, I'm free after July 1."  And he said, "Well, let me hire you as a consultant."  So I said, "Fine."  And I did that for a while, and I just went--he'd tell me the congresspersons that I needed to talk with about his business, and I would go and talk with them.  And I got him some money for that.  And then in September--that was in July--in September I got a call from the chairman of the board of Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] saying they'd like for me to come there as president.  And I said, "Well, I believe I'll give that a try."  And in October, I went there as president of Talladega College in Talladega, Alabama.
Story_ID: 475758
Speaker 1: Anything you want to talk about that happened at Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: That was, that was a good experience.  The alumni and the faculty and the students were just great to deal with.  It's the one school of all that I've dealt with where I never heard an alumnus say a negative word about the college.  I mean it's--everyplace else--the alumni worked very well at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] and at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I don't mean that.  But every now and then somebody would have something that wasn't going right.  I mean that's to be expected, you just come to expect that.  And that's a negative criticism of the alumni, that's what they should do.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But at Talladega, not one person ever came to me and said something negative about what was going on at Talladega College.  They were just happy that things were going as well as they were, and, "Thank you for coming here to help us out of the dilemma."  The big thing about that one was they had lost their accreditation, and I was able during my stay to get their accreditation reaffirmed.  And I think that was the highlight of my two years there.
Story_ID: 475759
Speaker 1: Tell me about your involvement in church.
Speaker 2: Well, I've always been involved in church, even as a youngster in Oklahoma.  Every Sunday, from the time I can remember, I went to Sunday school; each Sunday.  The Sunday school was run primarily by youngsters.  In my growing up, I don't ever remember a parent coming to Sunday school.  The Sunday school superintendent, the secretary, the teachers, all were in--perhaps teenagers up to eighteen and nineteen at the most.  And, and, I learned--my knowledge of the Bible I think primarily comes from my years spent in Sunday school reading the Sunday school lesson.  You know, before I could read well, they had us reading verses in Sunday school, and learning verses and so forth.  So I now can quote some scriptures that I learned then, and I give them credit for it.  So, I've been involved in church.  I went to church, but Sunday school was the thing that really got me started.  I went to church not every Sunday, but most of the time.  Sometimes I'd play hooky from church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And every place I have gone as an adult, I have joined the church there.  When I went to Petersburg [Virginia], when I went to--when I got out of the [U.S.] Army and went to Stillwater [Oklahoma], I joined the church there.  When I left Stillwater and went to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I joined the church there.  When I left there and went to Ohio, I joined in Columbus [Ohio].  I left there and came back and then went to Fort Valley [Georgia], and I joined there.  You know, so every place I have been, I've been active in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are you also involved with the Masons?
Speaker 2: In what?
Speaker 1: The Masons?
Speaker 2: Not active now.  I once was very active.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but now I'm not very active.
Story_ID: 475760
Speaker 1: Tell me about your honorary degrees.
Speaker 2: The first one was Alderson Broaddus [Alderson Broaddus College; Alderson Broaddus University, Philippi, West Virginia], I think right off, and that's the school in West Virginia.  And I had met this person through affiliation with the American Baptist Association.  And we were both operating--I was at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] and we were both operating Baptist-related schools.  And he took a liking to me, you know, he liked my approach to things and so forth.  And he asked me if I would do them the honor of letting them give me an honorary degree.  And I said I'd be happy to, and so they did.  And that being the first is just one that kind of, you know, it sticks out for me.
Story_ID: 475761
Speaker 1: So you leave Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] when?
Speaker 2: In July of '03 [2003], 2003.
Speaker 1: Well, I thought that's when--when did you go there?
Speaker 2: I went there in October of 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay (pause).  And in 2003 when you leave there, what happens next?
Speaker 2: Retired.  I came to Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, and I've just enjoyed being a part of this.  I've done a little consulting work while here, but I'm just really enjoying myself.
Speaker 1: What made you choose Hilton Head Island to settle in for retirement?
Speaker 2: It was a process of elimination.  My wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] and I visited here when we were at Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina].  We would bring faculty groups here for faculty orientation and so forth.  We'd bring them to Hilton Head, and we'd take them to Fripp Island [South Carolina] and other islands around South Carolina.  And we visited New York [New York], we visited Hawaii, we visited Senegal, we visited the Gulf Coast in Mississippi, the Gulf Coast in Alabama, San Diego, California, L.A. [Los Angeles, California], San Francisco [California], Las Vegas [Nevada], just a lot of places.  And, and, over the years we knew that one day we would be retiring.  So we said, "Well, let's kind of look at it in terms of where we would like to retire."  And we would go to a place and say, "Oh, we like this."  And I'd say, "Okay, what about living there?"  And we'd give it some thought, and then something would come up, "No, I don't think we'd like that."  But the only place that we could never forget about, that we could never find something that says, "No, let's not go there," was Hilton Head.  And once we were down here, and the kids came over, they were riding bicycles through, and they came over, this place was being built.  And the kids came back over, and we were living right across the street over there.  And they said, "Mommy, Mommy you have to go see this place.  It's just the place for you.  I know you'd like it."  She came over and looked at this, and talked to the contractor and asked if she had the opportunity to make some changes in it since they had not finished it.  They said they'd be glad to.  They said, "If you pay for them, we'll be glad to do it."  And she said, "Fine."  And she told me, "That looks like the place."  We signed the contract, and that's it.  Now prior to that, we had made a down payment on another piece of property in Sea Pines [Sea Pines Plantation, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], which is down the street here.  And another person had made a down payment the same day we did, and they'd done it about an hour before we had.  And it's a first come, first serve business.  And our agency said, "We don't think they're going to buy it."  So it turned out that the man bought it, so they gave us our money back and we went and put it on this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we have been very happy.
Story_ID: 475762
Speaker 1: Talking about your daughters, tell me about them growing up, now.
Speaker 2: Well, growing up, they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, what I mean is, I'm, I'm positive--because I know how you are about education--that they have gone on to college.  Tell me about what they're doing and the schools that they went to.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, first of all we decided that we were going to give our children the best education that we could afford, we decided that.  So, with Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder], our oldest daughter, we sent her to private school.  She went to private elementary school and private high school.  And our reason was if you get a good foundation in elementary and high school, you can go to college anyplace, you know, and do all right.  So, she did fine in that.  And then when she got ready for college, we took her on tours of colleges that she wanted to visit.  Now, I had always--when my daughters would say, "I believe I'd like to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and major in agronomy," I would say, "That's good.  They've got a good agronomy program.  And now also, if you look at it, Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] has a good agronomy program also.  You might want to take a look at that."  So, every time they'd say what they might be interested it and where they wanted to go, I'd find a black college [HBCU] that had the same thing, and throw that on the table.  And I gave them the book of the black colleges, and said, "Look through this."  And so, we took Cheryl on a couple of visits.  And when she went and got to Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], a beautiful campus, she fell in love with it.  And she said, "This is where I'm going to school.  You don't have to go anyplace else."  So she went to Dillard, and then did a Master's in Business Administration at Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and she has worked in higher education since then.
Story_ID: 475763
Speaker 1: And Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder] has worked in higher education.  She was at Claflin University [Orangeburg, South Carolina], and joined the freshman program there and did an outstanding job.  But then she came to me one day and said, "You know, Dad, you and Mama [Eunice Wilson Ponder] have looked after me all my life.  And I think it's time for me to look after you.  And I think I'll just come to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and I'll find a job there someplace.  And whatever you need--I know you don't need me, but whatever I can do to help make life better for you, I'll do it."  So I felt pretty good about that.  And she moved in here a couple of years ago, and now she's a counselor over at Hilton Head High School [Hilton Head Island High School, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] for the district, and doing an outstanding job.  So, we feel very good about that.  But she also said to me once in talking, you know, why she went to a black college [HBCU], and she was very committed to that.  And she said to me that, "Daddy, you spent your whole life, your career, in black higher education, and I would not embarrass you by going to a white school."  So, that's the kind of kid she is, and she makes me feel very proud of that.  And my youngest daughter, Anna [Anna Ponder], who was born July 14th, 1964, is also that kind of person.  She didn't go to private school, except for high school.  In high school she went to a private school.  But she was just an outstanding kind of student.  She was into all of the drama clubs and all of that, so.  And when she graduated, we took her around to colleges and universities.  And she went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and she thought that's where she was going to go.  And she had become a Merit Scholar [National Merit Scholarship], and we sent the information to Hampton.  And the Merit Scholar, they only send it to but one place.  If you don't go where they send it, you're not a Merit Scholar.  So then we took her to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and she saw that and said, "This is where I'm going."  So, she ended up at Spelman, and she majored in French.  She spent one year at the University of Strasbourg [Strasbourg, France] in France, and did very well.  And after that she decided she wanted to go into international relations, so she went to Johns Hopkins University in the School of International Studies [Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, Washington, D.C.] and got a master's [degree] there.  And then she decided she wanted a Ph.D. and she went to Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] and received a Ph.D. from Yale University.  And she has worked in New York [New York], she is a New York lady now.  She wouldn't take anything from New York; she worked with a foundation, the Robin Hood Foundation [New York, New York], as a fundraiser for a while.  And recently she has changed jobs to become an investor with Tudor [Tudor Investment Corporation, Greenwich, Connecticut], T-U-D-O-R, the investment group, which is a hedge fund company, and she enjoys it very well.
Story_ID: 475764
Speaker 1: The two daughters [Cheryl Ponder and Anna Ponder] have done very well for themselves, we're very proud of them.  And my wife [Eunice Wilson Ponder] gets all the credit for making sure they do, they did what they should do, because I was busy working.  And she did an outstanding job, and I want to take this opportunity to say that there's nothing quite like having a good marriage where you don't fuss and fight all the time.  And our kids have never heard us fussing and fighting, so when we do it, we do it out of their sight (laughter).  But she did a good job with them.  But in the interim, as you've already heard, we graduated from college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] together in 1951.  And we graduated with a master's degree together in 1958 [from The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma].  And then she always wanted to get a doctorate, and, but she didn't want to leave home to do it and leave me by myself to do it and leave the kids.  So when the kids went off to college and we got to Columbia, South Carolina, I said, "Now, you got a chance to get your doctorate, and sleep in your bed every night.  What's the problem?"  She said, "I don't see one."  So she went to the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] and ended up getting her doctorate.  So, we have a family now of persons with doctorates, and we feel very proud of that.  But my wife is the thing that has caused me to get where I am.  Because not one time did I ever come home and say, "I got a job offer," and she said, "I don't want to go, I don't want to leave my friends.  I don't want to take my kids out of school."  She said, "How soon do we leave?"  And if you have that kind of helpmate, then things are pretty easy for you to advance in this society.  Without that, it becomes extremely difficult.  Because if you have to fight on the job to get things done, and then come home and have to fight, there's too much fighting.  And I think that's what causes people to lose sight of the real world.  So I'm very fortunate and thankful for my family, and my wife is primarily the cause of that.
Story_ID: 475765
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, what one thing stands out in your memory the most?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that stands out in my memory would be my teacher, Theodore Malone [at the Johnson Grove School, Wewoka, Oklahoma], who took time to encourage me to do what he thought I could do.  He always said that I could be something, and this is now up to the seventh, ninth, the eighth grade.  So, if you're encouraging me at that level, it sort of takes root.  And I think that was the thing that just really did it.
Story_ID: 475766
Speaker 1: That stands out in your mind so much, and the fact that he [Theodore Malone] encouraged you--thinking about sharing your story right now will be available for the future generations.  What message would you like to send to the future generation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to just say that you ought to decide that you want to be something, whatever that is.  I would not try to say what that is, but each person ought to decide they want to be something of greatness.  You just ought to strive for greatness, and decide that.  And then ask people and read about what it takes to get there, and put yourself on the path to be able to do that, and never let negative people cause you to not do your best.  And negative people are always available; you just simply have to go around them.  But just keep in mind that you can be whatever you want to be, if you want to work at being that.  And that's the message I'd like to leave.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that we have not spoken about that you'd like to speak about?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything else, except to say that in all of what I have done and whatever I have accomplished, I'm fully aware that I did not do it myself.  I am fully aware that I have stood, and am standing on the shoulders of giants who proceeded me, and without them, what I have done would have been impossible.  And I think we ought never forget that.  If there's anything you ought to remember it's from whence you came, and try to improve that status as you improve yourself.
Story_ID: 475767
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who had an idea that a college education is something that ought to be in the possibility for every human being on this earth, and that previous academic showings, previous income levels should have nothing to do with that.  And we ought to come up with a society that will guarantee every youngster the right to pursue a college education.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Well, I'd like to thank you for taking the time to share your story, it's an important story.  I know that, you know, that you're busy.  And actually taking the time will give the future generations the inspiration that is needed today.  So, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 475768
Speaker 1: This is the dedication of the Henry Ponder Fine Arts building [Henry Ponder Fine Arts and Humanities Center] at Benedict College in Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, Sir, please tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the membership presidents of, the members of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], meeting with President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Okay, Sir, next.
Speaker 2: This is a black-tie affair for the, during the Christmas holidays with myself and my wife Eunice [Eunice Wilson Ponder] with President and Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] in the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is my father's siblings.  And this is my father here and his siblings, taken very, very early.
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?  Can you name anybody?
Speaker 2: And I can't name another soul on there, but my father's name is Frank [Frank Ponder, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is my sister's homestead outside of Wewoka, Oklahoma with all of the out-buildings, and the automobiles and tractors there.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Yes. Okay.  This picture was taken at the White House.  And it's a picture of myself and my wife Eunice with President George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and his wife Barbara Bush.
Speaker 1: Okay Sir, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a very historic picture.  It was taken at the home of Bill [Bill Cosby] and Camille Cosby in their home in New York City [New York, New York].  This is Mrs. Cheek [Celestine Cheek], the wife of the president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  This is Dr. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], the president of Howard University at the time.  This is Camille Cosby, this is [HistoryMaker] Henry Ponder, this is Eunice Ponder, and this is Bill Cosby.  This picture was taken on the night when Bill Cosby gave me a check for $1.3 million for Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, Sir, ready.
Speaker 2: This is Henry Ponder graduating from college [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] in 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is me, my high school graduation [from Douglas High School, Wewoka, Oklahoma] photo.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Out of fourteen, five missing. Okay, this is a birthday present from my wife--for my mother, who is this person--
Speaker 1: Say from left to right and name the people.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is my mother's birthday party that the family gave for her, and these are her children.  This is my sister, Mayme [Mayme Ponder Jackson]--
Speaker 1: Okay, just say--you don't have to point.
Speaker 2: From left to right this is my sister Mayme; my brother, Bishop Alonzo [Alonzo Ponder]; my sister Anne [Anne Ponder Bell]; myself; my mother, Lillie Mae Ponder [Lillie Mae Edwards Ponder]; my baby sister, Eva [Eva Ponder McGough]; my sister Dorothy [Dorothy Ponder Cooper]; my brother Paul [Paul Harding Ponder]; my oldest sister, Katheryn [Katheryn Ponder Brown]; and my brother Frank [Frank Ponder, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of me in my [U.S.] Army uniform, taken in 1954.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is the master's degree picture for my wife Eunice and me in 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: These are the three women in my life.  From left to right, my oldest daughter Cheryl [Cheryl Ponder], my wife Eunice, and my baby girl, Anna [Anna Ponder].
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of me taken at an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] general convention.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Lillie Mae Ponder in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: This picture was taken on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina during one of our anniversary celebrations.  This is my wife Eunice and me.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1998.  The occasion is when the Oklahoma State University [Stillwater, Oklahoma] awarded me the Distinguished Alumnus Award, along with the other four gentlemen on the picture.  I'm in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken during one of our family reunions for the Ponder family.  And it's a picture of my siblings, my nephews and nieces, and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is the annual convention of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education. And we are presenting to President Bill Clinton a Distinguished Service Award.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Vice President Al Gore taken on one of my many visits when we had conversations together.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken with comedian [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory at one of the National Association for Equal Opportunity and Higher Education annual conventions.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: This was one of my major speeches given to encourage youngsters to become a part of the free enterprise system.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me taken during one of my trips to Israel, me floating in the Dead Sea.
