Story_ID: 663007
Speaker 1: Good morning.  I am Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines] with The HistoryMakers.  The videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Merline Pitre: M-E-R-L-I-N-E, P-I-T-R-E.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November the 28th, 19--six- 2016 (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what location are we?
Speaker 2: We're at Texas Southern University located at 3100 Cleburne Avenue [sic. Cleburne Street], Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: My profession is a professional historian.
Story_ID: 663008
Speaker 1: Just to get started, let's--I'm going to ask you a few ques--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream (laughter).
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a quote or saying that you just really love?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It is a quote given by Frederick Douglass: there's no progress without a struggle.
Story_ID: 663009
Speaker 1: All right.  So let's begin with telling me when you were born and where you were born.
Speaker 2: I was born in 1943 in a small community called Plaisance, which is located in St. Landry Parish [Louisiana], seven miles from the city government, which is Opelousas, Louisiana.  And, of course, all of our mail comes via Opelousas, so we usually say we're from Opelousas; but it's a small community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what month and day were you born?
Speaker 2: April 10th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we talk more about you, let's talk about your parents.  Can you give me your, your mother's name and where she was born and her date of birth if you know it?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in--same place, Opelousas--Plaisance, Louisiana, in 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Florence, Florence White Pitre.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She had twelve brothers and sisters--four brothers and eight sisters.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her growing up in that community?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of the things she might have shared with you about her growing up.
Speaker 2: She talked about the condition of living at the time, but also the fact that my grandfather [Vallery White] stressed education--that he and a number of, of the men in the community were the ones who went and built the school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana] when they got funds from Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald Fund].  He sent them to school until eighth grade.  That's as far as it went at that time; and then later, she had to stop.  But he stressed school and church.  My grandmother [Rosella Sam White] would always send them to Sunday school.  They also shared the value of helping other people in the community--that is, lifting as you climb; and so that community, you will find now have probably more educated, college educated individuals than any other community in St. Landry Parish, and that's a result of this community using self help to help themself advance the community, advance themself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, you said your mother had to stop at eighth grade.  Why did she have to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was no school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The school only went eighth grade; and, of course, you know, they were farmers also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did she do after school?
Speaker 2: Well, they, they were farmers, so there was always work to do (laughter).  After school, she went back after--well, after a long period of time and got her GED [General Educational Development]; but during the time that she was growing up, there was always something to do in the field or (laughter) in the community.
Story_ID: 663010
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: The same applied to my father.  Father, was a--you might say a low key individual, but he also stressed industry, helping each other; and, of course, we, we were sharecroppers, so he was always trying to find some ways to make ends meet.  As a matter of fact, he was one of the few who had a car in the family and transported people from one place to the other, but, of course, you know, the, the whole issue of sharecropping kept you down.
Speaker 1: Well, before you go forward, tell me your father's name and when he was born and where he was born as well.
Speaker 2: My father was Robert Pitre.  He was born in the same community, Plaisance [Louisiana]; Opelousas, Louisiana.  He was born September 22nd.  I'm not exactly sure, I think, 1908 that he was born.
Story_ID: 663011
Speaker 1: So you talked about that your grandparents got money to build a Rosenwald school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana].  Tell me more about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  He didn't get money.  Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald Fund] would give them the money (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's what I mean.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  It would--
Speaker 1: Well he would--they would give the money to build the schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the community had to match the money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So in terms of matching, they did match the money, but they, they did in kinds thing, too, like helped to build--taking turns leaving out of their field, going and build the building, actually playing carpenter at that time.
Speaker 1: So tell me about--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  So tell me more about your grandfather.  Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: Vallery White.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where he came from.  There are--there was an old lady who said that he came from Alabama, his parents came from Alabama.  There was another who said they came from Mississippi, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Rosella Sam White.  She resided in the same community [Plaisance, Louisiana].  It appears that her family was economically better off than he was.  They supposedly owned a lot of property, and her father was voting until 1896, up to the time that Louisiana would pass the grandfather clause, or, or similar subterfuge that would prevent them from voting; so they had a lot of mon- not a lot of money, a lot of property.  I don't know what happened along the way because it's no longer in the family, but it appears that economically they were better off.  There are some people in his family who eventually went onto, to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that, that is your--
Speaker 2: Grandparents.
Speaker 1: --your grandparents on your fa- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On my mother's [Florence White Pitre], mother's side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side, Sam?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sam was on your mother's side.  Okay.  And so Vallery White.
Speaker 2: And he was on my--
Speaker 1: And that's--
Speaker 2: --mother's side, too.  He was--
Speaker 1: Your mother's?
Speaker 2: --my mother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your, your father's mother?
Speaker 2: I didn't know them.  As a matter of fact, my dad [Robert Pitre] said that his mother died when he was real young.  So I, I didn't know the grandparents on his side, neither the mother nor the--the grandmother nor the grandfather.
Speaker 1: Did you know their names?
Speaker 2: I heard him say his father name was Jimmy Pitre, and the grand- his mother was Melanie Pitre--Pitre.  Now you will hear me use the word Pitre and (pronunciation) Pitre interchangeably.  We used the word Pitre until we went to college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  That's in 1960, and they started anglicizing it, but in, in front of the fact, it's really a French name that should be pronounced as Pitre.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.  Any other ancestors that--or cousins that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: I've heard that my grandfather, Vallery White's either mother or grandmother, whether--that they also had a lot of property, but they were Thierrys: T-H-I-E-R-R-Y.  His grandmother--his--my grandfather's mother was a Thierry; and the Thierry had a lot of property also, and had a lot of influence because it will be--I don't know if, how close kin, but it would be some of the Thierrys will give land a long time ago, at least propose land for the school.  That's on my grandfather's--mother's gra- father's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Side, okay.
Story_ID: 663012
Speaker 1: Now, you, you said that your mother [Florence White Pitre] and father [Robert Pitre]--is there--that they both grew up in the same community [Plaisance, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened, my dad's first wife [Lucinder Charles Pitre] had died.  He had four children, my oldest four siblings, and he wanted someone to at least--he wanted a wife to help him take care of his children, and so he married my mother.  So this is how that--I was told that shortly after, maybe a year after, you know, (laughter) his wife died, he was actively looking for a wife, and so he came across her.  At--where and at what point, I don't know where, where they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 663013
Speaker 1: And then they went on to have more children, was it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  The, the three--I'm the oldest of, of my mother [Florence White Pitre] and father [Robert Pitre]; then I have a sister, Sandra Taylor [Sandra Pitre Taylor], and a brother, Gregory, Gregory Pitre, and I was told that she had a younger child who lived, I don't know, three months or whatever, but I never knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's go through all of the siblings, and you can put them in order and tell me their names.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The oldest sibling is Zenobia Taylor [Zenobia Pitre Taylor].  She was the oldest one.  She married a guy who was in the [U.S.] Navy and eventually settled in California.  She has three, three children, and she's now deceased.
Speaker 1: What was her occupation?
Speaker 2: Her occupation was nothing but a housewife.  Prior to then, however, she had served as a domestic servant, before she married, to many white individual in, in Opelousas [Louisiana].  Then the next sibling was my brother, Joseph Pitre.  He worked primarily as a cook offshore, Joseph Pitre.  He had five siblings.  My next--
Speaker 1: Five chi- he had five children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Children.  Yeah.  I'm sorry.  My next sibling was Verdina Pitre Fontenot.  She was more or less a domestic worker.  She first settled in--after marriage in Lake Charles, Louisiana, and then went to Atlanta, Georgia.  My next sibling was Sherline Thomas [Sherline Pitre Thomas].  She moved to Lake Charles also upon marriage, and then later went to California and then came back.  During the time, she served as a caretaker at a child--one of those early--
Speaker 1: Childcare?
Speaker 2: Yeah, childcare facility.  Then, then the next one is me; and then my sister, who we say full sister (laughter).  She is a dietician in Washington D--Washington, D.C.  She first worked in St. Landry Parish [Louisiana] at several convalescent home as a diet- a dietician.  Then later moved with her husband to Fort Washington, Maryland, you know, the D.C. suburban area.  And then my last sibling is Gregory Pitre.  He was a coach in--a teacher and coach in East Baton Rouge Parish school district [East Baton Rouge Parish School System].
Speaker 1: And, and the sister, the one that's the dietician, what is your name?
Speaker 2: Sandra Taylor.
Speaker 1: Sandra Taylor, okay.
Story_ID: 663014
Speaker 1: So let's now talk about you as, as a child.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is (laughter) going to church [Mohorn Baptist Church, Plaisance, Louisiana] and going to school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana].  And also after that was, you know, somewhat baffled at the fact that we were always working in the field as sharecroppers, as sharecroppers and looking at other children whose parents owned certain land--owned their own land.  They got to go to school more frequently than we did.  They dressed better than we did.  And kept wondering but kept being told that if you get an education, you can move out of this situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when you would go to school, how often did you go to school?
Speaker 2: We went to school approximately seven months out of nine.  In the fall, we were harvesting the crop, particularly cotton and potatoes; and in the spring you were chopping cotton.  There was some time that you missed in between that, so, say, seven or six and a half months, whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what age did you start going into the field?
Speaker 2: We started going into the field at least by seven [years old].
Speaker 1: Oh, that young.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 663015
Speaker 1: Is there a teacher that you remember, somebody that's memorable to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I remember my seventh grade teacher [at Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana].  Her name was Ms. Josie Ruth Hammond [Josie Hammond Vann].  She was the one who taught black history, but not only did she teach black history, she, she brought--newspaper, we didn't get newspaper (unclear).  She'd bring newspapers for us to read.  She'd give it to us, so it would appear that Ms. Hammond was pulling and my mother [Florence White Pitre] was pushing.  You, you must have a push and pull.  My mother was aggressive.  You might even say passive aggressive, but aggressive in the sense that she was always pushing, pushing; and so there was no room to step back, and so with that, with, with Ms. Hammond pushing--and then there were a number of other teachers.  There was Mr. Joseph Hamilton who would always tell us: the man who beat you thinking shall always be your boss.  And he would, he would constant- he would constantly say that.  Then as I got to high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana], there was Ms. Johnson [ph.] who was constantly drilling social studies and the news, what is happening to the news.  And it might be one reason why I decided to go on and, and be a historian.  So those teachers at that time, they didn't have the facilities or even the new books 'cause we got hand me down books in school from the white schools.  You could see the--so, when, when you had all of this push and there was nowhere to go but (laughter) forward; and given when you look back and see the things that, that you faced, you know, you're a sharecropper, whatever.  How do you gonna get out of it?  And so you took that advice and, and ran with it.
Story_ID: 663016
Speaker 1: And just to step back into your, your home in--and on the farm, describe for me the neighborhood or the area in which you lived [in Plaisance, Louisiana] and, and who lived around you; and the things that you saw on your farm.
Speaker 2: Well, on the farm, we raised cotton and--that was the major crop--cotton and sweet potato, yam.  The house was not too very far from the next one.  Now, there, there could be some farm where they're very, very far apart, but they, they were not that far apart; so therefore we, we had neighbors who were also--and we went to school with them and what have you, but--and, and also when they finished their crop, if you were not finished chopping, they would come and help you out.  But the living condition, you know, was--I guess, average.  We had three bedroom.  Well, it wasn't average.  I mean, we had outdoor toilets.  We, we did have electricity.  And later on a television, but when we didn't have a television, we went to the neighbor's house and looked at, at television; so there was some interaction among the neighbors, each looking out for the other.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who your friends were in the community?
Speaker 2: They were neighbor--usually, if you were in school, in the same class with, with each other.  I know the neighbor was Delores Joubert [ph.].  You know, she and I used to go walk to the store (laughter) and walk back from the store; and then she passed--and, and we went to the same church [Mohorn Baptist Church, Plaisance, Louisiana].  So if something is going on at church.  I went to Vacation Bible School.  We went together and we saw each other there.
Speaker 1: So she was your best friend.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember any other things that you might have done at home?  Like on holidays, was there anything special that you did during the holidays?
Speaker 2: We, we usually went to my [maternal] grandmother's [Rosella Sam White].  See, my grandmother had twelve children, so I met the, the other cousins; and even to this day, we, we still gather together--the cousins.  And at that time, like, much to talk about, we, we talk about the games and the news (laughter)--what was going on in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, you said the games?
Speaker 2: Yeah, football games (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you liked football.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about any--what type of games did you play as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, I played basketball.  We were (laughter)--yeah.  I played basketball.  And, of course, I listen a lot to baseball because a lot of my cousins were male, and they were always listening to--at least the same, those who were the same age with me, and they were always telling me about the game, whatever, and so I simply reciprocated.
Speaker 1: And, and you said that you and your friend walked to the store.  Tell me about the, the people who owned the stores in the community.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a country store owned by a white individual, and I--when I was really young, you would go to the store, and you would have to holler hello for them to come out and wait on you 'cause that was the era of segregation.  Even to spend your money, you would have to holler, scream to the top of your voice if the store were not open, "Hello, hello?"  And it was owned by a white person in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many stores were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Really there was only one.
Speaker 1: There was only one store.  So where did you shop for clothes?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my dad [Robert Pitre] had a car, so we usually went to the, the town.  You know, during the era of segregation, you had those little small towns.  That's where everybody met on Saturday, and, (laughter) and purchased whatever they had to purchase.  The, the other store was simply one for grocery where you needed something you needed, but, other than that, you went to, to the, the small town which is now a city.
Speaker 1: In Iowa City [sic.]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So where, where was it?
Speaker 2: No, I say, which you might call a city--
Speaker 1: A city, okay.
Speaker 2: --now, but it's a town.
Speaker 1: All right.  So do you remember any trips to the city?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We would go to the city.
Speaker 1: Okay tell, tell me about them if there's anything in particular, or what you--when you would go to buy clothes, was there a ritual about--you know, like, nowadays, kids you know, get prepared to go to school, so they get school clothes--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --or supplies or whatever (laughter).
Speaker 2: You didn't get that.  No, you were glad to get what you could (laughter).  You just went to try on, try on the, the clothing that your parents could afford (laughter).  It was no such as what you want (laughter).  It's what you needed and what you got.  You made do with what you had.
Story_ID: 663017
Speaker 1: And you also talked about going to church.  What religion were you?
Speaker 2: Baptist, Baptist.  My mother [Florence White Pitre] was Sunday school teacher.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Mohorn, M-O-H-O-R-N, Mohorn Baptist Church [Plaisance, Louisiana].  It is interesting how it came into being.  Immediately after Reconstruction, there was I guess missionaries who came down to, to the South, and the, the schools were located at different, other places.  I don't know what--to what extent Plaisance [Louisiana] was built up yet, but in 1886, there was a white guy who donated what was called an arpent of land to blacks in the community to be used for a church and a school.  And you would see--if you look at the original document, these individuals placing their X, some of them signed whatever.  And it was--it is from this church, Mohorn.  The reason it's called Mohorn, the deacon was called Moore [ph.], and I think the (laughter), the pastor was Horn [ph.], but, whatever.  When they signed their X, then they started a school, so it is from this school that most of the older people in the 1900--not 1900s, from 1890s to 1920, they would go to that church for a school; and in 1920, the Rosenwald school came about, and it was established where it's currently established about, about a mile from there now.  It was a high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana] when I went to; it is now an elementary school.  But this is how it got started.  And even, you know, St. Landry [St. Landry Parish, Louisiana], and those southerners that came, they have a lot Catholic influence.  Even the Catholic--the people who were of Catholic faith came to Mohorn Baptist Church until Plaisance high--elementary school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana] was started by, by the Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald Fund].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so did they eventually get a Catholic church in the community?
Speaker 2: Did we eventually get one?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Catholic church in the community [St. Joseph Catholic Church, Plaisance, Louisiana] didn't start until 1940s, I think, in the community.
Speaker 1: Well, that's, that's very interesting that, that you were, were a Baptist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Most people ask me that, (laughter) and I think--I guess it is a misnomer.  I--or let me say it this way.  Probably at the beginning the majority of the people were Catholic, but there were some Baptists; and as the years progress, I guess now it's almost even.  But the Catholic, the Catholic had a great deal of influence because when we were going to school, you didn't eat fish on--(laughter) I mean, you didn't eat meat on Fridays, and the students were excused to go to catechism even though it was a public school; so there was a great deal of Catholic influence, but there were some Baptists.
Story_ID: 663018
Speaker 1: The idea that in, in this parish that the people were Creole, do you want to talk more about, about your heritage 'cause I know that, you know, we talked about your [maternal] grandparents [Rosella Sam White and Vallery White] and the people in the community.  Were most of them Creole?  Meaning, that they were of descent of, you know, from the French and, and the Spanish?  And--tell me more about what you, what your perception is; or, or what your knowledge is of your background as far as being Creole.
Speaker 2: I think this whole termi- terminology of Creole changed over the years, and it's somewhat intertwined with my (unclear).  There is a little community right next to Plaisance [Louisiana] that's called Frilot Cove [Louisiana].  These individuals were descendant of, what we call free people of color.  They were very fair skinned.  They intermarried with each other, and didn't have anything to do with them.  They even wanted their own schools, what have you.  On the other hand, there was an--the French influence was very strong, and, of course, you would see that a lot of people from--those located in the parish are fair skinned.  But the one I talk about, the Creole, they are really you might say more white than black in, in appearance.  Therefore, when we came up you were Creole if you spoke French.  You could be black or fair skinned.  Over the years, people have kind of--there, there are people who even ask me, "Are you a black Cajun?"  I've never heard the term black Cajun used in St. Landry [St. Landry Parish, Louisiana].  But they, they mixing it up with the French influence.  I would say by the time I came about in the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s], Creole referred to individuals who spoke French whose--cook a certain way, their cuisine and what have you, but it did not have as much to do with their color.
Story_ID: 663019
Speaker 1: --That you were French--you spoke French meant that you were Creole.
Speaker 2: You spoke French and you had certain customs, and you cook a certain way.  This was--because they--I remember my mother [Florence White Pitre] and father [Robert Pitre] talking about other people who came into the city [Opelousas, Louisiana], and they would refer to them as American people, American people (laughter) because they spoke a certain way.  But there are some very dark skinned individual who spoke, who spoke French, and so, so, "What are you speaking?"  "I'm speaking Creole."  And so the Cre- the Creole referred to this--the French language, culture, custom, and cooking.  Now, they tend to differentiate by saying--some people say Creole or black, Cajun or (laughter) white, but, still, they had that same culture.  But that's the only distinction I, I see, or I have heard of.  But, of course, I know other people have made a clear distinction, and I don't see too much of that.
Speaker 1: Did they speak French in your family?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Rosella Sam White] spoke it.  She's the only one who spoke it to the grandchildren.  My mother didn't speak it to us because when they went to school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana], most of their teachers did not speak French, and so they referred to the children who--if you have an accent, you're Frenchie and whatever, so they would not speak it to their children.  So it is my grandmother who did the French speaking.  Now, she could speak it to my mother, and they would, they would respond, but they never spoke it to us, but the grandmother would speak it to us.
Story_ID: 663020
Speaker 1: Let's go back.  Let's move on back to the school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana].  Now, we talked about what the, the school looked like.  Can you describe the, the classrooms, and the, the classes; and what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite subject was social studies (laughter).  The school, when it first started was a little one--I guess, how many, like five room school?  Then it expanded.  In the '50s [1950s], they, they built some school throughout St. Landry [St. Landry Parish, Louisiana] that was a brick school and expanded, but the other one was, I guess, about five room.  The--for basketball, you played on a dirt court.  You had your commencement on a stage on the outside.  You had another little small room for home economics and a shop for agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And did--were there any other extracurricular activities that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Yes.  At the--when I became a senior, I was selected to go to Bayou Girls State, which is the leadership conference that was held at, at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]; so I went there, and that--and then I came back and made a presentation before all of the teachers in the parish.  I also participated in 4-H club.  That was another one, 4-H club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So we're still in elementary school.  So you said this school went to the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Oh, it, it went to eighth grade until 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1948, it became a high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: So you went there.  So you went to the same school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when I went to school--yeah.  It, it was a high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so you went from elementary all the way through high school.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what are some of the other things that you might have been involved in?  Tell me about--like you did say that you went to the neighbors to watch television.  What were your favorite shows?
Speaker 2: Oh, didn't go periodically, maybe when a fight was going on.  I, I was never that interested in, in watching TV, whatever.  I was trying to read what I could in my books (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you liked to read.  Tell me about what you liked to read.
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have too much reading.  I was reading those textbooks that they give me.  I mean, we didn't have--the newspaper that my teacher [Josie Hammond Vann] brought to class, you know, 'cause outside of that, you, you were always working in the field or whatever, so you were trying to catch up.
Speaker 1: So there weren't any libraries that you could visit.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you said that you went to high school and you were involved in the leadership.  So you were an excellent student, you would say?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I graduated valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  And what year did you graduate from high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-two [1962].
Story_ID: 663021
Speaker 1: What did you think that you would want to become at that time, in your mind?
Speaker 2: In my mind, I wanted to become a, I guess, a lawyer because I had an uncle [Pitre's maternal uncle, Marion Overton White] who, who had just--when I graduated from high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana], he, he graduated from law school.  But my mother [Florence White Pitre] wanted me to become a teacher; and the reason for becoming a teacher, you could get a job fast, and you could get pulled out of, of poverty, as she saw it, faster.  But I did not want to be a teacher--not in, in high school.  And so, therefore, when I went to college, I was following my cousin who majored in foreign language, and I decided (laughter) I'd major in French.  He was in, he was in Spanish.  But I was never that interested in, in it.  I just did it--but I had social studies as a minor, and so when I finished college, I decided I'd go on to graduate school [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause I didn't want to teach in high school elementary, and--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Let--before we get there.  Let's talk about your college days.  How did you decide what school you were going to, what college you were going to attend?  And was there someone that helped you, I mean, to do your applications?  And was there financial aid needed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wanted to go to Southern because it was close to home--Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], about sixty miles from Opelousas [Louisiana].  The, the counselor, Ms. Ora Jean Ballard [Ora Jean Ballard Joseph] helped me to get a National Defense Loan [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program].  I don't know what would I have done had I not gotten that loan.  My mother always used to tell a story that we were working hard in the field maybe junior year or whatever, and I asked her, "Do you think I can go to school?"  And all she could do is cry.  So, when that came about then, you know, everything opened up.
Story_ID: 663022
Speaker 1: And so tell me about your, your first year at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  It--was this the first time that you were away from home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was the first time away from home.  And I had gotten, what, a T.H. Harris Scholarship, about fifty dollars, whatever; and I did okay the first semester, but I think I might of had a 2.9 [grade point average] or something, and I was totally distraught thinking I was going to lose the scholarship.  But then after that, I was able to maintain 3, 3.5 and above.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your experience like?  Who were the people that you met there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a roommate from, from home, so we, we were roommates together; and the next year, individual who made 3 point or above was, was sent to what we call Progress Hall  where all the honor students stayed together, so I was able to meet a lot of students who were high achievers over there, and, you know, kind of give you a boost of, of going forward.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good friend there?
Speaker 2: My cousin and my classmate.  I guess I was focused so much on getting out of poverty and getting an education that I was always studying because I had to do a lot to catch up.  I didn't have all that reading material at home prior to then, and, and I, you know, I had to catch up, so, you know, I went with those friends at home, and I had a few others, but I never joined the sorority or whatever, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was there a favorite teacher or professor?
Speaker 2: Yes, the favorite professor.  The--during my undergrad year was a man and a lady, Ms. Helen Little [Helen Wells Little].  She was the French teacher, and she would, you know, always have us going to different function, and she would even bring food or candy (laughter) or whatever.  And, at the same time, I also had a professor of history, Henry Carl [ph.], who would, you know, I just loved the way he taught history.  But I was too far gone in French 'cause at the time, I had a social study minor.  I didn't want to teach high school, and--but I knew I was interested in, I was interested in history, so I had the, the minor in social study, but since I was in, in French, I said, well, maybe I would get a better job if I go on in French; and so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 663023
Speaker 1: Who was the, the president of the college while you were there [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], do you remember?
Speaker 2: Felton G. Clark [Felton Grandison Clark].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how was he as, as a president of the school?
Speaker 2: He was good.  His, his father [Joseph Samuel Clark] was one of the founders, and then he took over next.  He stayed there a long time.  He was highly educated, and he did a, he did a great job.  There were some problem as, as was the case with most HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] when you had student demonstration in the 1960s.  He--a lot of students were, were sent home because, of course, the sta- the university or any university is an agency of the state, and, and, I suppose they were leaning on him to do something about those agitators, so unlike the president here at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], who took a stand and said we stand by our students, Clark did not do that.  But the students went forward with the movement anyway.
Speaker 1: And so that's why some of the students were expelled because he said that anybody that protested would be expelled?
Speaker 2: Oh they eventually expelled them.  Yeah.  I don't know if the statement was made or whatever, but they were expelled.
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about civil rights at that time?  I know you say you were focused on, on school.
Speaker 2: It was needed.  And I, I didn't actively participate because my mother [Florence White Pitre] was, ooh, she was crying, "If you get involved, you're not going to have a way to go to school.  You're not gonna--your scholarship's gonna be cut off," or whatever.  I mean, morally, and whatever, I was, I was very supportive of them, but I didn't participate in that for that reason, and, you know, somewhat afraid also.
Story_ID: 663024
Speaker 1: And you graduated with honors from that school as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what happens next?
Speaker 2: I, I got a fellowship to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get a master's degree; and I went on and got a master's degree.  Now, the experience in--at Atlanta was really stimulating and something that almost changed my life because while at Atlanta University, I was able to sit in on what was called the black institute [Institute of the Black World, Atlanta, Georgia] one summer, and there you had the Civil Right Movement going on.  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] just got killed.  And you had all of those people, scholars talking about the black experience.  And I'm say to myself, well, here I'm sitting in French, in--with a major in French, and I don't know anything, or very little, about African American history.  So I started making up my mind then that I was going to move to history, but I needed some money, and so after I got the master's in history, which was one year, I went onto Saint Augustine's College [Saint Augustine's University] in Raleigh [North Carolina] and taught French there for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who was the, the president at Atlanta University, do you remember?
Speaker 2: The president was Rufus--oh, I can't think of what his name--Clement [Rufus Early Clement].
Speaker 1: Clement.
Speaker 2: I think it's Clement.  I'm sure it's Clement (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you, you receive your master's in--this is nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: --sixty-seven [1967].  Okay.  All right.  And so you went on to, to teach French for three years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what were you doing about the history that you wanted to pursue?
Speaker 2: Well, I was still making up my mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, 'cause I--after those three years, then I started applying for, to go in a Ph.D. program--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in history.
Story_ID: 663025
Speaker 1: Well, just tell me something about your experience as you're a teacher.  So this is your first teaching--
Speaker 2: Experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) position, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me what that was like.
Speaker 2: I think it, it was great.  The--this--it was a liberal arts college.  All of the students had to take French, and, you know, I enjoyed teaching French, but it was basically the, the lower level French--French I and French II, conversational French.  And while that was exciting and stimulating, I was not going anywhere with it (laughter).  I would probably only be teaching this unless I would have decided to go on and get a Ph.D. in French, but a Ph.D. in French would require a lot of French literature; and you've got the Civil Rights Movement going on at that time, and so why should I be concerned with, with French literature, and I know nothing about my own.  And so after three years, I said, well, I'm, I'm just going to start applying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--who were the--what was the makeup of the students in North Carolina at this particular school?
Speaker 2: The makeup, it was male and female (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was, it was coeducational.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And do you remember who the president was at that time?
Speaker 2: The president was--I'll have to think of--I know it.  I for- I--
Speaker 1: No, that--
Speaker 2: It will come to me, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's fine.  And were the students involved in civil rights at the school as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Because I was at Saint Augustine [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got assassinated (unclear)--
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that time?
Speaker 2: Well, the students took to the street, and went, went to the capitol [North Carolina State Capitol, Raleigh, North Carolina], and, and some--in fact, this is one time I did participate.  We walked down through, to the capitol, and, of course, you know, it was very tense 'cause the students was just--they were really agitated that Martin Luther King had, had gotten assassinated.
Speaker 1: Was the makeup of the school predominantly black?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was predominantly black.  And, of course, there were many white instructors, but it was predominantly black--the student body.
Speaker 1: And were--even in, in elementary school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana], were your teachers black or white in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: And, and that's through high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: In Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So college--
Speaker 2: --at Southern, too.
Speaker 1: Oh, at Southern, too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: The ones that I had.  Now, there may have been a few white in, in other departments, but--um-hm.
Speaker 1: When was the first time you encountered a white professor?
Speaker 2: When I got my doctorate at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 663026
Speaker 1: So now what happens after three years of teaching French [at Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina]?  So (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I decided to apply for the Ph.D. program.  I first applied--well, I applied at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] (unclear).  I was accepted at Berkeley.  Went to Berkeley and my financial aid was not there; and then the money wasn't there, (laughter) I decided to come back home, taught for a year and a half, reapplied again, got accepted at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about your experience at Temple.
Speaker 2: Well, at Temple, my advisor was Lawrence, Lawrence D. Reddick.  He was the first biographer of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  As a matter of fact, he, he was on many of the first boycotts and demonstrations with King.  He was expelled from Alabama State University [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] for being with them.  So he was my advisor.  And, of course, I suppose, you know, being at Temple, you simply went along with the various classes that I had and met some other individual who were also interested in black history, and, you know, did, did fairly well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and, at this time, even though this--where, where we've moved now into the '70s [1970s], where in the '60s [1960s], I mean, you were at the age to vote.  What was the first time that you voted?
Speaker 2: Oh, I voted in Louisiana as soon as I made, what is--twenty-one or eighteen [years old]?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember who was running for president when you voted?
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s], oh, that would've, had to been--it had to been Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson].
Speaker 1: And just to go--I know that you said that your, your mother [Florence White Pitre] was not--or your family--was there anyone in your family that was involved in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my uncle is, is mainly responsible for the integration of St. Landry Parish [Louisiana], Opelousas [Louisiana].  The one who I told you was a lawyer, he was a civil right lawyer; he was also president of the conference of branches [Louisiana State Conference of Branches] of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He was taken to jail one time.  And, of course, I had other relatives who were, and (laughter) to a certain extent are still activists now, who were involved in the civil rights struggle who boycotted stores and whatever.
Speaker 1: What was your cousin's name?
Speaker 2: My uncle's name was Marion Overton White; and my cousin was Joshua Pitre, Donald Pitre, and Jesse [Jesse Pitre].  Each of those ran for office.  At the time, Joshua became the first black to serve as--first black to be elected to the school board [St. Landry Parish School Board], the first one to serve as president of the school board, stayed on the school board for sixteen years, just passed away last year. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I just wanted to, to before we move forward--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) any more to have--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that information.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 663027
Speaker 1: And so preparing for your doctorate [at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what--tell me about the hard work that I know it takes to, to get to that point; and what was your dissertation on?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was on Frederick Douglass as a Republican Party loyalist (laughter).  The--keep in mind--the Republicans at that time were, were not the Republicans that we have today (laughter).  But a lot of work had been done on Frederick Douglass, but nobody had looked at Frederick Douglass after slavery; and, of course, Frederick Douglass, he saw this as, as the way by which blacks could enter the mainstream of American life, and so he aligned himself with the Republican Party and was a loyalist, and, of course, you know, with the Republican Party, Charles Sumner, was responsible for the 14th Amendment that--Thaddeus Stevens for advocating land for blacks, and so, so there were reason for him to be a Republican.  During that time some would say, and, you know, he might have been a little too loyal, but, I mean, (laughter) this is a human being, individual.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And was your paper published?
Speaker 2: No, I never, I never did publish the paper.  And I guess, mainly--I published some articles from it--mainly because I came to Texas, and a historian are driven by the sources they have, so the sources around here, here in Texas when I did my dissertation on Frederick Douglass, I had to spend time at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] where his papers are; and so, you know, starting off as a young person with no money, I would have to go to D.C. and find out some more information; whereas, here, all I had to do with go to the, the state museum and archive here in, in Austin [Texas State Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas] and Houston [Texas]; at Rice [Rice University, Houston, Texas]; and all of those places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But when I asked about, about the hard work, you know, while you were doing your, your Ph.D., what are some of the things that entail--what is it that you have to--that you had to go through?  What are the--you know, like, I know there's research involved.  I want you to kind of explain what you had to do to, to actually get to that point of a Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Well, you take several courses.  You take courses that teach you how to write.  You look at the historiography, the literature in the field, and you're constantly writing papers in each, each class.  And now when you get to the dissertation stage, you cannot rely simply on the, the article or book that are already written.  You have to go to primary sources and, and from that primary sources draw your own conclusion and write about it.  So that's why when I wrote on Frederick Douglass, while I knew a great deal about 'My Bondage and My Freedom' [Frederick Douglass]--all the difficulty he had while he was a slave, I had to go to various newspapers in Washington, D.C., look at those newspaper, look at his paper, his writing, back and forth, because, you know, he was a prolific writer.  What did he say about the conventions proceedings?  All of this, in order for me to come up with how much of a loyalist was he to the Republican Party; and what was going on at the time?  Because there's--some people say that he was, he was too loyal.  He would--when some other blacks saying, "Well, we should go to a third party," though it may not be the best solution, he didn't want to hear anything.  He only saw straight Republican, but--so you had to find out what was the third party people saying or doing?  What else was happening to the country about African America?  Not just in Washington, but since the masses of blacks were in the South, how was that going to affect them?
Story_ID: 663028
Speaker 1: Why did you choose him as a subject for your dissertation?  Was there a particular reason, or you just wanted to know this information?  How do you come up with what you really desire to do?
Speaker 2: Well, you first have to look and see where the material is.  I, I mean, I was always interested--you know, Frederick Douglass sticks out in black history.  But you have to look and see, where are the materials; can you find enough material?  It's not enough just to say, can you find enough material on that individual, and then you do an outline.  And after you look at the outline, do I have enough material on this?  Do I have enough material on that?  And then how close is the material to you?  You know, you can come up with a topic, but you have to go overseas.  Well, I didn't have any money to go overseas.  (Laughter) Particularly if you were writing something about the slave ships or something, then you would have to go to the archive in, in London [England], and, and I just didn't have that, so--and, of course, I was looking for something--the African American experience in this country, and so I figured that Frederick Douglass, with all of his writing, would probably have more--it would be easier to write about him because he would have more material accessible to the people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you told us that Lawrence Reddick was your advisor [at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Was there a committee?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who, who was on your committee?
Speaker 2: The committee was a South African, Clement Cato [ph.].  He had been exiled from South Africa.  That's the height of apartheid.  He was here.  David Wiedner [ph.] was an Africanist, 'cause I had a feeling--African history--I had a feeling social and political history, David Allen [ph.].  He had written a lot about the Hull House [Chicago, Illinois] and Jane Addams--social reform movement after the Civil War.  He was on the committee.  So you had--he was in social and political history, David Allen; Clement Cato was on there, and David Wiedner was on there.  Both of those were Africanists; and then my advisor Lawrence D. Reddick was in African American history.
Story_ID: 663029
Speaker 1: All right.  So you get your Ph.D. [from Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Now, in, in high school [Plaisance High School, Opelousas, Louisiana], you were a high achiever, and in undergrad.  Tell us--tell me about that, about all the times that you were, you know, highest ranking--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was--well, you know, we had a, we had a graduation in eighth grade [at Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana], so I was the first in eighth grade class; and then valedictorian of the twelfth grade class.  When I got to college, I graduated magna cum laude, but I had the highest average in the college of education [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: Which was 3.7 [grade point average] in education because, remember, I told you, my mother [Florence White Pitre] wanted me to go (unclear) (laughter) so I, I went in teacher education but didn't pursue it.  And then when I got to the Ph.D., we had a comprehensive examination, and I passed the comprehensive with distinction; so these (laughter)--up to the Ph.D. level.
Story_ID: 663030
Speaker 1: So after you receive your Ph.D. [from Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you go to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Tell me about the experience there.
Speaker 2: Well, I come to Texas Southern over here.  I applied and a position was open.  I came here.  When I came, you know, you're a new person, so you're at the bottom.  I had four classes, about sixty students in each (laughter).  The facilities are not as good, but they were renovating the building, so a whole year, I didn't have an office.  But then I knew that my focus was to, to teach and do research, so I didn't--having come up in the era of Jim Crow and having all kind of other obstacles, this did not stop me from doing--my main job was to teach and to do research, and later disseminate the information to the black community.  Because one of the things that I learned in--at that black institute [Institute of the Black World, Atlanta, Georgia] at--in Atlanta [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that I told you, was (unclear) said the black scholar has the responsibility to the black community; and that, that responsibility is to create new knowledge and to disseminate that knowledge to the black community, so I know that my first focus was teaching.  That's what I was hired for.  I did that but also kept in mind what [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding said about the responsibility of a black scholar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so were you able to accomplish anything else besides teaching?
Speaker 2: What, while here or what?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  While at--yeah, Texas.
Speaker 2: I mean, Texas Southern is where I am now, and that's where I've been for the last (laughter) thirty-six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as far as developing programs?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I developed a women studies program in the late '90s [1990s] when that came along.  As far as African American is concerned, what I did was to integrate African American history with American history.  Each class I taught in American history, when I did the survey course--if I talk about the War of 1812, I talk about the role that African Americans played in the War of 1812.  So while there was no formal course in African American history, at the lower level when I came here, I integrated; however, there were courses at the graduate level, and we still have some of those courses now that deals with African American history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what year are we in when you come to--
Speaker 2: Texas Southern?
Speaker 1: --TSU?
Speaker 2: I come in 1976.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Story_ID: 663031
Speaker 1: I mean, you've been here for a while.  So tell me about other things that have occurred while you're here as a professor.
Speaker 2: Other things like?
Speaker 1: Now, you get an endowment (unclear)--okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  As I said, okay, I came here in '76 [1976]; and as I told you, the two focuses, teaching and research, well, the question was, you know, how are you going to do research if--teaching that many student?  And so you look for alternatives.  The alternative is to get a fellowship because Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was not granting sabbatical until every seven years, and they were few and far between.  So I applied to the National Endowment for the Humanities for a independent fellowship.  I was granted it to my surprise because they are difficult to come, come by, too; and I was granted this fellowship, and was able to spend a year off doing research mainly in Austin [Texas] on black legislators.  Because by '76 [1976], then you--we had, begin to see a proliferation of literature coming out on black--on African American, and, particularly, during Reconstruction.  I had seen Charles Vincent's book on black legislation in Louisiana ['Black Legislators in Louisiana during Reconstruction']; Tom Holt's [HistoryMaker Thomas C. Holt] book on black legislators in South Carolina ['Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina during Reconstruction'].  Well, I said, well, there's no one who has done anything on Texas.  And there's, very few work had been done on Texas.  So I started looking, and as I look and didn't see very much; then I wrote the proposal to the endowment to do a book on black legislators of Texas during Reconstruction and post-Reconstruction; was granted that, took a year off and did most of my research in Austin; and afterwards, then I was able to start writing.  Once I had collected the material and kind of organized them, then after class, I could start writing, and this is what I did; and then came up with my first book that's called 'Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: The Black Leadership of Texas' [sic. 'Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, as you said, there were very few writings about black legislators.  There was, I guess, a lot of writing about how blacks were prevented from voting.  Is a lot of information about that?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.  There was not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: --very much literature on blacks in Texas, period.  And I suppose maybe because a lot of activities that occurred in the Civil Rights Movement occurred on the East Coast or the Southeastern part.  There was very little on Texas history.   There was one guy who wrote something, James Smallwood about 'Time of Hope, Time of Despair' ['Time of Hope, Time of Despair: Black Texans During Reconstruction']--that period, ten year period during Reconstruction.  Alwyn Barr had written 'Black Texans' ['Black Texans: A History of African American in Texas'].  And another guy had written something.  That, that was probably the only scholarly book at that time.  Now, afterwards, you begin to have a proliferation.  So there was not very much written on it, but I, I said, well, this is the material right here at my fingertip, at least I can contribute that part to it, and so this is why I wrote about black legislators.  And, of course, the book was republished this year by Texas A&M Press [Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas].  And right now, I'm finding a lot because of geneal- genealogy and all that, a lot of descendants, who coming and asking for the book now, and saying, well, this was my granddaddy and what have you.  And point of fact, one of the individuals I didn't know at the time that I wrote about was supposedly Barbara Jordan's great granddaddy [Edward A. Patton] (laughter) in the book.
Story_ID: 663032
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so what were some--now, I, I know the book ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre] talks about some of the obstacles that the black legislators, you know, lawmakers, you know, had.  What were some--not to, I know, we, we're--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: --going to read the book, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --tell, tell me, what were some of the obstacles that they faced?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, number one, they faced the obstacle of being a minority in the legislature.  The, the largest number who ever sat in there was, was twelve in the house [Texas House of Representatives] and two in the senate [Texas Senate].  They faced racism.  They faced violence.  At the constitutional convention, they had many fights that, that occurred between black and white; and, of course, they faced the obstacle of, of just going to vote.  There's one newspaper article that said, the editor was looking out his door when blacks went to vote for the first time in Texas history, 1868, and he said, "White man and Sambo voted together, but Texas will yet be a white man's state."  But not only that, you had violence.  You had redistricting.  You had all of those obstacles.  But despite all of this, they did make a credible record.  It appears that the majority, if not all of those, introduced a bill to have a school--whether it was day school, night school, whatever.  So they, they viewed education as very important.  And this is why Booker T. Washington said it appeared that a whole generation was going to school, went to day school, night school, Sunday school, what have you.  Prairie View University [Alta Vista Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas for Colored Youth; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] is established now because when Texas A&M [The Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas] was established, one black legislator stood up and said, "Well, you have an agriculture mechanical college for, for white students.  What about Negroes?"  As, as they were called at that time.  You had them--wanted a mental institution.  You had one individual, Matt Gaines [Matthew Gaines], who talked about having a militia to protect blacks from going--when they went to vote, and he said, "I may not be educated, but I have enough sense to know the value of a man's life."  And so you had them playing a very important role, especially, from people who had just descended from slavery, not, not all of those.  Of course, you had a few who had come from the North like the carpetbaggers, but then you had others who, who were ex-slaves.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So after you write this, this book, then--and this was in 19--what, what year was your first book (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985], okay.
Story_ID: 663033
Speaker 1: You served as a leader for the Texas consortium of black colleges and universities [Texas Historically Black Colleges and Universities] to a trip to Haiti?  Was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1980?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: Yeah in 1980.
Speaker 1: --that was before that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was before--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then.  They--Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was engaged in international studies even before I came, and they got a Fulbright [Fulbright Fellowship] to go and--a group of faculty members go there, exchange idea with other people in the, in the Caribbean--I mean, in Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic] and in Haiti, so we were able to go there, and--
Speaker 1: And, and tell me about that experience.  Like, who, who was the president at the time of Haiti?
Speaker 2: It was Bebe Doc.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Jean-Claude, okay.
Speaker 2: Jean-Claude--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, Duvalier [Jean-Claude Duvalier].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so tell me about that experience because (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was a great experience because that was my first experience abroad, you know, from leaving the country, and had no idea that, that Haiti was that poor.  We, we know that for years it had been stifled for not having trade with the United States.  But I guess the most striking thing was to look at Haiti and Santo Domingo on the same island and see the disparity that, that occurred between them.  And I don't know if it was because Haiti evolved as the first nation, as the first nation that came about as a result of a slave insurrection, the only one.  And Haiti--Santo Domingo was not.  But I, I really wonder when you look at, at the landscape and whatever, I, I just, I'm, I'm wondering.  Sometime I say to myself, well, well, did, did Toussaint [Toussaint L'Ouverture] really win, or did they give it to him?  Since it's so poor, it appears now they--(unclear) resource compared to Santo Domingo on the same island.  But also the other thing was striking was to see how people of different culture lived.  Also, I was able to relate to people in, in Haiti because I could speak a little French--what we call Creole.  I could understand it.  It's not what they call the correct French, but I could--because they speak it at home.  You see, if you use the word in French for--the word something is quelque chose; where we say (pronunciation) quelque chose in Louisiana, they say quelque chose in Haiti.  And the food, the food is similar.
Speaker 1: And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: --so your main purpose was to, to do what when--while you were there?
Speaker 2: The main purpose was to let professors from Texas Southern exchange ideas with professors from, from those two countries.  We had--we would have classes in the morning telling--with them telling us about their culture.  We had a sociologist who spoke to us.  We had a person--a agriculturist who spoke to us, and we had a historian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--and then how did you use this information when you came back?
Speaker 2: Well, if you were in--if you were a person in, in the language, you could talk about how the language differed here in, in history, then I could--I had a better feel for talking about the Haitian Revolution.  I had been to Haiti, had seen the things, had heard some of the historians and what they said, so you could juxtapose.  If you were in art, then you could talk about the various art work and what they had or would have you--so it was, it was selected group who went over there.
Speaker 1: And we said that Jean-Claude was the president of Haiti, but who was the president of Santo Domingo [Antonio Guzman Fernandez]?
Speaker 2: I, I don't recall.  I don't (mumbles).
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  And this was in--that was in 1980 to '81 [1981]--
Speaker 2: Yes, '80 [1980] to '81 [1981] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or 1981, so--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 663034
Speaker 1: What happens next?
Speaker 2: What--after '81 [1981], well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the book ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In--and, well, is this around the time that The Journal of the Negro History [The Journal of African American History] is written--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the next book?  That was in--
Speaker 2: The, the--well, the journal was already established, but I had began to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean the paper that you wrote for it ['Frederick Douglass and the Annexation of Santo Domingo,' Merline Pitre]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I began to send articles, you know, from, from my dissertation, and then the article on Frederick Douglass.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And the thoughts about that paper, about Frederick Douglass, and, and it talked about the annexation of Santo Domingo [Dominican Republic]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That, that was a little--I guess a little island that they were trying to get, and they used Frederick Douglass, really, to get this.  And, and he would later find out that he was used.  I wrote this so long ago, (laughter) I hardly remember what it was.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: But he, he was, he was sent there as an envoy in an attempt to, to get this, this small island for military purpose, but they, they later did not get it, but that was the purpose of sending him over there; and, and some people would later criticize and say he was used for that purpose.
Story_ID: 663035
Speaker 1: Now, in '83 [1983], you become the associate dean of the liberal arts college [Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was associate dean of the liberal arts college then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  All right, so--
Speaker 2: That--that lasts only--we had a change in administration, so that lasts only, what, a year, year and a half, so not very much occurred (laughter).
Speaker 1: Occurred during that time.  Okay.  So now we're back to '85 [1985] and the--you know, the--your book 'Many Dangers, Toils and Snares' ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre] was written and published on that.  And so what happens next after 19--after you write your book?  And so, '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '85 [1985], then I started doing research on the other, the, the next book ['In Struggle Against Jim Crow: Lulu B. White and the NAACP, 1900-1957,' Merline Pitre].  See, after I wrote this book, then the women movement was up and coming, and so I said, now, I have written a book on forty-two men of color and nothing about women, and (laughter) everybody is talking about women.  So I, I started doing research, and as I did research, I said, well, I need to look at something here in Houston [Texas] where the sources are close by.  As I started looking at the, the papers, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] papers, I kept seeing this name Lulu White [Lulu B. White] come up, Lulu White.  And I said, who is this lady?  And she was--she really, as one of her classmates describe her, as someone who didn't take stuff from anyone, and she was cursing and doing--I said, now, I wonder.  So as I start--then I started looking at that.  At the same time that I started researching on Lulu White, I discovered that we did not have a program on women's studies.  Now, I don't know what happened prior to my coming here, but TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] used to have in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], a women, a women's day, where they would recognize women, but somehow, it fell off the radar, and so there was nothing on women, so that's why I decided I would come up with a plan to have a women's studies minor 'cause you got to have something.  So at the time I'm doing Lulu White, I came up with the women's student minor.  The question was as, as it came to (unclear)--who's gonna take women's history?  You know, the men probably won't take it, and so if you put it as a major, you probably won't have anybody majoring in it.  And then you have to write some new courses, so what we did, we said, well, I got together with group of women here.  "How many of you teach a history--," or, I mean, a course, I'm sorry, "how many of you teach a course that deals with women?"  So we got a sociologist.  We got social work.  We have human services.  You have women literature.  You have the one in history.  So we came up with enough courses to have a minor, and that's how we still have the minor now.  And then we started having--during Women's History Month, we'd have a program and a luncheon and invite people to come.  And, and what has happened, one of those, we got four women, a black, a Hispanic, a white, and one--and it was really good because then we could collect data from that.  So while that was going on, then I wrote the book on Lulu White.
Story_ID: 663036
Speaker 1: Now, the book on Lulu White ['In Struggle Against Jim Crow: Lulu B. White and the NAACP, 1900-1957,' Merline Pitre] shared a lot of information on what was happening to voting rights here in Houston [Texas].  Darlene Clark Hine had written a book called 'Black Victory' ['Black Victory: The Rise and Fall of the White Primary in Texas'] in which after the--during Reconstruction, after the South returned to what home rule, those federal troops were withdrawn from the South, and the South able to institute similar laws that they had prior to slavery after that happened.  The main thing that was done was to prevent blacks from voting because I think one of the, the main thing that white detest most was blacks voting.  They referred to them as uppity blacks who wanted to vote.  So Darlene Clark Hine wrote this book called 'Black Victory' in which she showed that of all the subterfuge used to prevent blacks from voting, the white Democratic primary was probably the most effective because it said that only white men could vote in the Democratic primary.  Now, you have to keep in mind that Texas was a one party state.  Though you have the Republican Party, very few whites, others black, so blacks know the--who gonna get elected.  If they got elected would be one blacks among many, and they didn't have any power.  So they used--so black historian, by the turn of the century, had the largest middle class in the South, doctors and lawyers, who did not have to rely upon white landlord.  They pooled their resources, went to court for twenty-two years before the court finally overturned the white Democratic primary.  Lulu White [Lulu B. White] was behind this--not at the beginning, but because blacks going to the--to court, had an organization, but they did not allow black men--women to join, to join.  Lulu White joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] because the NAACP was one of the few black organizations that allowed black women to have an office, though it was a law office.  But Lulu White is going to work her way up, and so she worked her way up.  By the time she become executive secretary of the Houston branch of the NAACP [NAACP Houston Branch, Houston, Texas], the case that the [U.S.] Supreme Court is going to overturn, Smith v. Allwright, is about ready to go to court.  Lulu White and her husband [Julius White] is mainly responsible for this.  Her husband was a man of wealth, liquid capital.  Some say he was a policy runner, whatever, but he funded most of those cases (unclear) Supreme Court.  He also provided Lulu with a car to go around soliciting membership for the NAACP because the NAACP would have to--that was the only way why we still got money to go there.  So when Lulu became executive secretary in 1943, she solicited all of those branches and got them.  She got with Thurgood Marshall, sent the money; and they were successful in the case Smith v. Allwright, 1944.  Supreme Court declared the white primary unconstitutional.  But Lulu didn't stop there.  She said we cannot sit idly by and let things come to us.  We must go out and get them.  And so she urged them to run for office, to go vote.  She went to the poll.  And, and, of course, you--you're not supposed to be at the poll, and whenever she was at the poll, the police call, she came--she, she left without--but not without exchanging insults, so she drew up platform.  She did all of this to get blacks into the system; and it is Lulu White, who will campaign for the first black woman in Texas since Reconstruction, Hattie White [Hattie Mae White], which was no relation to her, who won the school board election [Houston Independent School District] in '58 [1958].  And Hattie White would campaign for Barbara Jordan.  So it is on Lulu White's shoulder that, that, they stood, so I was somewhat intrigued by Lulu White, and, of course, when the book came out, and then I gave it to my students, and they, they seemed to be (laughter) very intrigued about it, too.  And what they all are saying is that we didn't know.  We happened to know that--about this black lady.  We know about Barbara Jordan.  We know about the others, but this was an unsung heroine.
Story_ID: 663037
Speaker 1: What happens next?  Let's see, tell me about the dumping on the neighborhood, the social implications of waste disposal in his-?  How were you involved with that?
Speaker 2: I wasn't involved with the--I know the, the sociologist was--oh, there, there was a conference, you know, one time, and I, I--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --just participated in that, but it was more or less a sociologist over here.  You see, this dumping of--or that neighborhood, this gonna lead to--TSU, arrived here at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], but I wasn't here when it came about.  I, I only wrote about those.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  All right.  And so tell me what, what happens next?  The most--what you can think about that comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I serve, I served as dean, and, of course, after I served as--while serving as dean, I didn't let my research interests die, you know, I always save a little time to, to do some research because you know, I know administrative jobs are not for life, and you can always go back 'cause at the time I served as dean--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: This was in, in 1990 to 1994.  We had what is called the College of Liberal Arts [Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas], so that was about fourteen--there was the science--now it is only liberal arts, but it was the science (laughter) also.  So that, that was a, you know, quite an experience because you have all of those diverse interests in the college, and you're trying to manage it, but I think we did, we did okay.  We got the, the women's studies program.  You have attempts with black studies program.  We had black studies program coming--we had people in science coming to talk about theirs; and so, at that time, we begin to see the--what am I say- the high, high mark of, of technologies.  We had somebody talking and saying that things change--people change their career every seven years, and that's due in part to technology, and we begin to see a lot of the, the technology in the classroom as a result of that.  However, my interests always remained with teaching, so while serving as dean, I think what I consider one of the highlights of it is when I also received a--an endow- what is--a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities to have a workshop, a teacher's workshop on Jim Crow.  Now, the good thing about it, this grant paid for teachers here at Texas Southern.  It paid their, their summer salary, the city, and we got scholars from across the country who had come in and talk about Jim Crow; and so you had someone talking about literature, Langston Hughes and Jim Crow.  You'd have a historian talk about it.  You'd have a sociologist talk about it.  We have an artist who talked about it.  And I think that these faculty members were just thrilled about having discuss--many of them had--they needed retooling.  They had been to school, but they had not had any experience with black history or the black experience; and so there was, I think about fifteen faculty members, and we had all of those, so I think this--I would consider this probably as one of the highlights, and we have pictures of those, I said, but it's a newspaper of those who, who participated in the program.  Because what happened is that one noted historian say that we knew a lot--about 1990, we knew a lot about slavery and about the Civil War, but that period in between, that Jim Crow period, we did not know much about that, and this was an attempt to capture what was, what was happening, and so that's an attempt to go back and ask your parents.  What was happening during Jim Crow?  Almost like slavery, you've got the slave narrative, but we did not have too many narrative of Jim Crow--going to the same hotel, going to the back of the bus and all of this; and so these people were able to talk about it, and, of course, some those people were able to talk--ask their, their older relatives about that period of Jim Crow.  'Cause the period of Jim Crow is, you know, is still bright in my mind and so many other people, but we didn't talk about it.  We talked about civil--the Civil Rights Movement and slavery.  And so this why this period was so important; and while I, consider it one of the highlights because it, it helped other teachers to disseminate that knowledge to, to their student, and so I, I think that was very great--and we had, you know, the scientists had their own at that time also.
Story_ID: 663038
Speaker 1: Since we're talking about Jim Crow, is there any personal experiences that you want to share about that since we didn't talk about it earlier during the '60s [1960s]?  But this might be a good point if you have something to share.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  (Unclear) oh, are we ready?  Well, I, I think some of the first experience with Jim Crow, as I said, going to the store (laughter) as young, a young girl, whatever, and had to, had to holler, "Hello."
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Just for them to, them to get your money.  Also I guess looking at the, the textbooks--you know, we had hand me down textbooks.  Looking at white swimming pools that they had over there, you know, in my home, hometown [Plaisance, Louisiana].  Looking at the fact that, you know, you had colored signs.  You can't, you can't go there--that, that's for, that's for white people.  So you had, you know, we would see the, the white bus passing, splashing water on children who, who live within the same distance.  I, I lived too far, so I had to catch the bus, but there was, there was a certain distance that you had to catch the bus, and so some children who lived farther, you know, the white bus would come and just (gesture)--or playing on, on dirt courts.  (Laughter) You know, whereas, they had all of the other kind.  You know, working in the field.  There's some people who--you went to pick cotton, and they, they cheated you when they weighed the cotton, you know, and so you had all of those kinds.
Speaker 1: Do you feel that you've ever experienced discrimination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure (laughter).  Discrimination in what place?  You know, the--?
Speaker 1: I mean, when you went to school, at work?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm sure it was, it was subtle discrimination, you know.  Now, this is, I guess it has to do with black.  I graduated with the highest honor in, in the school of education [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but they allowed a man to, to march at the front of the class, and it should have, it should have been me.  They allowed him to march, so but he was in the [U.S.] military, so that was, I guess, gender discrimination.  And, and, of course, the, the racial discrimination was always--it was always there.  It was always subtle.  But, you know, since you were in different spaces, you know, white and black, then, I, I didn't have any that, that many face to face, but, you know, you had those signs that said, you know, blacks and white.
Story_ID: 663039
Speaker 1: So after your, your time as dean [of the Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas], what--tell me what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back and I started doing this book on--I coedited this book with--black, black women of Texas ['Black Women in Texas History,' eds. Bruce A. Glasrud and Merline Pitre]; and I, I was also active in a number of organizations, the Southern Historical Association of African Americans.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Say, say the name again.
Speaker 2: The Southern, Southern Historical Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: African American--the study for African American life and history [sic. Association for the Study of African American Life and History].  And, of course, we have--together with one of my classmates, he--at--who was a classmate at, at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  He started what became known as the Southern Conference on African American Studies [Southern Conference on African American Studies, Inc.].  And it started from a small organization, so I worked with him.  We go from state to state having a meeting where we specifically dwelling on the southern states, and so I became active.  I was always active in those, but, you know, during that period because shortly afterwards, I'll be--not shortly afterward, but in 2000, I'll be called back to the dean's office again; so (laughter), so while I was out, then, I was actively involved in those, those kinds of activities.
Story_ID: 663040
Speaker 1: You did a lot of lectures, graduate seminars, on black history held at the university here?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, also, I guess what we failed to mention was the first book, you know, I got an award from the, the black leg- the black caucus, legislative caucus [Texas Legislative Black Caucus] for the book on black legislators of Texas ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre], and also for the, the black journalists [National Association of Black Journalists] give me award for that same book also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, and then you do a lot of consultations with different groups, the--there was a regional project, the NEH [National Endowment for the Humanities].  What, what was that project about?
Speaker 2: NEH, the regional--
Speaker 1: It says Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 2: Oh, the NEH, they were trying to start a humanities center at Arizona State University, and so they wanted to get people who had received grants from there who knew something about the area, and so I served as a consultant for, for that group for a while.  He was trying to have a center where a lot of grants go over there, and they--well, and so he needed somebody on the advisory committee.  This is, this is all that I served on that one for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 663041
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, not, not very much had been done on Texas history, and so there was a book called--a book written on black women history, but it was not--we felt that a lot of things were left out of it, so when Bruce Glasrud [Bruce A. Glasrud] asked me if we would do this, and we could put a lot of historiography in it.  We could get different people specializing certain areas to write about it, so we, we wrote about it somewhat as--in a survey form or a chronological order.  One individual wrote about black women during slavery; one, Reconstruction; one, black women as servant.  I wrote about black women during the Great Depression; and then others wrote about black women in public office.  So this was the next book that I took on, and we, you know, it was a great success.  That book ['Black Women in Texas History,' eds. Bruce A. Glasrud and Merline Pitre] won the Liz Carpenter Award [Liz Carpenter Award for Best Book on the History of Women].  Liz Carpenter is considered, I suppose, the mother of women's studies here in, in Texas, and she, she presents a gift each year at the Texas State Historical [Texas State Historical Association] for the best book on women in Texas; and so this is one of those awards on, on the, on the wall, this--the Liz Carpenter Award for the best book on Texas, Texas history.  It had to be black women in Texas history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that--and that's in what year that this book is published?
Speaker 2: That was in two--
Speaker 1: Two thou-?
Speaker 2: --two thousand, 2009, I think.
Story_ID: 663042
Speaker 1: Let's back up because--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: --because you, you said you call--you're called back to be a dean [of Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas].  That's in 2000, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand [2000], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you have some work that you do.  Serve on committees, advisory and consulting, advisory committee for a Magazine of History [OAH Magazine of History]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was, you know, the Organization of American Historians and the American Historical Society [sic. American Historical Association]--the two largest historic, historical society in the country and the oldest.  I was able to be voted on the nomination committee of the Organization of American Historians, which is an honor.  And the purpose of that committee is to serve on the Magazine of History.  If you go to it now, it is a magazine that provides information for--mainly for teachers.  It, it has lesson plan.  It had, it had a whole section on Jim Crow that the teachers could usually use in their class and what have you, and so I serve on that one and also was the chair of that committee for one year, so, you know, I thought that was a great honor that we could disseminate this information to teachers across the country.  It's not just here in Texas, whatever.  It's a national organization across the country.  They get a Magazine of, of History.  And so I served on that one.  That was as a result of being on the nominating board of the Organization of American Historians.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, okay.  And then you give a lot of lectures also, and it says about the Hughes Taylor lecture [sic. James Taylor Lecture]?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is what--this is in--as I said, Marcos, Texas [San Marcos, Texas] is called--it was Southwest Texas State [Southwest Texas State University]; now it's called Texas State University, and that was the--I was the first African American lecturer, and, see, by this time, everything being open about African American if they want to find out something, so I gave a lecture over there as the first African American lecturer on, on African American history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you served as--the Southern Conference of African American Society [sic. Southern Conference on African American Studies, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's the one I told you we started, and I, and I became president of that one.  We--I had been working along with him all along, but.  Now, this organization, as opposed to the Organization of American Historians, it is a very small one that just started, but it is one that allows people in smaller universities or who can't get into major publication, you can--we have a journal called The Griot, the journal of African American history--southern history.  They can publish in that because not, you know, there's so much people being published or whatever, and it's hard to get in those larger ones, so this one serve a purpose.  It also served as a stepping stone.  You do there.  Then you can move to the next one and next one, whatever, so it is still--we're supposed to meet in Atlanta [Georgia] this year, and I, I served as president of that organization in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] in one year.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that was, was that 2007, 2008?
Speaker 2: Ye- yeah.
Story_ID: 663043
Speaker 1: So now in 2011, African American handbook of Texas [Handbook of African American Texas]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Before then, I was involved in the--I became a Texas Fellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And a Texas Fellow is, is an honor given to any individual who has made a contribution to Texas history.  There's only 250 individual who have received that honor since it started in the 1880s or whatever.
Speaker 1: And what year was that that you became a fellow?
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009].  Okay.  Then as a result of being that, then I became president of the organization [Texas State Historical Association] in 2011; and as a result of being president, I became editor of the--what we called African American handbook of Texas.  Is--it is a digital handbook where we're trying to capture--it's like an encyclopedia, people across the state, but in this one, you have to be deceased (laughter) probably because they had, had problem with it.  You have to be deceased to be in it, so, you know, like George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush] is not in it yet because he's not deceased.  But my focus was on African America, so, currently, we have about 850 interests, individual places and thing like that, but that's still a lot, but at least this is a beginning--particularly, doing black history, one can go there if they're looking for a vignette or whatever.  And the good thing about this one, it gives you a bibliography so it can lead to other research.  It has been peer reviewed, and, and also, you know, it's not just write it and you don't have the sources from where you got it from.  So this is why--it is a great help, as I said, because not much is written on blacks in Texas, and so this handbook is, is very good--as, as a matter of fact, we can't keep up with it now because it's hard to get people to (laughter), to write, you know, to get that many.  They'll write one or two.  And then you have to have somebody--I was much more active when I was president and I first got it and, and had some leverage, but now I have all kind of other responsibilities, and so every now and then, somebody will send something, but, before, you know, I was able to (laughter) to get more of it.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so--and this was in 2011.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then that's also, you said, the year that you served as the president.
Speaker 2: President.
Story_ID: 663044
Speaker 1: So what happens in 2012?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the--my speech, 2012 is, is published in the Southwestern Historical Quarterly, the, the presidential speech, which I talked about the, Texas and the massive civil rights narrative.  You know, if you look at books on the Civil Rights Movement now, they will talk about all those other places where you had--you know, Alabama, Mississippi, whatever.  Because during the, the '60s [1960s], Texas, as a result of Smith v. Allwright [Smith v. Allwright, 1944] and as a result of the fact that Texas was a large city [sic.] with a lot of aura, when students started demonstrating here, you had a blackout 'cause they asked all the media not to carry it so that they could integrate quietly, and I think they integrated quietly because business people soon came to the realization that segregation was not worth the dollar; and so you had this quiet thing that happened here in Texas at that time.  So, as a result of that, you would not have this overt thing, so many of people who were writing about the Civil Rights Movement, they will talk about Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, whatever--and very little about Texas.  Where, on the other hand, you had two major civil--excuse me--two major civil rights case that came out of Texas, Smith v. Allwright, the one that said white primary is declared unconstitutional; and the one that created Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  The one that created Texas Southern, Sweatt v. Painter [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950].  You don't know the story behind that?  (Clears throat) Excuse me.  Texas had only one public institution in the state, and that was Prairie View, Prairie View College [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  It was only--you had some church related colleges, but Prairie View was the only one.  Blacks in Texas had been asking--and Prairie View was, was considered agriculture and mechanical school.  From the time the constitution was established in 1876 [Texas Constitution of 1876], it said that a similar institution would be established for Negros with a classical education--journalism, medicine, law, whatever.  Black legislators pushed and tried to get something done but was unable to do so.  It was stifled.  In 1946, a black man from Texas by the name of Heman Marion Sweatt decided that he wanted to become a lawyer, but he wanted to go to University of Texas.  He--Lulu White [Lulu B. White] was responsible for getting him.  She knew his family.  They went to the University of Texas and applied.  The--because Smith v. Allwright had passed, Texas was somewhat on guard, and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] said we're going to use Texas as a proving ground since this has already happened, but we're going to focus on education because we can show the disparity of the glaring discrimination or whatever, so they got Heman Sweatt to become a plaintiff, went to the University of Maryland [sic.] in 1946--I'm sorry, University of Texas; and applied.  When he applied, the president, Theophilus Painter, sent his application to the attorney general, Grover Sellers, and said that this applicant is duly qualified to become a student at the University of Texas law school [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas] except and for the fact that he is a Negro.  The attorney general writes and says that, according to the laws of Texas, he should be denied.  And, therefore, when he was denied, Sweatt decided to take his case to court.
Story_ID: 663045
Speaker 1: When he took his case to court, the State of Texas decided that they would make Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] a university overnight.  They would change the sign (laughter).  They passed a bill saying--they passed the bill, but they changed the sign overnight.  That we're going to make it a university overnight.  Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt] did not accept the offer.  Then they decided that they would tell Sweatt, "Well, if you can come to a building downtown Houston [Texas], we will get some black lawyers to teach you, and that will be a branch or a link to the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas]."  He did not accept this.  So then they came up with their final offer to rent a space in a petroleum--a building downtown and let white lawyers from UT, or white professors from UT teach him.  He rejected that and took his case to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  When he took his case to the Supreme Court in 1950, the Supreme Court ruled that Texas--there was no comparison between Texas--or but before that, before the ruling of the court, then they decided, after he does not go to the Supreme Court, that this area here, you can't see it.  It's a building far from here.  There was a private college called Houston College for Negroes [Houston, Texas].  The state purchased Houston College for Negroes, and established a law school; and that's how Texas Southern came to be, March 3rd, 1947, a bill passing the senate [Texas Senate]--bill 140, 140--and approved by the house [Texas House of Representatives] that this would become Texas State University for Negros with a law school.  Texas--and that would eventually become Texas Southern University, but Sweatt took his case--he still pursued his case to Supreme Court; and when it got to the Supreme Court, the State of Texas argued, "But we have separate but equal.  They have a law school."  The court ruled that there was no comparison between the two; and, therefore, Sweatt had to be admitted to the University of Texas.  So what did Sweatt v. Painter [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] do?  It set precedent for Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  In Sweatt v. Painter, the court would imply separate but equal is unconstitutional.  In Brown versus the Board of Education, it would say in black and white, separate but equal is unconstitutional and has no place in American society.  And so that's how Texas Southern came to be.  This case, most historians would argue Brown versus the Board of Education is the one that gave rise to the modern Civil Rights Movement.  But I'm saying the precedence for the Brown versus the Board of Education was Sweatt v. Painter here in Texas and here at Texas Southern University.
Story_ID: 663046
Speaker 1: Your heroine, (laughter) Lulu B. White, she's added to the seventh grade social studies course (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: So tell me about that.
Speaker 2: --you know, they have, they have standards in Texas, and I don't know too much.  This is not a teacher--but in education they have certain things that they must know about or read about or whatever, and they just decided that she was, she was added to that.  It's--it probably came about because of, of they're trying to add more women into the history textbook or whatever, but this is the contribution that I'm glad of that, that she, she was added to, to the seventh grade standard.
Speaker 1: And that's fantastic.  I mean, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's because of your hard work (laughter) that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that she is now known today.
Story_ID: 663047
Speaker 1: In 2013, you started writing on--or preparing for the book 'Southern Black Women' ['Southern Black Women in the Modern Civil Rights Movement,' eds. Bruce A. Glasrud and Merline Pitre]."  So is that when--and this is about black women in modern Civil Rights Movement, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What, what I--as I looked at the literature on Civil Rights Movement, you know, at first, it was only the men or those men like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but very little was written these (unclear).  And we had a lot of heroines in each state that's being written about, but--I mean, a lot that is written by, by blacks in the South.  But I, I decided that maybe we should look at the state itself.  What was going on in this state?  Because not all of the Civil Rights Movement occurred the same way, had the same thing; and the role that black played was different.  Some were grassroots leaders.  Some were, you know, organizers, some were mobilizers and whatever, and a lot depended upon the environment, the state in which they was because you would have somebody like Fannie Lou Hamer in Mississippi that everybody knows about and the role she played.  But some of those other women in other states, you would never know about.  So decided that maybe we should look at state by state because you would find that, as I said, here in Texas, you would have integration coming much more quietly or overtly [sic.] than in Mississippi where you--where the camera and everything was there, so, but still, these women were playing a very important role and pushing, so this is why we wanted to look at those individual states.  For example, here in Texas, what we pointed out was that--I don't know if this author pointed out, but when you had the student demonstration here in the Houston [Texas] in the '60s [1960s], it was the lady who was the dean of student here at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], who was--allowed the students to use her car.  And another time, her name was Deanna Burrell, Lot Burrell's [ph.] mother.  She was Mrs., Mrs. Lot [Deanna Lot Burrell].  She allowed them to use her car to, to transport the students to different places; so these women played an active role.  Another lady, Beulah Shepard [Beulah Ann Shepard] is the one who is responsible for our current mayor, mayor now.  She, she lives in a little community called Acres Homes [Houston, Texas].  She's now deceased.  But she started paying a poll tax in 1946, and has been involved in each of the--until her death--she was involved in each of the election.  She was invited by three presidents because of the role she played in the Democratic primaries.  Uneducated.  Now, as far as the mayor is concerned, the mayor, [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Turner, she saw him really as a talent.  He was very bright and whatever.  He went to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And when he came back, she told him, I want to get involved in poli- no.  She told him, "I want you to get involved in politics, to run for office," and he said, "Miss Shepard, I, I'm not interested in that."  She say, "You don't know what you're interested in" (laughter).  And then took his--her advice, went on and became a state legislator; and now is mayor of Houston.  I think you all going to be interviewing him next week.  So this was what I was trying to do in this book: look at the role that these women played, you know, in the Civil Rights Movement, in what we call the modern Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 663048
Speaker 1: Tell me what you're working on now?
Speaker 2: I'm working on a history of Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  Texas Southern University does not have a comprehensive history.  It, it started as we said--it started as a state supported institution in 1947, but the antecedent of that is 1927; and that is, in 1927 blacks wanted a junior college, and so they went to the superintendent of Houston Independent School District along with whites and asked to establish a separate junior college [Houston Colored Junior College, Houston, Texas], and it was established.  It was under the auspices of the school board.  Afterwards, the school board decided that it could no longer bear the expense for those junior college, and as I told you, at the time that HISD was having trouble, financial trouble, banned expense, they passed it onto the University of Houston [Houston, Texas], and it was still a private college under their board, their board of directors.  And then in 1947 when Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt] decided to apply for the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin School of Law, Austin, Texas], then, then the state decided to purchase that Texas--Houston College for Negroes and made it Texas Southern [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University].  So from that point, then you look at how Texas Southern was established.  At the time it was established, there was only one street, one bus that came down.  There was a lot of trees.  There was one building.  But I think the irony of the establishment of Texas Southern, in order to prevent the integration of the University of Houston, they established Texas Southern in a hurry because--okay, this was done in March 1947.  Texas Southern opened its doors in September.  (Laughter) And, therefore, they had to change all of the accounting procedures and what have you.  But more than this, in order to prevent integration, they said that Texas Southern University could have any degree upon demand.  This is why the pharmacy school started with six students; but shortly after the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled [in Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] that Sweatt had to be admitted to the University of Texas, all of this changed.  The budget was slashed.  Six years afterward, they were starting to say that, that it was not cost effective to have two law school and two pharmacy school nearby because the University of Houston was right across the street.  But Texas Southern became a state supported institution before the University of Houston.  But shortly afterwards, they would start to say, you know, it's not cost effective; and so this whole issue of merging Texas Southern with another institution almost remain with us today, but this is what happened at first.  The funding was never as it should be.  TSU suffered financially.  And so it is not until the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] sued the southern states for inequity in higher education that the infrastructure of Texas Southern has developed to what it is now.
Story_ID: 663049
Speaker 1: So what I have attempted to do is look at the history; how it got started.  What happened in each administration?  For example, the first administration was with Lanier--Raphael O'Hara Lanier, but it was a, it was an emergency university.  If you look at the, the papers at that time, the primary document, they referred to it as an emergency university.  Now, it was supposed to--when was this started?  Supposed to be started with a law school.  The next thing, it had a pharmacy school.  It had a vocational educational school; and there was a big fuss over that as to whether you should have a vocational school in a classical university, one that is similar to UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas].  So you had that hassle going on the first year where, where one individual say that to, to start a university in a hurry without any of the necessary facilities is almost to ask for failure.  But despite this, the university was able to survive because of the commitment that African Americans made to it.  So the next year after Lanier left, Samuel M. Nabrit became president.  He was the brother of James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] who would become president of, of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], but who was also working along with Thurgood Marshall in those various lawsuit.  When Nabrit came to office, he made it clear that he was not concerned that much with his job; and so, therefore, when the students demonstrated in 1962, he called an assembly.  He had all the pressure from the outside--what he should do.  Unlike, this other, other college presidents, he called (unclear).  He said that if we had been teaching our students all the year about inequity in education, whatever, and it would be something wrong if, if we would tell them what they're doing more or less is wrong.  We stand by with students.  So he stayed ten years, probably goes down as the best president because not only did he do that, but he, he went to pr- he went to philanthropist organization where they--and garnered a lot of support financially for Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], and really built Texas Southern, Texas Southern up.  And then along the way, you had other president came who, who more or less did the same, but it's interesting to look--I'm still looking at it--to look at the history and see how it evolved with the time and see what happened.  But--so I'm, I'm toying with the idea that despite the obstacle that it had, despite the integration that it had, it, it did a valuable good.  We have over four- forty thousand graduates.  We have people like Barbara Jordan and Mickey Leland, Strahan [Michael Strahan] who comes over there.  So I'm toying with the idea of--for a title that, it was 'Born to Serve' ['Born to Serve: A History of Texas Southern University'].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's--we'll be looking for that next book, 'Born to Serve.'  Okay.
Story_ID: 663050
Speaker 1: Also, you do take a trip to, to Africa, to Senegal and Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ethiopia, Kenya, and Egypt.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now, who, who funded this; who sponsored it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The American Forum [ph.].  That was part of Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] international studies program.  And, of course, this was mindboggling to me.  Not only had I not known very much about African American history, but I knew almost next to nothing about African history, and to go there and see.  Reading is one thing but to see it and, and we almost went from coast to coast from Senegal where they spoke French to Kenya; and, of course, in Senegal, again, I could see the relationship with the, the language.  I could understand some of that.  The food was cooked the same way.  And, of course, when you got to Egypt was quite different, and, and also Senegal because one of the things that had been drilled to us during the '70s [1970s] was that Egypt was an integral part of Africa, which people tend to take it out of the continent.  So this was very, very enlightening for me, and I was able to come back and have more material to teach to the class and to disseminate to others about, about this.
Story_ID: 663051
Speaker 1: We talked about some of the memberships that you belong to.  I mean, you have done great works in a lot of these different organizations.  But tell me about the advisory committee for the [HistoryMaker] Quintard Taylor, black--?
Speaker 2: Quintard Taylor, BlackPast.org.  I'm, I was very happy to be part of this one.  It is now the largest online to--he just sent us an email that his--he had over a million viewers across the world; and, of course, Quintard Taylor was a student of mine that I taught at Saint Augustine's College [Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] (laughter).  He, he--everyone had to take French, so he took French, but he went on and became a historian, so he has--if you go to BlackPast.org, it is the largest.  It is online encyclopedia on African American--there's a lot of about Texas history.  You were asking about the Freedmen's Town [Houston, Texas].  You can go to black dot--BlackPast.org and, and read about Freedmen's Town, and it will give you some information, and then you can get some more information on that, so I was very happy to be part of this; and Quintard told me he started with his student, you know, writing vignettes and then later on got connected with other people that gave him money; and, and this is how they were able to progress and, and put it out there for people to see.
Story_ID: 663052
Speaker 1: Along with the many memberships, you have written numerous articles, and we've talked about some of them, but there are a couple that we would like to--I'd like you to expound on.  And the black Houstonian and doctrine--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of Separate but Equal ['Black Houstonians and the Separate but Equal Doctrine,' Merline Pitre].  You know, not only black Houstonians, but African Americans have toyed with the idea of separate but equal.  Even today people say should we--maybe we were better off with segregation, whatever or we should get--remember, black folks would--at least many would have gone on if it were equal, but separate has never been equal.  This is the problem that they would have--that black Houstonian was have when you would come to establish Texas Southern [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  When they came to establish Texas Southern, you had a feud between Lulu White [Lulu B. White] and the editor of the Houston Informer, Carter Wesley [Carter Walker Wesley].  Why?  Because Lulu White went along with Thurgood Marshall.  We're pushing for integration, and we have to stay on that course.  Carter Wesley said, the state have offered us another university, and that is Texas Southern.  Integration is going to be long in coming, and it's not going to affect that many people.  It's not going to affect as many people, so why--we can have the cake and eat it, too.  Lulu White said, no, we have to go--so you had a great feud, and the feud is still going on.  Her argument is that she could, she could not see any--she could not see any reason for separate but equal; and Carter Wesley said that, if you're going to educate the masses of black people, you have to have somewhere for them to go.  We can still push for the integration of, of Texas, but we need this other university, which is Texas Southern, for the masses of black people.  Lulu White said, all you're going to get is a Jim Crow school with inadequate facilities, so the argument still goes on now.  What do you do?  Do you take one that affect more people, or you just push the bad one?  And so this is the feud that was going on.  The other thing is that if you have an institution like TSU, the question becomes that then you will probably be able to disseminate more of their culture as opposed to another one, but the argument still goes on.  It goes on whether you should go toward integration or non-integration; and I don't know.  I, I think the masses of people in, in Houston [Texas] probably went along with Carter Wesley--that you establish Texas Southern if you can't have both, but the argument still goes on.  And so I think it will be interesting for any of the students to look at it and try to evaluate what is happening now.  Of course the argument goes on so often: whether we were better off or worse off, or whether we should have stayed that way.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 663053
Speaker 1: Another article, the 'Different Strokes of Different Folks,' the African American--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --and source material (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and source material [sic. 'Different Strokes for Different Folks: African Americans and Source Material,' Merline Pitre].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When--as I told you, when I first came--well, prior to then, up until the 1950s, very few liter- there was very few literature on African American, and, well, some say there was no source material.  But it depend, the kind of material that you use.  For example, when I was doing the first book on those black legislator ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre], if you went to the newspaper, the most, most of the newspapers were white newspaper written by and for white people.  It, it was hard to find others.  So, therefore, you would see things in some of those newspaper that said, these black legislators were ignorant ex-slave who descended straight from the cornfield to the legislative hall, and what someone was doing was simply scribbling on paper, what have you.  If you use--said I can't find anything.  This is what the newspaper is saying.  Then you come up with a negative view of these (unclear).  But if you have patience and discipline and go to the legislative journal, then you can see what these people were saying--that they were advocating for school, for mental institution, to establish Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]; were advocating for the right to vote--were pushing for more blacks to vote.  But you have to go to the convention proceeding.  You have to go to the, to the legislative and, and senate journals [Texas Senate].  You have to look and see in other white ally's paper if some of these men wrote a letter to them, what did they say?  And going through some of those newspaper, for example, one individual who could be considered the Matt Gaine- I mean, the Malcolm X of his day was Matthew Gaines at that time, and Matthew Gaines was writing about voting right, and he's saying, it's a sin to have power and not to vote and, and not to use it--referring to those black communities that had a, had one opportunity to send a black to the United States Congress.  You see, during that period of post-Reconstruction, Texas is the only southern state did not send anything to the United States Congress.  They had an opportunity one time, but then they were split because there was another white who was somewhat moderate who's--say, well, I have a better chance; and so some went in that direction and Matt Gaines was cautioning them: it's a sin to have power and not to use it.  If you got--you--if we cast nineteen out of twenty votes, we should not lose.  This is in 1870, Matt Gaines is saying this.  So if you know the source material, go to the source material, then you can come out with a more comprehensive view of what blacks were doing, feeling, or saying at that time.  What I was trying to do in this book was not trying to say exclusively what was done to blacks.  We know that they, they had a lot of violence meted out to them, that there was economic coercion.  There were all kinds of substitutes, but what fin- what those blacks were doing for themselves.  How were they trying to build their communities and whatever?  And they were trying to do it through school, through lodges and what have you; and if you go to those, you went to some of those lodges, fraternal organizations or--then you can find.  So this is what I'm saying about source material.  You have to know what source to go--you have to look at all the sources.  You cannot look at just one side because you come out with a one sided view of history.
Story_ID: 663054
Speaker 1: Of course, you've done a lot of peer reviewing.  And, which was your favorite, or is there a favorite peer review that you did or program that you worked with (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I've done something for the, the Journal of American History; and, of course, one of the things it, it allows you to do is to read what someone read and see how accurate, whether they left something out.  Now, in years gone by, long time ago, it used to be that people would simply review those just to simply see how brilliant they were and they'd find every little--dot the I and cross every T.  This is not the, the purpose of doing.  This is the purpose of pointing out the strong and weak points, whether or not someone left something out, or whether or not one is using stereotypical language; and there are times when, you know, this has to be pointed out that they are using.  So I, I suppose most of the book or more of the book, I should say, get published in the Journal of American History, and so you have an opportunity when they send this to you to, you know, to, to point certain things out about that.
Story_ID: 663055
Speaker 1: Last year, I was named a fellow for the East Texas Historical Association.  East Texas is the one that, that deals just with East Texas history.  This is the one where--East Texas is the area of Texas where African American live--where the majority of them live or came during slavery because of the fertile land and what have you.  And so, again, emphasis is given to those area that deals with African American history.  Now, this is not to say that you have African American in Midland or other area, but that East Texas, you had more of this, so you have more of the African American experience; and, and the books that I have done, black legislators of Texas ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898,' Merline Pitre] and, and all of those deal more with East Texas, and so I was able to get--I mean, I, I was able to be named a fellow for East Texas, East Texas history.  All right.  I also--the president, the president that just left or, or from Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] just resigned, Dr. John Rudley [John M. Rudley], he instituted a presidential achievement award [Presidential Achievement Medal], and I received that one in two thousand thir- 2014, I think.  That is a person who have been here twenty-five years and made contribution in teaching, research, and service, and I was able to get that.  Also, the--we have across the country a national organization called the Black Women Historians [Association of Black Women Historians].  I received the leadership award from the Black Women Historians--that is, a historian who has made a contribution to scholarship, and also served in a leadership role; and it is named after the former dean and historian of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Lorraine Williams.  And so I received the Lorraine Williams Leadership Award [Lorraine A. Williams Leadership Award] from the, the association for black women historians; and I was one of those who, when we first started in '78 [1978] who was among those who first started Black Women Historians association.
Story_ID: 663056
Speaker 1: That's the time when, you know, bla- when women history became popular.  Again, we did not find too much on women because black women, being black and women, were doubly victimized; and so we decided to start that organization [Association of Black Women Historians] at that particular time and was able to do that.  And as a result of being linked to this organization and networking with people, then you meet with people, so I became a close friend of Darlene Clark Hine.  I don't know if you know she's more or less considered the dean of the Black Women Historians, whatever.  She had a conference in 1888 [sic.], I think I'm giving the right year, in which she invite scholars from across the country looking at the state of African American history; and, of course, because she know the state of HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and what have you, she paid my way along with two other students to attend this conference, and so I think, you know, that was great for being (unclear).  Also being part of that organization and, and meeting other people, I also met Deborah Gray White, the lady who wrote 'Ar'n't I A Woman?' ['Ar'n't I A Woman?: Female Slaves in the Plantation South].'  And she's the one who's the author of 'Telling Stories' [sic. 'Telling Histories: Black Women Historians in the Ivory Tower,' eds. Deborah Gray White].  And so this is why my memoir is in, in the book, 'Telling Stories' up there.  It's only twenty pages, so it's, it's abbreviated memoir, but it's a memoir of, of my upbringing up to the point where I became dean [of Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 663057
Speaker 1: Sponsored conferences, you know, besides you doing lectures, let's see, Salvaging the Self [Salvaging the Self: Black Southerners' Response to Jim Crow]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, let me say something about those conferences.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I got to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], that--not very much was going--was happening about African American especially, on, on the graduate level, so I started writing proposals to the Texas state commission of humanities [Texas Commission on the Arts], (unclear) only would get two thousand, three thousand (laughter).  I get four thousand, is probably the most I've ever got.  It was enough to pay a noted historian to come down and talk.  And so this is how I had those conference.  Now, the one Salvaging the Self stemmed from the, the--a grant that I got from the National Endowment for the Humanities about Jim Crow.  Again, in Jim Crow, I'm looking at how blacks salvaged the self.  We know the discrimination that was meted to them, but they salvaged the self, other than that, they would become insane.  They salvaged the self through expressive culture.  You know, talking about themself, Zora Neale Hurston talking this way.  They salvaged themself through history, Carter G. Woodson writing about history and whatever.  They, they salvage themself through resistance; so I was able to look at it and say, how did blacks survive that period of Jim Crow?  They salvaged the self by enduring.  So we look at all of those--how did they salvage, salvage the self?  As opposed to, you know, we know that there was lynching.  We know there was lynching and all of this going on.  But what were they doing?  Okay.  They--there was form of resistance.  They were laughing at themself through, through expressive culture, or, say, in poems, or whatever.  They were having black history week with Carter Wesley [Carter Walker Wesley].  So this, this is why I consider this conference very good so it allowed people in the audience to talk about how that a black person living in that era salvaged the self, how did they survive Jim Crow and whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, all right.  I don't think that you mentioned, but are you a member of ASALH [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]?  We talked about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I'm a life member.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know you talked about Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'm a, I'm a life member.  I serve on several committee of ASALH.  And, of course, this is where my first article ['A Note on the Historiography of Blacks in the Reconstruction of Texas,' Merline Pitre] was published in The Journal of Negro History [The Journal of African American History].  I serve on certain boards as the first one.  I serve on review boards for the journal and what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Is there any other--anything else that you want to talk about that we haven't talked about?
Speaker 2: No.  What is it called?  The black--is this the black--I don't--I'm not sure what it is.  The HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] have some kind of conference each year where they look at scholarship and the whole bit, and so I was the runner up one year for that.  Another lady, you know, what contribution you made at HBCU, and kind of--I, I was, I was a, I was a runner up for, for that one year.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And there are any other sponsored conferences?  Because, you know, you talked about, you know, how you got the money, you know, to do these conferences, and you get a, you know, a couple thousand dollars, but, you know, like the, The Fourteenth Amendment and Black Quest for Equality--that was one.  Any other of the conferences that you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well--well, we've had a number of others.  I just list a few.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: See, what was I was trying to do is since, since we did not have a--any formal course, undergrads, and I don't know if all teachers integrated African American history in their courses, in their survey history courses as I did, I thought that would be a good way to give the students some idea of what African American history, just a slice of it or a snippet of it of what was going on; and so this is why we would hold those conferences on black history, black history week or Black History Month or whatever.
Story_ID: 663058
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we did not talk about that we--any part of your life story here that you would like to expound on, or talk about that we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess in looking at Texas Southern history, there was race riots--not race riot.  That was what it's called, a so called riot that occurred at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] in 1967.  At the time, you had the Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] riot or whatever.  What happened, Texas Southern has an interesting history.  You can't see now, but Wheeler Street [sic. Wheeler Avenue] used to go straight through Texas Southern.  The cars was flying there, and so the students became upset over it and wanted it closed.  And pretty soon, you would have some tension arising as a result of that.  But more than this--the student already tense over, over the, the city not closing Wheeler Street, thoroughfare that ran straight through, while they closed one that ran through University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  So there was an incident that happened at a dump site where the student went over there and became involved; and they came back to campus, and it was said that they came back to campus after some throwing of rocks or whatever, but because of the tension that occurred for many, I guess, many weeks and probably even months because of them going through, and you had this incident that was happening at this dump site on Holmes Road, the policemen began to--of the City of Houston [Texas], send policemen around the campus because they, they saw something what they perceived of as building up; and so it is said that as they came by one night, one guy threw something at a policeman who was patrolling, and this more or less what started the riot.  Many historian contend it was not a riot because aft- after this happened, they were taken, they went into the dormitories, found, found a gun, and then the other policeman came in and shot up the dormitory or what have you.  There were four hundred students arrested and sent to jail, but the policemen didn't--and the dormitory was more or less demolished, but the students didn't fire back, so I'm not too sure the ingredients for a riot was there, but they didn't fire back.  But several of them--well, four hundred were placed in jail.  The commission on civil disorder looked at it, and one called it a riot.  One called it a disturbance or what have you.  But if you read it, it was really not a riot, but it--as a result of this, Wheeler Avenue was closed after that.  So, I guess it shows some of the student power at this particular time.
Story_ID: 663059
Speaker 1: What else?  I'm trying to think of (laughter) what else is--that may be of interest.  I've been at TSU [Texas State University, Houston, Texas] so long (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  All right.  So let's, let's think about your life, and let's--if you do some reflection, think about some--a sound or a, or a sight or a smell that would take you back to that place where you grew up?  What would they be?
Speaker 1: A sound or a sight.
Speaker 2: Or a smell.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: Even somebody cooking or whatever.  What, what sounds, sights, and smells would take you back to remembering yourself as a, as a child?
Speaker 1: Well, looking at, looking at the house that was similar to the one I grew up in, and, you know, being in, in the country.  It is what bring back memories, but working in the field, hoping to get out (laughter).  And, and, of course, there's a--that little school [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana] is, is a historic site.  It's still--that part is there.  You know, I go home quite often, and it's still, it's still there, so it's not that I'm far removed.  I go home fairly often.
Speaker 2: You do, okay.  And so the school was made a historic site?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: What--do you know what year?
Speaker 1: I don't know what year, but I--it's in the 2000s.
Speaker 2: So it's fairly recent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and that was because it was a Rosenwald (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rosenwald--
Speaker 2: --school.
Speaker 1: --school, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I guess, I guess one thing I must say about the community is that, as I was telling you about the number of educated people coming from Plaisance [Louisiana], the first guy to get a Ph.D. in St. Land- black guy to get a Ph.D. in St. Landry Parish [Louisiana] was a graduate of Plaisance High School [Opelousas, Louisiana]; and he died as a professor of biology at University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California].
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Ja- Ray, Ray Collins, Ray Collins [O'Neil Ray Collins].
Speaker 2: What about any smells or sounds that you remember, you know, as a child?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess, surprisingly the sound is that, okay, we had a radio, and they didn't play too much rock and roll or whatever.  It was more or less (laughter) that country music on the radio.  That, that kind of brings you back to it.  It's--
Speaker 2: There, there was a certain kind of music in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: What, zydeco?
Speaker 2: Zyde- zydeco.
Speaker 1: Zydeco.  Yeah.  But they didn't play it too often.  They played more often than not on that station that we had (laughter) it was just country, Cajun music.  You, you would hear zydeco sometimes, but zydeco was--though Clifton Chenier was from Opleousas [Louisiana], he came to Port Arthur [Texas] and released most of his hits there.  Though he did make some at, you know, Opleousas also, and he's--I think he's buried in Opleousas.  You've heard of Clifton Chenier?  He's kind of the king of zydeco, and he, you know, he, he's one who made zydeco popular to a certain extent.  I think he won a Grammy [Grammy Award].
Speaker 2: In zydeco, that, they use like washboards--
Speaker 1: A washboard.
Speaker 2: --washboards--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to make the music.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, for one time, it had kind of died out, but they started a festival at home, the Zydeco Festival [Southwest Louisiana Zydeco Music Festival, Opelousas, Louisiana].  They started that--it started back--I guess must be the--maybe the '80s [1980s], and you had people coming all the way from Canada; and so you would have Cajuns come in and out.  Now it was integrated, and so they would come to the festival there and be concerned with--I mean, dancing and what have you.
Story_ID: 663060
Speaker 1: If you were to look back over your life, is there something that you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: I probably would have gone onto law school.   (Laughter) I probably would have gone onto law school as this--you know, as I look at what has happened, and what have you.  I--maybe law and history.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 663061
Speaker 1: What do you want to accomplish, or what do you want to do that you haven't done already?
Speaker 2: I want to write a history of blacks in Opleousas [Louisiana], Plaisance [Louisiana] or really St. Landry [St. Landry Parish, Louisiana] that I haven't done 'cause it appears, I mean, everybody is telling me at home that I've written (laughter) everything else except something about them; and, and I think everyone want to know this history because, as I said, people usually talk about it, they're proud of it that so many graduates have come out of Plaisance and got terminal degrees.  You got people from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and whatever, and, and we do not have this recorded.
Speaker 1: And that's interesting because during World War II [WWII], a lot of people left Texas; and then again, during the, the civil rights, you know, when the--well, during the--well, during the migration, too, where people--a lot of people left and went to California or came to Texas.  What year did you come to Texas to stay?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But before that, you know, people left, and your family stayed.  It seems that most of your family--?
Speaker 2: Well, most of them, but some of them came--the bulk of the people from Louisiana really came to Houston [Texas]; and then from Houston, they'd leave and go to California.  You see, you had the oil boom in the '40s [1940s], Beaumont [Texas] and Port Arthur [Texas] and whatever; and then in the '60s [1960s], then they started coming to Houston, and then a few from Houston left and went to California.  But even now, as soon as the graduating class leaves the state, except for those who are gone to college, then they head on out to Houston.  I guess, you know, following the job because St. Landry used to be an agricultural place, and so you had cotton f- but you don't have cotton anymore.  You had cotton and, and sweet potato yam.  You don't have them.  And so, so more or less, they were following the job, so you do not have that vibrant community except for teaching school or what have you as you had before.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Hadn't really thought about it, but (laughter)--I guess to, to leave something in a book so that generations from here or not can, can know something.  That's why I want to write this history about, about St. Landry and Louisiana to know from whence we've come, and, and the heights that you can attain.  We've only begun to scratch the surface.
Story_ID: 663062
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for future students, since you know, this will--this t- interview will be available through, you know, so many universities, and there will be so many students that will be able to watch you.  What advice would you give to a future generation?
Speaker 2: As I said, for there's no progress without a struggle.  There's no free lunch.  You have to work hard and discipline, discipline.  You have to discipline yourself.  You can only make it through working hard and being disciplined, stay focused.  Don't get distracted.  And, of course, you have to read.  You know, now with the digi- digital age, student not reading.  They think they can look at a picture and see and know everything about it.  While a picture may speak thousand words, it does not tell you everything.  You have to read.  And I, I don't know what happened to many African Americans because during the period of Reconstruction, African American made its--their greatest gain in education.  At least 90 percent of the slave in--or former slave emerged being illiterate, but by the turn of the century, at least 80 percent could read a simple sentence and write their name and then continued on because they saw education as this vehicle to political and economic empowerment.  So I--I don't know what, what is happening.  You know, and that's why I said the digital age is great, but you have to read.
Story_ID: 663063
Speaker 1: And is there anything else?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think one of the great things about the program [The HistoryMakers] is that--is the genealogy that, that you're providing, you know.  I think more people learn about themselves and their environment and people who are close to them, then the better understanding we have with each other, and, therefore, you can eliminate some discrimination.  One of the reasons people do not discriminate or are fearful of each other is because they do not know anything about each other's culture, what they're about, what they focusing on; so if we knew this about each other, it would greater.  All we've known through the years is fear or that have been handed down, or stereotypes about each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I want to thank you so much for taking the time--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --out of your busy schedule--
Speaker 2: It's been my pleasure.
Speaker 1: --to share your story.  I mean, it's fascinating; and we thank you for your contribution, you know, to the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], to your community.
Speaker 2: Well, I appreciate it.  This is, has been a great experience for me.
Story_ID: 663064
Speaker 1: This is (background noise) my first grade (laughter) graduation.  They started having first grade graduation, and so this was when I was in first grade at Plaisance elementary [Plaisance School, Opelousas, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: And what year would that be?
Speaker 1: That was in--six- 19--(unclear) that would be '49 [1949].  Let's see, yeah, 1949 right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This when I got my first master's [degree] in 1967 at, at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and Dr. Lawrence Reddick [Lawrence D. Reddick], my advisor in--that was in 1976.  He was the first biographer of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And he was your advisor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: For a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: This is when I got the master's in history, and that was in 1972.
Speaker 2: And this, my mother--yeah, I guess you have to stand that one up because, see my dad [Robert Pitre] there.  My mother and dad when I received my doctorate in '76 [1976] at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: This is my mother and her, her three children: my brother, Gregory Pitre; my mother, Florence Pitre [Florence White Pitre]; myself; and sister, Sandra Taylor [Sandra Pitre Taylor].
Speaker 2: And this is my mother, my brother, which I just told you.  My other sister, Zenobia Taylor [Zenobia Pitre Taylor], and Sherline Thomas [Sherline Pitre Thomas].
Speaker 1: Is there anybody different in this picture?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you can see Sherline better.  This is my sister, Sherline Thomas, and my brother, you can hardly see him in the back, but you've seen him before.
Speaker 1: My mother and Sandra Taylor.
Speaker 2: This is when I published my first book ['Through Many Dangers, Toils and Snares: Black Leadership in Texas, 1868-1898'] in '85 [1985].  This is the provost, Dr. Robert Terry [Robert J. Terry].
Speaker 1: This when I published my second book, 'In Struggle against Jim Crow' ['In Struggle Against Jim Crow: Lulu B. White and the NAACP, 1900-1957'] in 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's the first book with the, the current president that we had at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], Dr. Leonard Spearman [Leonard H.O. Spearman]; and that's in eighty- '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: This is when I became president of the Texas State Historical Association in 2012.  That is 2012.  I'd say '11 [2011], '12 [2012].
Speaker 1: And this is when I was honored by the, the--what is it?  Black legislative caucus [Texas Legislative Black Caucus] for the book.
Speaker 2: This is a high, high school student picture.  That's Plaisance High School [Opelousas, Louisiana], got '81--'61 [1961], '62 [1962] on it.
Speaker 1: That's another picture of me receiving the award from the legislative black caucus.
Speaker 2: And that's when I became dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Behav- [Texas Southern University College of Liberal Arts and Behavioral Sciences, Houston, Texas] not liberal arts, arts and sciences, I think.  That's me and my mother.
