Story_ID: 19053
Speaker 1: I want you to first start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and I'd like to also know what the 'F' stands for.
Speaker 2: Okay. My name's Dr. Alvin F. Poussaint. The middle initial 'F' stands for Francis, that's after Saint Francis, I was raised--raised a Catholic. My first name's spelled A-L-V-I-N, middle initial 'F.' And Poussaint, P-O-U-S-S-A-I-N-T. I think the original name in my family was Toussaint. My grandfather [Rufus Toussaint] came from Guadeloupe as a young boy, brought over by we think a white family who then let him go on his own at about sixteen in New York and somehow we think that 'T' got changed to a 'P' because it's spelled the same way as Toussaint except for the first letter and everybody with the name Poussaint that I know of is connected with my family--connected. There's no Poussaints who are unconnected to my family--that I--that I couldn't trace a connection to the family. So I think it was a made up typical thing that happened when quote immigrants--although I don't think he was quite an immigrant--the 'P' was changed. And I think, my--my speculation is that this white family that brought him from Guadeloupe, since my grandfather was not all black, he was like lighter than I was, I felt it was something going on in the family that somehow he was a kid that was sired by someone in that family and they brought him with them to the United States in the 1800s, late 1800s. And then he settled in New York. And he never spoke about this family, his origins. And so we know very little. Although I did travel to Guadeloupe where he was from. We tried to trace the name. They had no record of any Poussaint ever living on the island, going way back to the 1800s. I flew to Martinique, it's sister island, French island, and they had no records of any Poussaints in the hall of records. And their feeling was that the name was originally Toussaint, because they had many, many Toussaints, going way back to the 1800s, not a single Poussaint. So they felt that somehow that 'T' got changed to a 'P' with my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Did you--I have one question, I'm going to go back to my--but, did--you were saying that he got sired--what did you say about the white family?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that someway, because of his complexion, he was not very light skinned, but he had--he had--he was clearly mixed. And since they brought him over when he was a little boy, I think about ten years old or so, I thought that maybe he was a product of some union with a member of that white family and a black woman most likely. And they brought him over with them, but they didn't accept him as part of the family. And when they put him out on his own, in fact, we think that possibly they changed his name and made the first letter a 'P,' Poussaint, so that he would no longer officially be connected with their family. You see what I mean? Something--something like that happened that that 'T' was changed to a 'P.'
Story_ID: 19054
Speaker 1: Today's date is February the 13th, 2001 and I'm at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is my main--main position and I'm a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and I'm also a Faculty Associate Dean of Student Affairs at Harvard Medical School and I'm Director of the Media Center at the Judge Baker Children's Center here, which is a Harvard affiliated institution.
Speaker 2: What is the Media Center?
Speaker 1: The Media Center mainly focuses on advocating for children in relationship to the media. So we've been involved in discussions about ratings, violence on TV, the V- chip [electronic chip that restricts television programs viewed by children], marketing to children, doing some production ourselves of educational material. So it's focused around children, dealing with how the media influences, but also how we can use the media to promote health in children and well being in children, so we do a lot of writing of op-ed pieces, belong to certain websites for parents and some for children and so we write and propagandize a lot in the good sense on behalf of children, trying to educate.
Story_ID: 19055
Speaker 1: I ask these five questions, they're just short answers. What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? I would say potatoes.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying. "It's better--better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all."
Story_ID: 19056
Speaker 1: I'd like to have your father's name and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's name was Christopher T. Poussaint, the 'T' stood for Thomas. And he was a printer and typographer who initially had his own printing shop in East Harlem in New York where he was born and grew up. And then later he--when he became a typographer, and in fact his business couldn't sustain him, he was doing a lot of things for the local black community. He then went to work for a number of different newspapers in New York, including the 'Herald Tribune' and so on. And made a decent living I suppose, but we didn't quite know it, but because there were eight children.  And so we lived in some crummy apartments without--the first one I remember the toilet was in the hallway, it was on Third Avenue [New York, New York], beneath the elevated trains, then we kind of moved up, and we even felt proud because we moved to an apartment that had a toilet in the apartment, but no bathtub, the bathtub was in the--was in the kitchen with a--with a metal cover.  And you took off the metal cover to take a bath. Then we moved to an apartment--still all in East Harlem, where they had a very tiny bathroom with a sink and a tub and we really felt we had arrived, but we were using, even back in the forties [1940s] we had the icebox where they brought, you know, the ice and put in the ice. So each thing we got it was--luxury thing we got, it was like really something very special, including a refrigerator, et cetera. And I think it had to do with it being so many children [Christopher, Lillian, Clement, Dolores, Richard, Kenneth and Julia Poussaint] that there was just not enough to go around. And I'm talking about sometimes with food. That the younger kids frequently did not get meat because the meat was too expensive, so the older kids got meat and my father got meat, but the younger kids didn't get meat and just got the vegetables because it was too much to buy. But he was--he always had--he always had a job.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know--was--was your father--was--was it your grandfather, was it his father that you were talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did your father talk at all about his growing up? His--.
Speaker 2: My--my--he didn't talk a lot about it. He grew up in New York and sometimes what he said sometimes you didn't know whether it was entirely true or not. It's not even clear where he got his training to be a printer. He went to some type of vocational--vocational school. Whether he was a high school graduate we don't know. I know that my mother was not a high school graduate, we don't think. But they didn't talk too much about the background, although I think they got married very, very young. I think my mother was--must've been sixteen and he was probably eighteen when they were--when they were married. So--but they never talked about--a lot about their early, early life.
Speaker 1: Did you--would you consider your upbringing a West Indian upbringing [father's family from Guadeloupe] or was--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My upbringing was decidedly not West Indian. It was--it was--it was African American. And nobody in my family--my father didn't consider himself West Indian and my mother was also a mixture and she--sh--she had no connection with being West Indian. So no, it was not that influence--there was no Caribbean, West Indian culture within the household. The cooking was basically--the food we ate was basically American soul food diet, and our associations were--there were probably some West Indians among them in our neighborhood, but our association was primarily among African American.
Speaker 1: And your mother, tell me her name and--.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Harriet Johnston [nee Poussaint], her maiden name. She was born in New York. Now, her father was white and her mother was Mexican Indian as far as we can determine, who died not long after she was born. So she was--she was very fair. She was the fairest one in the family. But she was light-skinned. I don't think a black person would mistake her for anything except they would know she was a light-skinned black. But many white people often looked at her when she was dragging along these black kids, whether she was--she was white or not. But she--she totally identified as black. She never identified as anything else except black. And her father [Wallace Johnston] used to come around the family to visit.  He had remarried. And used to come by regularly and was part of--part of the family.
Speaker 1: And you said her father was white?
Speaker 2: Her father was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's father was white.
Story_ID: 19057
Speaker 1: Where is East Harlem [New York, New York], for those, you know, because you hear of Harlem--?
Speaker 2: East Harlem, I think it's--well, I would say--some people say it starts with--after 96th Street on the East Side, when things begin to get bad, around that neighborhood. And it goes--goes all the way up on the East Side to like 125th--135th Street. But it's--central Harlem is west, East Harlem is east.  And East Harlem is also known as 'Spanish Harlem' and it was made famous by a song, in fact. So East Harlem is Spanish Harlem. I grew up in a neighborhood in fact that was predominantly black and Puerto Rican, there were many, many Puerto Ricans. That photograph on the wall over there of my class, most of the students in my junior high school class [PS--Public School 171, Harlem, New York] were Puerto Rican with a spattering of a white kid here and there, an Irish kid, an Italian kid, but it was mostly black and Puerto Rican, so that their culture influenced the neighborhood a great deal. So as a kid, I picked up a lot of Spanish sayings, a lot of cuss words that the kids used, just from listening and being around so many Spanish-speaking--speaking kids.
Story_ID: 19058
Speaker 1: I'd like to go to your siblings. You were the seventh of eight, right [Christopher, Lillian, Clement, Dolores, Richard, Kenneth and Julia]?
Speaker 2: I was the seventh of eight, yes.
Speaker 1: Right. Can you tell your--the sibling's name and order, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My oldest brother, who's now dead, his name was Christopher, he was a printer and a typographer, in fact he worked at the 'New York Times' [newspaper]. Then I have a sister, Lillian, who's still--who's alive, and she's kind of--had worked as an executive secretary for some ministers in New York. And then I have a brother named Clemmy [Clement]  who worked with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] as kind of a g-agent, you know, he's supposed to track down people. He's still living, he's in his seventies. And then there's my sister Dolores, who's high--an elementary school principal in New York. And was a teacher her whole--whole career. And then I have a brother, Richie, for Richard, who worked in the post office his whole life. He's--he's living, but very ill at the moment. And then there was my brother Kenny [Kenneth] who died at age forty-two, had a lot of mental problems and was a heroin addict. And then there's me, number seven. And I have a sister three years younger named Julie [Julia], who worked in a lot of diversity affirmative action programs with major corporations in different parts of the country, who's now retired and living in Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Story_ID: 19059
Speaker 1: Share some childhood memories of growing up 'cause you're in a large family. You're at the tail end, you know, in that family, so--.
Speaker 2: Well, being in a large family had it's pluses and minuses, there were always a lot of people around, a lot of interaction around. But there were also like fights and the other things that go on between siblings. And sometimes there was not enough food. But I think on the whole there was a lot of interaction, sometimes too much. You didn't have privacy, you didn't have any place to study, you were crowded and sleeping--the apartments were small. So you, in fact, for that reason, spent a lot of time outdoors if you could. We'd always be in the street, even at a very young age like four and five, we could go in the street by ourselves and then come up when it was dinner time or whatever from playing. And we walked wherever we wanted to walk. In fact, we--I remember my brother and I doing a lot of things on our own at a very young age. I mean, we walked six blocks back and forth to school by ourselves. We went to the movies by ourselves. Rarely did my father [Christopher Poussaint] or mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] take us anywhere. I mean, sometimes, but usually they were not taking us or involved a lot in our recreation growing up. You kind of made your own little culture and it was made up mostly of your friends. And maybe other-- occasionally some neighbors in the environment.
Speaker 1: Were the older kids taking care of the younger kids in some respects?
Speaker 2: Well, some. Not--not the men so much. But the--I would say that my older sisters [Dolores and Lillian Poussaint] took care of the younger ones and were given responsibilities and kind of watched over you and helped. I think, yeah--definitely, particularly my sister Dolores was in some ways a substitute for my--for my mother.
Speaker 1: Do you think your mother was just coping? Or you think she--because that's a lot, you know, it was a lot of kids. I mean, it was not--I mean, there were other families that large, so--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think my mother was phenomenal actually. Not only was she coping, she seemed pretty happy. But how she did all she did, I don't know. She--she would, you know, take the wash to the hand wash. Sometimes she would wash the wash herself for everybody and put it out on a line, you know, stretched out to the next--next building.  She would cook. She would bake. She made all our cakes for everybody on birthdays. She cooked pies, she cooked all the dinner. She did all the shopping at the supermarket. One thing we did to help, she--she would always take the kids with her to the supermarket to help her carry the packages and so on back home, because we had to walk. The family never owned a car. We lived in New York, so we always took public transportation or walked. So she did--and then she would take the wash and she would iron everything. You know, the sheets, every--all the shirts, the blouses, and so on. So she was constantly working day to day and cooked--was there to fix breakfast in the morning, make your lunch, and then have dinner ready for you when you came home.  And she took a lot of shortcuts, which was smart and then she involved all the children in helping out with chores. She didn't--she didn't have to do dishes. She did do dishes, but they were usually assigned that we rotated who did all the dishes and who helped clean up the house. We had to help clean up the house, mop the floors, wax the floors, that type of thing. She always made the kids do, even though she would participate. But the bulk of the work she did herself.
Speaker 1: And what about your father? Was he--was he working mainly or was he--.
Speaker 2: He was mainly working and involved in a lot of outside activities, mostly at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Harlem on [sic,135th] 35th Street. He was in the boy's department and later was, in fact, kind of the head of the boy's department at the Y on 135th Street. And so he was usually home for dinner, but sometimes he would go back out. He was probably one of your old-fashioned fathers who saw himself mainly as a provider. Not as someone who did a lot of things with the kids, that that was the mother's responsibility, including his being the super disciplinarian who was the last word or who would suppose to set the punishment or whatever if things got out of line. But he was--he was around enough, but he was not--not kind of the modern father who was affectionate and hug you all the time and took you places and took you out and took you to the movies and that type of thing. And I don't know, I think some of the children may have different impressions, I think some of the older children feel that he was more connected. I think as the family grew I think he probably maybe had enough of kids. And he either saw us taking care of ourselves or the other kids taking care of us and my mother primarily taking care of us.
Story_ID: 19060
Speaker 1: Now, are you Catholic by training because I know that you--.
Speaker 2: I'm Catholic by upbringing. I was raised a Catholic. I took catechism, I made first communion, I was confirmed, had confirmation in the Catholic church. I used to go to church every Sunday I think until I was about sixteen. I used to go to confession nearly every week until I was about sixteen, until my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] died. And after my mother died, I had kind of a typical reaction, I would say, of anger toward God: "Why did you--why did you let my mother die? She was such a good person. If you were a real--really a God, you wouldn't have let this happen." And I got angry with the church at that time. And kind of began to withdraw from the church.  And also I think I was being very good Catholic in part to please my mother, even though she didn't go to church that much, she would go for the religious holidays, I knew she wanted me to. And when she was dying, in fact, she called me into her bedroom and she had gotten back from her radiation treatment for cervical cancer and she called me in and she said, you know, "People think they're fooling me and think I don't know I have cancer."  And she said, "I know I have cancer." And she said, "I know I'm dying." And she said that I was a--I was a good boy and she wanted me to promise her that maybe I would become a priest. So that's how interested she was in my going to Catholic church. She had visions of me becoming a priest.
Speaker 1: And do--and she was Catholic also?
Speaker 2: She was Catholic. She was Catholic and my father [Christopher Poussaint] was Catholic.
Story_ID: 19061
Speaker 1: Are there any other memories that you have specifically you'd like to share, you know, growing up and, you know, whether it's time on the streets or in school, or, you know, in the family itself?
Speaker 2: Well, the street [East Harlem, New York, New York] was a lot of fun and we participated in all those urban games. There were also a lot of fights and there was crime and we did our petty little crime too, stealing from fruit stands and sneaking in the subway and that type of thing. Some fights--there were gangs around, so--and you were exposed to violence, there was domestic violence, not--not in my household, but neighbors, I think quite a lot of it. And a lot of gangs where there were shootings, frequently with the homemade zip guns as they call them. And something that doesn't take place as much, but the way of gang rumbling back then was to stomp somebody. So you would witness people being stomped.  That is, they would knock them to the ground and they'd would start kicking them and stomping, literally stomping them was the way you attacked people, more than you did with guns or with knives. That was like, not only physically assaultive and very damaging, but psychologically it was a way of demeaning--demeaning you even more. And sometimes guys would get stomped who were in the wrong neighborhood.  And I belonged to a small club called the Cherokees, but I--it wasn't like a real gang. But--and we were kind of neutral, so that kept us out of trouble. But there were a lot of other gangs that you ran into and I was always a little bit younger than my group and--so that they saw me a little bit as a mascot, even to the point one time, one memory I remember was one of the gang leaders, we were going to some club and he was a teenager and I was probably not--I was not probably--I was not a teenager, I was probably about eleven or twelve. And to protect himself from the police he gave me his gun, to hold his gun, hold onto his gun and then went in the club, figuring that the police aren't going to be looking--no one's going to bother me for a gun, but he knew where the gun was. So there were things like that at the time that were taken for granted in terms of the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 19062
Speaker 1: But I think the most significant thing for me about my childhood was when I was nine or ten--was the rheumatic fever.
Speaker 2: And do you know how you got the rheumatic fever, I mean--?
Speaker 1: Well, the, you know, the ideology of rheumatic fever is a strep throat. You get a strep throat and strep throat seems to disappear, but then you end up with rheumatic fever as the body reacts to the antigens and so on in the strep throat, and not all people are susceptible. And if you get treated with penicillin to kill the bacteria--they didn't have penicillin at that time, so you couldn't do it with penicillin, or was just becoming available. And I got a rather severe case of rheumatic fever that had immobilized me. The pain and the joint swelling so that I couldn't--I couldn't move. I couldn't move and they had to carry me to the hospital.
Speaker 2: Now, wasn't the story that you were first--they misdiagnosed it?
Speaker 1: Yes. I was--when I first went to Mount Sinai [New York, New York] hospital, which was about three or four blocks from me, it was over on Fifth Avenue, 99th and 100th Street. They took me to the emergency room and--'cause I had severe ankle pain. Severe ankle pain.
Speaker 2: But were you outside.
Speaker 1: I thought that I had injured my ankle. We were playing kick the can and run.  Where you kick the can and then you chase it, I mean, I don't know all of the--I can't remember all of these games. And I felt that I had sprained my ankle. So I went to the emergency room because the pain was really bad and they took an x-ray, it wasn't broken. And the doctor said, "Well, you probably strained it," and he wrapped--he taped it. He taped my ankle to give it, you know, which was a reasonable diagnosis.  But I probably had fever at the time and other things. Well, the pain became more and more excruciating and in about two days all of my joints were swollen and painful and I had a very high fever and I couldn't move any of my joints and to move them was just painful. I mean, I didn't want anyone to move me. I didn't even want anyone to touch me. And my sister Dolores actually, and my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint], carried me down.  We lived, I think on the fourth or fifth floor of a walk up tenement, walk up. Carried me down and she claims she carried me to the hospital and I don't--that would be a long way for her to carry me to the hospital. My recollection, I think that they had called a cab and put me in a cab and took me there. She says she carried me to the hospital.  Anyway, I got there and the interns on duty apparently immediately recognized what I had because right there in the emergency room I became a teaching case. They called down all these doctors to take a look--to take a look at me, to listen to my heart, to see an acute case of rheumatic fever.
Story_ID: 19063
Speaker 1: The doctors [Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York] came and I clearly was a classic case [of rheumatic fever] and they wanted all the doctors to see. And I remember screaming and the nurses gave me a bath and one that was pretty--pretty kind of mean she said, "Don't you ever take a bath." We took a bath once a week. I mean, that was what we did. So it may have been at the end of the week or something. And then if I was in pain I know I didn't take the bath because my joints ached too much, so I was pretty dirty. Anyway, they treated me like I was like gravely ill. They took me upstairs and they put me in an oxygen tent and they were constantly coming by and constantly checking me and all this other business. And I think they told my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] that I might die. I think that's what they told my mother. And they kept me on bed rest and the only thing they could give you was a lot of aspirin and oxygen and apparently I had a lot of heart damage, which I don't have now, but at the time--during the acute attack, I must've had a lot of Myocarditis [degeneration or inflammation of heart muscle] or something that was showing up on the electrocardiogram [ECG]. And they kept me in the hospital--I was--for about three months or so, I was like on bed rest and maybe could get up and sit in the chair, go around in a wheelchair, but they wouldn't let me walk because the treatment then was that--well they didn't want to put any strain on my heart, apparently feeling my heart was not going to hold up. And I literally had nothing to do and I think that became the turning point in my life--was that experience.  After I was in the hospital for about three months I spent another two or three months in a convalescent home in Far Rockaway, Long Island where I had a lot of negative experiences at that convalescent home because they were so bigoted. But in the hospital what was--was critical was that I began to read. I could--I had to find things to do, and I began to read books and people would bring me books. Visiting day was like once a week or once every two weeks back then for kids because they didn't want you to get homesick, I mean it was a little bizarre. But I was sent books and people brought me books and I just read and read and read, trying to pass the day--to go by. And I even--my school teacher from elementary school came and brought me some books and school books because she said, "I don't want to have to leave you back in school and if you read and do all this stuff you can keep up with your class." So all I did was read. The convalescent home was a negative experience because I had very bad racial experiences there that I had never experienced before. I mean kids called you names, you know, you knew all the names and we had some clashes with the Italian kids. But there they were particularly cruel. I was the only black kid and they were always calling me names. Every word they knew that was derogatory--these white kids like were kind of shocked that I was even there in the convalescent home. And you know, would call me 'black boogie,' 'nigger,' you name it. To the point that it got so bad I became very depressed about it and one day one of the kids called me a nigger and I just started crying. Just broke down and started crying. And I went--I was very homesick, and I went running into the head nurse, or assistant head nurse and crying and sobbing and she said, "What's the matter? What's the matter?" And I said, "Jimmy--the kids keep calling me a nigger." And she looked at me and she said, "Well, aren't you a nigger?" And I just was totally--I don't know what I felt at that point. I was just so stunned and shocked and also terrified that she thought this too. Like--I like was seeing her as some angel. She had on a white nurse's uniform and I'm going to her and you're going to rescue me and sweep me up and hold me and protect me and she said, "Well, aren't you a nigger?" And then I started writing my mother letters that I wanted to be out of this place and "please bring me home" and I was crying all the time. And then I had a cute experience, there was a Puerto Rican girl there.  Little--a year younger, she was maybe about eight or nine or something, I was about ten, and she felt very sorry for me. She was kind of light brown. And she took me aside and she said, "You know, maybe what you should do," she says, "Is tell them your Spanish," she said, "And I'll teach you some Spanish words. And then they won't bother you and call you all of these names." She said, "They don't call me those names." Which I thought was very perceptive. I even remember her name, her name was Hilda. And she felt badly for me and identified with me. So I got out of that place, but I got out of that place with the feeling that like the white world, or these white people, was really awful and bigoted and scary. So that was a very negative experience in that way. And I was--I became a little bit obsessive trying to get out of there. I was always making wishes and looking for four-leaf clovers and things that would get me out of the convalescent home. I would cry when my mother came and I, you know, didn't want her to leave and tried to make her take me home with her and they wouldn't let me go home. Finally they let--let--let me go home with very strict restrictions on my activities. I couldn't--I wasn't supposed to walk up and down stairs, so I had to be carried up and down stairs. And I wasn't to do any running or participate in any physical activity, sport, or anything. So when I got home I--again, I had to read. And sometimes my friends would come and carry me downstairs, but they wouldn't let me play. So I would sit on a stoop and watch them. So--my--I was pretty athletic before I got sick. And then I was not--it wasn't until about my senior year in high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] that they permitted me to take physical education again. So that got cut out of my life and I switched over to quiet activities. It's the reason why in junior high school [PS, Public School 171, New York, New York] I took up the clarinet. I don't think I would've took up the clarinet, but it was another activity to do that was quiet and not physical exertion.
Story_ID: 19064
Speaker 1: Did you feel at any time, you know, I know that you said that the nurses and doctors thought you were near death, but did you feel at any time the danger? You know, you were aware that your body wasn't, you know?
Speaker 2: I was aware I was sick, but I just didn't think in terms of--of--of dying. I saw it as--as kind of a nuisance that my life was restricted, but I didn't have enough sense to think that well, "I'm going to die," they're saying that you're going to die if you do this or that. But they would--they would--my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] would kind of act like she thought I was going to die if I ran up the stairs:  "Don't do that." And she would get all nervous and so on. And the kids all act like if I went out and played a game of stickball I was going to drop dead on the street and they weren't going to--they weren't going to let that happen. But I don't think that I ever really, really believed it myself. I wasn't--I wasn't like scared as much as feeling that I was being harbored by all of these rules they were putting on me. I didn't have a sense of, well yeah, I knew my heart was supposedly weak and I had to regularly go to the doctor. I mean regular visits my mother took me and they would always do an electrocardiogram [ECG] and take my blood and all of this other stuff, but I didn't really understand it.  But I think--there's no question in my mind though that that hospital experience was the reason why I wanted to become a doctor. It was that exposure. Before that I didn't--I didn't even know what a doctor was, but I was around doctors so much, particularly at Mount Sinai hospital [New York, New York] that when I came out and people said, you know--they talked about what you wanted to do, I said I wanted to be a doctor. But I didn't know really what it was about, but that planted the seed. And so like age ten, eleven, I was telling people I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Now what impressed you about the doctors? Were they--?
Speaker 2: The doctors? Well, I felt some of them were like very kind. I knew that they were like taking care of me and I felt they were trying to help me get better and I knew they were trying to save my life. I mean, they would kind of--I would like always ask them, you know, "Why can't I get up and walk around?" and they would tell me, "Your heart's too weak and you can't do that," and so on and so forth. And then I was intrigued with what they did, the stethoscope and, you know, the instruments and I saw what they did and I also saw people looked up to them, you know, in a hospital and so on and they had all of this authority. And it appealed to me.  And I think there was one doctor, I can't remember his name and I just vaguely remember what he looked like, but he was kind of my--the chief physician looking over me, always coming by to check and check-out my heart and other things and I think I again got curious and identified with what he was--he was doing and taking, you know, taking care of me.
Speaker 1: Now as a doctor, do you--when you look back on the care you got, do you think you got good care at that time?
Speaker 2: I think that at Mount Sinai I got pretty good care. I don't think they treated me well at the convalescent home. But I think in the hospital I got very good care. Mount Sinai had a nursing school, I think, there were a lot of nurses around and student nurses. And a lot of the nurses were very, very like kind and--to the kids and trying to--knowing that this was a tough experience and they were bored. They were always trying to cheer you up, you know, and bring you things. So the Mount Sinai experience was not--not bad, although again I was the only black kid, even though this hospital in East Harlem, was on that ward, you see, in the hospital. But there were no overt bigotry and I never got the feeling that they were treating me bad except for the nurse that said, "Don't you ever take a bath." I don't think that they were harsh or anything and some of them would even come in who were on the ward a long time and got to know me and they would hug me, you know, when they came on duty and sometimes when they were leaving. And so I also think I got very attached to the nurses and I think that's why it was even more of a shock. I'd begun to see the nurses as these, again, angelic people helping you. So to have this nurse [at a convalescent home in Far Rockaway, New York]  tell me, "Well, aren't you a nigger?" was just totally shocking. I thought she would be like the nurses at Mount Sinai, who were a lot of them student nurses, who were younger and trying to be--and much more kind.
Story_ID: 19065
Speaker 1: Now, when you--you get back [left school for several weeks to receive treatment for rheumatic fever] and you--you still are out--are you out of school? Are you getting back at the end of the year--or, I mean, how--? 'Cause this interrupted quite a bit.
Speaker 2: This interrupted my school, but when I went back to school, I didn't miss a grade. I went into the next grade and I start to do better academically, which I think had something to do with all of the reading. And so my grades picked up. I was still in elementary school. Then I went to junior high school [PS, Public School 171, New York, New York] I was very focused on my work. And I took up things, for instance I--I took up typing when I was in junior high school and became a very fast typist and became like the typist for the school newspaper. And then I took up music, I played the clarinet. And I worked very--I used to type all of my notes in junior high school. I had a book with everything typed, you know. Because it was an activity and I enjoyed being--like being able to learn how to type faster and faster and then I spent a lot of time practicing the clarinet and doing my academics. So by the time I graduated from junior high school, they gave me the medal for general excellence, which must've meant that I was the top student at the time.  And I think a music award of some type because of the clarinet. So that's where my activity was focused. Even though I still went out, I couldn't do anything, you know, so I hung out with the kids and my brother and I tried, you know, some reefers and I even snorted some heroin, but it didn't do anything for me. And then--.
Speaker 1: What age are you at this point?
Speaker 2: Age. Well, let's see, junior high school, I was probably being thirteen--fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I think drugs started getting introduced to the--to the--to the kids in the [East Harlem, New York] neighborhood. And they were all trying them and a whole bunch of them got--got hooked and it was simple as that. And it never--it never--it never appealed to me. But then I used to go with them while they were shooting up. They would be in a basement shooting up and something I don't like to admit, in order to participate, sometimes they would have me give them a shot. And I would give them the shot. Being intrigued by giving them a shot, almost like, "Hey, this is like being a doctor," you know, to give them their shot of--even when they took it intramuscularly sometimes, not  IV [intravenously] or--. So I was there while they were shooting drugs, but I wouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Now, how--was this your brother Kenny [Kenneth Poussaint] or just a bunch of kids in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was my brother, Kenny, but it was a bunch of kids in the neighborhood. A whole bunch of them. My best friend, who was a kid in the neighborhood, became a junky.
Speaker 1: And they were--and you're talking about thirteen--fourteen?
Speaker 2: They were like fourteen--fifteen--sixteen. They were junkies when they were in high school, I know that. Yeah, they were pretty young.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Because you don't think of it usually, you know, at that age. You know, or you think of people smoking, you know, but not, you know, necessarily shooting up or anything like that.
Speaker 2: No, I'm pretty sure my brother couldn't have been more than about sixteen when he became--became hooked, somewhere around there. I know I was a teenager, I couldn't have been more than fourteen and fifteen when I first tried all this stuff.
Story_ID: 19066
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think--I mean, you know, in the articles and things that appear, you know, you've talked about this [witnessing drug usage amongst his peers at an early age], you--you say that, you know, you didn't--you looked at it and you didn't want to be that out of control, and I understand that feeling. But what was also influencing you? Were there other things? Other factors? Your mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] or, you know, or your father [Christopher Poussaint] or teachers? (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, my mother didn't say anything about it. I don't even know if she knew that my brother [Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint] was a junky. If anything it probably had to do with the Catholic church. See, I was--I was trying to be good and holy and taking drugs and doing all this stuff was like considered a sin and I used to go to confession. So if I would've have--had to confess that I was doing this stuff. And I think that somehow that had something to do with my deciding that this is bad, although I did other bad things, I participated in the stealing and other things. The--the--I think the drugs I saw as really bad, like a bad evil thing to do or against God or whatever. And then it may have had something to do with not wanting to displease, particularly my mother at the time to do anything that would interfere with her image of me as this good kid. Because when I came out of the convalescent home [recovering from rheumatic fever] she showered attention on me. We became very, very, very close.  You see? I was very closely tied to her and I became closer to my sisters [Dolores, Lillian and Julia Poussaint], especially. And--so that I--I had more of a clearly loving relationship with her and I think the experience with them--I think, saying to her that I might die, did something to her, she had not lost a child, so that she became more protective of me. I mean, I used to have a special diet that she had to make, which was now they would--they would probably get the doctors if they did such a thing, but they told me I should drink at least a quart of milk a day, eat a lot of cheese, a lot of butter, and at least one soft-boiled egg or hard-boiled egg a day. Cholesterol diet (laughs) to strengthen my heart, that was the diet. So I got a lot of cholesterol and fat in my system from many years of eating that way. That was prescribed actually and my mother would make sure I ate, you know, this--this--this food. I was also very, very skinny. And that may have made them a bit nervous that they couldn't get weight on me. I think when I graduated from college I weighed 124 [pounds], I was very skinny. I think I was skinny because they wouldn't let--I couldn't exercise. I couldn't do anything to build my muscles and get bulk, you know, because--because I couldn't do any physical activities, so I just was skinny. And I never was a super big eater, so I was just skinny and probably had a high metabolism at the time as well.
Story_ID: 19067
Speaker 1: Did your friends see that you had changed or did they call you a 'punk' or I mean were there any of those things (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) There were a few friends who called me a 'punk' or a 'sissy.' But I would say my closest friends used to actually congratulate me or praise me for being smart. They nicknamed me--which appeared in a magazine article about my family back in the 1940s in a magazine called 'Our World' which came out at the same time as 'Ebony'  [magazine] did and they were both competing for the--for the market and they did a story on my family. And in the story they had a picture of me playing the clarinet and said, "Alvin is known and seen as the brains of the family." And the kids used to call me 'the brain.' So they were not trying to discourage me from being smart, right. Occasionally it was a jealous kid, occasionally said, "You're a sissy," but most of the time they were impressed that I was smart and did not try to talk me out of being smart or criticize me for being smart.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now, how did your family end up being featured? Was there some reason?
Speaker 2: They were being featured because we were this large family with eight kids [Christopher, Lillian, Clement, Dolores, Richard, Kenneth, Alvin and Julia] and my father [Christopher Poussaint] worked at the Harlem YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and it just looked so lovely and they put in the Christmas tree with all our pictures and so on. And so people thought we were nice family, you know, with eight kids. So they decided to feature a family. Now I think probably they picked my father because I think they probably knew him because he was a printer, that somehow there was some connection there and also the Harlem Y [YMCA].
Story_ID: 19068
Speaker 1: It's time for you to finish junior high school [PS, Public School 171, New York, New York], right? And then you go on to high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], but a special--you go--right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, that--that came about in a unusual way. I--I didn't--I didn't know anything about high schools and I didn't know there were special high schools that you went to, kind of vague--vaguely. And my music teacher, who--who was a conductor for the band, 'cause I played clarinet, one day after rehearsal was walking down--and he was white, there were no black teachers in my junior high school in East Harlem [New York, New York]. And he said, "Have you ever thought of taking a test for one of the special high schools?" And I said, "No, what schools are there?" So he named them: Stuyvesant, Bronx High School of Science [New York, New York] and Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, New York, New York]. And he said, "You know, you should take it, maybe--you just might pass," he said. "You just might get in." So I asked him, "What--what--what--what should I do," and so on. And he said, "Go down to the principal's office and tell them you want to take the test for one of the high schools." And Stuyvesant was in New York--in Manhattan, so I said, "Well I want to take the test--test for Stuyvesant." Now, I didn't know from anything about what kind of test this was or do any preparation. And I went down and I took the exam--downtown I think at the school with hundreds and hundreds of kids and they notified me that I'd gotten in. So once I was in Stuyvesant, I mean, the road was easy. I mean, they had high standards. I mean, they still make all the records. Most Ph.D.'s of any high school in the country. I think the most Westinghouse Science [Competition] winners, I mean, it was very strong academically. I mean, these kids all got in by exam and I was still--I was a little scared, making the transition was a little hard. I talked funny. I talked like I was from Harlem, East Harlem, a little Spanglish and everything else mixed in, so much so that my teacher, when she called on me and I would talk, she felt I had a speech impediment. She told me I had a speech impediment and assigned me to--to a speech therapist who came around to the schools to help children who had speech impediments. And so she came and would meet with me and gave me all these exercises to do. But I did--I did mispronounce a lot of words, there was no question about it, it was embarrassing. For 'oil,' I said 'Earl,' you know, just--for 'point,' I said 'pernt.' So I was mispronouncing and these teachers would hear me mispronounce all these words, you know, and decided I could--something was wrong with my talking. It was just East Harlem language. I mean, no one--everyone spoke--said those things. My father [Christopher Poussaint] said 'pernt--' ['point'] the wrong way. So I took the speech lessons and the exercises and I was kind of embarrassed to talk so differently from the rest of the kids, so I wanted to correct it. So I was very motivated to correct it. And then I liked writing and the teachers put me in--they put me in a special creative writing--they--they--course for high school as a substitute for the regular English, which I was in most of the years and used to write a lot for the, you know, the school essay book and other things, poetry, other things. When I graduated from Stuyvesant, probably the award that I will most treasure--I still do psychologically--is at graduation, totally to my surprise, I received the creative writing award in the high school and I just felt so proud because very few black kids in the school--these kids were the sons of doctors, lawyers, corporate people and all the upper echelon of New York, and I always felt so proud that I had won this coming from where I came from. Bob Moses [civil rights activist/education reformist], by the way, was in my class.  Bob Moses. That's when I first met Bob Moses and we became friends and then he later influenced part of my life.
Speaker 1: How interesting. Now so this whole thing, when you went, how was the adjustment? I mean, I know, you, you know, your teacher thought you had a speech impediment, but the whole environment?
Speaker 2: Well, the whole environment. I had never been in such an environment that where there white, mostly white, middle to upper middle class kids. Some working class kids. And I felt really out of place. I thought for class reasons, because I spoke differently. And I was a bit nervous, but I was always a hard, hard worker and I think I even went through some feelings of inferiority, you know, in relationship to the other kids. I would listen to them talk, and, you know, they would just clip off things. So I was a little afraid. I was afraid that I was going to flunk out. And I realized too that my preparation at that junior high school wasn't so hot. You know what I mean?  That I wasn't as prepared as these other kids were for this school. But what that did to me was make me work harder. I decided I'd better--going to have to really study to stay here and to do well. So I became a study--study freak. I studied a lot, put a lot of care into my--to my work. Studied for exams, you know. I just worked very, very hard. And did very well.
Story_ID: 19069
Speaker 1: But in high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], you know, I didn't--I didn't look necessarily for the support of the teachers, like it wasn't like--there wasn't anybody to really give me a lot of support. And then in my junior year my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] was very ill, dying from cancer, which I think interfered with my--my performance. I had to work harder to concentrate and I think I was coming across as withdrawn or something or sad in class because one of my English teachers said I didn't seem very interested in his class, which wasn't true. I just--I think I was acting withdrawn or detached in some way that he was--he was picking up on. And he wasn't going to write me a college recommendation or something. And when he mentioned the class I told him that my mother was dying during that whole semester and had died from, you know, cancer and that after that it was like it felt like the family had disappeared. And so he was very like sympathetic--like he understood. But I didn't know he had any feelings like I wasn't showing as much interest as before because I used to volunteer to write more. I was on--I was an associate editor of the literary magazine and I apparently--I must've pulled back during that time when she was very ill.
Speaker 2: Now, she died when you were a senior?
Speaker 1: She died--she died when I was in the first semester of my junior year at Stuyvesant.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Stuyvesant High School. I was in my second semester. I must've been about sixteen or seventeen, because I was still going to church and I know it wasn't until after she died that I didn't go to church and she died in 1950, in December. I graduated from Stuyvesant in June of 1952.
Speaker 2: Now, so how did that impact you? It didn't impact your academic performance?
Speaker 1: Well, some, but I don't know how much. I didn't--I didn't start flunking, I was still performing at a very high--high level. I--I know I was very troubled by her dying. I couldn't bear to go see her in the hospital because she was becoming emaciated and I know that it was very, very traumatic. And I was like very, very, very sad because I was almost idealistically, whatever, attached to my mother as like the--the perfect person. And so when she was dying like I just couldn't--I just couldn't believe it, like the reality of it just--was just horrifying to me.
Story_ID: 19070
Speaker 1: So what did it do to your family [mother's death from cervical cancer]--that's what, I mean, 'cause every--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint]--my mother was the glue of the family. Holidays focused around--around her, Christmas, Thanksgiving. The whole family was focused around my mother. And my father was like the provider, but he wasn't (unclear). So when she died it was like the family had died, had fallen apart or something, and who was going to substitute for my mother now? She died in early December and Christmas was coming up and it was like we were all at a funeral at Christmas time. Who was going to cook? Who was going to get the turkey? Who was going to do everything to make this holiday and have the big meal, you know, without her. It was like--it was like you couldn't imagine the activities without her being there, it wasn't the same. And my father [Christopher Poussaint], I think, started buying turkeys that were already cooked by the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Assocation] in Harlem and bringing home a stuffed turkey, you know, it was just a change. And everybody was melancholy and then a lot of the children, we were so used to getting together, for instance, at Christmas and Thanksgiving, that some of them started drifting away. And we always used to get together at twelve o'clock New Year's Eve and my mother's the one who held that together and she would make eggnog and make home made donuts and the whole family had to be there when the clock struck midnight, bringing in the New Year. When she died that fell apart--that tradition. So it was like all the things that were focused--that she had established as part of family life seemed to disappear.
Story_ID: 19071
Speaker 1: And then it got even worse because it was right after that that my brother [Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint] began to deteriorate around my mother's [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] death. And took it very, very hard, much to our surprise, because it didn't seem like he was very close to her. But he--he told me at the time--I was sixteen, so he must've been eighteen, that in tribute to my mother he was going to come off drugs. So he stopped taking heroin. When you stop taking heroin--I don't know whether it was medication for him or what--but he began to get loony and became more and more paranoid, more and more magical and bizarre--that he had special talents to understand people and make things happen and increasingly, clearly he was crazy, he was--he was losing his mind, although we didn't know too much about it. He kept not making sense. He was my roommate, so I had been through a lot of things with him, picking him up off the floor with the needle in his arm, you know--you know, all of that. I began to notice he was not making sense and I remember symbolic--some symbolic things he said which I felt he was really--he would go in the bathroom and he would start compulsively washing his hands and arms, scrubbing them, like a long time. And he would come out and I would say, "What are you doing? Why--what--what are you doing?" And he said, "I'm just trying to make myself white like mama." I said, "You're trying to do what?"  He said, "Make myself white like mama." And then he--then he went to that to saying things like, you know, "You're white. You're white." And he had got this like--I don't know, he had never--this came as a surprise to me, but he was associating my mother's fair skin with the loss and her being someone--and he became--. Then he--he--he got very paranoid and he could magically make you disappear or something or destroy you and locked himself in his room--our room, and the only one he would let in the room was me. And so the family finally realized that he had to be taken to a hospital.
Story_ID: 19072
Speaker 1: I went up and told him [brother, Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint] that the people, you know, people coming, he had to go to the hospital. And he started screaming, "Please don't--please don't let them take me. Please don't let them take me." And I along with my other brother and some other people held him down while the police came. And the police took him in the car, they may have put a straightjacket on him and took him to Bellevue Hospital [New York, New York]. And then I realized how symbolic my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] was. I would go visit him at Bellevue hospital, where he was in a straightjacket, strapped to the bed, and sometimes he would sound rational and sometimes he didn't. But then sometimes he would sound a little rational and then I would be--I was leaving and he would say, "When you get home, please say hello to mama for me." And I knew he was not right. And finally they transferred him to a state hospital, Creedmore State Hospital [New York, New York], where he remained for about over a year and got all kinds of treatments, you know, not the modern treatments, they didn't have anti-psychotic drugs then. So he--he slowly got better in some ways and the family visited him I think quite regularly. We drove out there to see him. But then he came out and within two weeks he was back on heroin. And then became a real bad heroin addict going down hill, but he didn't act as psychotic, he wasn't talking crazy, but he became a real bad heroin addict and was drugged up all the time and I felt he was trying to kill himself.
Speaker 2: Did he ever steal to support his habit? Did he, you know, like did he steal to support his habit or do any--.
Speaker 1: I think he did all kinds of--he stole, he was a pickpocket. He would say--he would show me--and he did it well. He said, "I can show you how to pickpocket and never get caught." Then sometimes I would come in the room and he would hand me my wallet that he had pickpocketed off me. And he would sometimes demonstrate the techniques how you do it, you know. And we had a little strange thing going there. He would--he would--he would go to jail or something--or he had all these little criminal things and he would like--that was his status, you know. Like he would say, "Gonna teach me how to be a pickpocket." So he would say, "Well, you bump the person first, you know, you always bump the person, you know, so they are unaware for that second," and he said, "Then in a flash they don't even know you got it." And he would, you know, tell me all these things. One thing he did that he got arrested for--I said, "Boy, you're pretty creative." He would buy cases of cheap wine, right? And on Sunday would go down to the bowery where all the bowery drunkards were and sell them the wine at double the price or three times the price on Sunday and finally got arrested for that by the police. For selling wine to the--to the--to the alcoholics, you know, sitting in the doorways. So he was--he was creative, but he was also--he would make me anxious and I don't know if he knew what he was doing. But he would come out of Riker's Island [prison, New York, New York] and--again, he was still my roommate, and he would start telling me about the food, the quality of the food at Riker's Island Prison and he hears that Sing Sing [Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York] has better food and maybe if he goes in again he should go--he--he should go to Sing Sing. And I'd say--I would say, "What are you talking--" you know, just--how could you be talking this way? But I think on some level this was his thing and he knew this was a whirl and he was very--he was very intelligent and he would tell me all of the tricks that--that--that people--people did. He--he would go into get detox [drug detoxification], right? And this is many years later because he had disappeared  for two years and we thought he was dead, we didn't know where he was, he was in jail. And he would talk about getting detox and he would say, "You know, most of these men in here," he said, "This is a bunch of jive." He said--he said, "What you do," he said, "When your habit gets real bad you develop a tolerance for this stuff,"  he knew that. The tolerance, you need higher and higher doses of the heroin to get you high. So he said, "Guys were going to get detox," so that they can come out and a smaller dose would make them high, and that's what a lot of it was about and that none of them had any intention of giving up drugs, right?  Then in one hospital in East Harlem [New York, New York] where he was being--again getting drug treatment, Metropolitan Hospital, they had him take an electrical class, trying to rehab him and he started getting like all A's in these classes and he said--I went to visit him one time and he told me he never knew he was smart, that he didn't believe this and it made him--made him anxious. Then he went on to explain to me, he said, "You know, everybody's always trying, you know, give up drugs," he said, "It's so--" he said, "It's not that simple." He said, "My whole life, my social world is drugs and the people who do drugs." He said, "To give up drugs, I give up everything." He said, "I don't know how to talk to people who ain't dealing--involved with drugs.  I don't know what to say, I don't know what I'm supposed to be without the drugs." And he was absolutely right about that. He finally, I think, did get off them, but was on them, off them, on them, methadone, all of this other stuff until he died at age forty-forty two. But there's some pictures in the album, you'll see that my mother used to dress us as twins when we were growing up because people thought we were twins. So it was like this--it was almost like a good/evil thing going on. I was going to be this good one and he was going--he was going to be the bad--bad one and I was very centered, I would never put any of my awards or things up on the wall, any of that because I was afraid it would hurt him, you know, for him to see those things, so I would never like talk about, you know, doing well or school stuff or anything else because he was having so much trouble in vocational school, training school. Making up a part of it was because he was a junky, it wasn't that he wasn't smart, he just was totally unfocused on that and focused on street stuff and where his next shot was coming from. And I don't know all the things that he did that were criminal, I don't know all the reasons he went to jail. I think some of them are unknown what he did. And for those two years that he disappeared why he was in--why he was in jail.
Speaker 2: Is he--of your family members, was he the one who was most out of control like that? The others--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He was--he was the one most out of control. I mean, I had a brother [Richard Poussaint] who's next to him in age and he never did drugs, but I know a lot of his friends did. And one of his best friends overdosed I remember and I think that scared the wits out of him and I didn't think he was going to go near that stuff. Overdoses were not uncommon 'cause you hear about someone up there, someone down there, someone over here had overdosed. Another thing, they were always sitting around on a stoop vomiting, which is a horrible sight to me, you know, scratching themselves, you know, which gave--would give me the willies. Why do you want to take something that makes you vomit?
Story_ID: 19073
Speaker 1: So, you know, my question is what--what was sustaining you if your mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] had, you know, was passed away and the [Catholic] church was no longer there, what was motivating you forward?
Speaker 2: Well, what was motivating me forward, there was some support. I had a sister-in-law named Bobbi Poussaint who took an interest in my school work and she used to give me lots of books to read and we would discuss the books. She would read stuff, papers I was doing and she would talk to me. She had graduated from Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] and she would really--she would really encourage me, like it's all doable and--and really gave me books and she was kind of on a left-wing side. And she would give me all these books educating me about the plight of black people. She had also gone to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], spent a couple years at Tuskegee, and she would give me books by Howard Fast, 'Freedom Road,' all this stuff. And I sat learning about the plight of black people and she would give me Herbert Aptheker [scholar of African American studies]. I mean, she would--she would like--. And I would get very enthusiastic about a lot of things that I read and would talk to--talk to her about. And--so that was someone at home and I spent a lot of time at her house and became her chief babysitter for my niece, who later became a TV anchor, Renee Poussaint, and I was her babysitter and I would take her to school. So I was always at her--their house and I was--had a good relationship with Bobbi Poussaint, my sister-in-law. That was the only one who I could have this academic relationship 'cause I couldn't have it with my father [Christopher Poussaint] and I never had it with my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] or any of my sisters [Lillian, Dolores, Julia Poussaint] and brothers [Christopher, Clement, Richard, Kenneth Poussaint], but I did have it with her. She took an interest in my schoolwork, kind of my social development. I would ask her questions about girls, you know, and how to behave and, you know, all kinds of things. So she became a good friend. And I mentioned her in my book when I'm acknowledging the family, as if--I mention Bobbi Poussaint as if she's a sibling, she's a sister-in-law, because she played such a big, I think, big role in my life during my teenage--teenage years especially.
Story_ID: 19074
Speaker 1: The teachers [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] weren't really supporting you, you know, I mean not supporting, but they weren't necessarily talking to you, how did you end up going to Columbia [University, New York, New York] then? That's what I--I mean, is it just--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, Columbia--well, first of all, I had--I had a very good record. I mean, technically it would be--be--be an 'A,' it was over a ninety some-odd average. And the guidance counselor, in fact, the schools he suggested I apply to was Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and maybe [The] City College [of New York]. And by that time I knew--I'd been going to summer camp where I was a counselor and I knew a lot of white--white kids, in fact, one of my co-counselors was going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], was going to be--(unclear) and some of them were going to these other schools, so I knew about them. And then the other thing was, I don't know--I don't know where he knew some ministers--my father [Christopher Poussaint] always saw Columbia [University, New York, New York] as the place to go, okay. He would say, "Columbia." He was so strung on that that it got a little bit neurotic. So he wanted me to go to Columbia, so I went up there and I was impressed with, you know, Columbia and I hesitated because he became kind of dependant on me when my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] died. I was doing like a lot of the major housework, the shopping, cleaning, waxing the floors every Saturday, you know? And so I flirted with the idea: "Well maybe I should go away someplace." But he told me that he didn't want me to go away. That he didn't want--that he couldn't afford the airfare, you know, whatever. He didn't want me to go away from home. And I kind of understood it, he felt he was going to lose me and he'd lost, you know, his mother and all the other kids were gone except my younger sister [Julia Poussaint]. My brother [Kenneth Poussaint] was there who had--was going to throw out later, you know, not then. So he wanted me around. And so I defied him a little bit because I was going to try to see if I could go out of town. So I put in an application to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I talked to my father about it--when he found out I put in an application--I didn't come to him until after I was accepted. He blew his stack. He said, "What are you doing that for?  You don't want to go up there. You're not going to be happy up there." He said, "They don't like black people up there. At Columbia they have all of these international students," et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Then he went into that I was being selfish because it might cost him money, because I had won a New York State Regents Scholarship that they gave for this competitive exam. So Columbia was going to like practically cost me nothing to go there. And then he said something that I'll never forget and he lost his temper about it and said if I go there, never expect a cent from him and he said he--he didn't want--he didn't want to ten years from now hear about: "I'm the nigger who went to Yale." And I said, "What?" Well, apparently he felt that if I went there I was going to get influenced in some way to turn against black people and the community and so on and so forth and that he--he--I wouldn't be under like the correct influence. And that Columbia I would be under the correct influence. And he sent me to see these black ministers who had graduated from Columbia. "Go see Reverend so and so, let him tell you about Columbia," and so I went and he was very happy. I turned out to be very happy. He loved to go to father-son things and was--would crack me up sometimes with his--his pretensions. You know, he could look very distinguished. I remember I took him to a father-son day and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] was playing Columbia and Columbia lost and we were at the dinner with all these other white fathers and sons and he was talking abut the football game and everything and Princeton and so on. And one of the white men at the table, like a business man or a professional guy, turned to my father and said, "Did you go to Columbia?" And my father sat back and said, "No, I'm a Princeton man." And I looked at him (laughs). And these men just sat there and he just looked at them, puffed on his pipe (laughs). (Unclear) "How could you do that?" But he just couldn't resist, you know. I remember, I think about that and I just laugh that he did that at this dinner and it's classic and he was from East Harlem [New York, New York] and he didn't even, I think, graduate from high school and said he was Princeton man. And there was not another word came out that man's--the man's mouth that had asked him--didn't ask him another question. But I enjoyed Columbia very, very much.  And was glad. I got a very good education there and I think the education that I needed and I think I was also relieved to be in New York City where I had all of my friends, I knew the city, I felt very at home in it and I really didn't want to go anywhere.
Story_ID: 19075
Speaker 1: I was being very taxed by my brother [Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint] and then I was being taxed by him more when I was in college [Columbia University, New York, New York]. It was very hard and we had some blowouts. He seemed to be able to tell when I had exams and he would come in at two o'clock in the morning, three o'clock in the morning, into the bedroom, mixing dope, dropping cigarettes on the bed. And one day I just blew my stack. I jumped up out of bed, I had a chemistry exam final the next day and I went and I got a big stick that was part of like a hanger stick and I held it up to him and I said, "If you keep--I'm going to bop your head off," and he ran and stood in the corner. And I said, "I'm just going to beat your head in if you keep keeping me up at night and I can't do my work." I said, "Don't you come up here when you're, you know, are shooting up. Don't you come in this room because I have to sleep for my exam." And he just got terrified. He didn't try to fight me and he must've saw the look on my face with this big stick--that I was going to hit him over his head with it. And he stopped doing that. He then went--would stay downstairs in the kitchen, stay in the kitchen when he came in late and did not wake me up. And then I think in my sophomore year or somewhere he disappeared, so he wasn't around. I know he wasn't around when I graduated. And my father [Christopher Poussaint] threw him out, he used to come outside, I mean, he would do things that would make you feel like pathetic. My father put him out, he didn't have any place to go, he was sleeping on the roofs and things. But he used to call--he used to fight with my father something awful and call him some awful names. And he would then come around and yell outside for me. And I would be doing my homework or something and he would ask me to bring him out food, throw food down to him, all this other stuff. And I finally told him I wasn't able to do that. And then he--this is when he disappeared, see. So he must've been fending for himself, I don't know where he was living, what he was doing, and then for two years we heard nothing, we thought he was dead, we used to ask friends, they thought he was dead, and then suddenly he reappeared. I think he was in jail. And jails don't have to--if you're over twenty-one they don't have to notify the family, it's just they're locking you up. So I think he was in and out of jail and wandering around doing all kinds of things during that period--period--period of time. And then I didn't see anything of him that I can remember very much while I was in medical school [Cornell University, New York, New York], and I was in medical school in New York City too. By that time I kind of knew I didn't want to leave New York City. I would visit other places, including this place, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I saw Boston I (unclear) and I said, "I don't think I can be happy in this--." One interesting thing about Cornell Medical School that's significant to me is that I always wanted to go there.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: It was a--it was a goal. I targeted that school and I knew it was a long shot. The reason why is my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] gave birth to me at Cornell Medical School. And I felt it would be some kind of tribute to her--I wasn't going to become a priest, but it would be a tribute to her if I went to Cornell Medical School.  And one of the first things I did as now a medical student with a white coat, I went down to the record room and pulled her chart--of my mother and saw the record in it of her giving birth to me. And then her bringing back--me back to the clinic for well baby visits and vaccinations. And I just was like--like almost like a spiritual high reading that chart about her giving birth to me, bringing me there as a little baby and the descriptions of me as a little baby. So I wanted to go there. I don't think a lot of people knew how much because I didn't tell a lot of people. But I told my advisor at Columbia--that that's where I wanted to go. And it was a long shot. I was the only black student in that class.
Story_ID: 19076
Speaker 1: Cornell [University Medical School, New York, New York] where there was bigotry, but they treated me well too. They kind of wanted a sure bet--that thing about sometimes where they want you to be a little bit better, not that I was the top student in the world, but I think I was high in terms of the ranking of (unclear) in students they took in. Other reason I went to Cornell, remember is always in my education was a money issue. And whether my father [Christopher Poussaint] could pay very much. And Cornell, in addition to the place I wanted to go--I had--and then the issue came up again with my brother [Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint]. Remember now, he's back and forth and I'm--the houses, the neighborhood, East Harlem [New York, New York], you know, so--. I kept in my application at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard called after I came here for an interview and then my advisor called me and said, "Why are you thinking of going there?" He felt Cornell was much better. I tell him, I said, "Well I love Cornell," I said, "I would love to go there," I said, "But I think it's really going to be trying for me to live at home." And that was the only thing I was thinking about. I said, "I love Cornell." And he said to me--he said, "If they offer you room and board, where you can go live down on the East Side in the dormitory," he said, "Will you go there over Harvard?" And he said also some other scholarship help. And I said, "Yes, I would." The next day I got a call from the Dean of Students at Cornell, who called me down and offered me four year scholarship, room and board in the dormitory. And that's what I--that's where I went.  So it saved me money. I wasn't trying to play any games. I wasn't like trying to do that, it just happened that it came up. And that I was going to toy with the idea, although I did not like the city when I came here and I didn't like the tone of the place. But I felt that if I was going to not go to Cornell, then I was going to go some place with a big--bigger rep, I wouldn't--. And Cornell had a big rep in New York City at the time. And I--and then there was this attachment because of my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint]. So I don't know that I would've still gone there no matter what, I was just being a little slow actually. And probably if my advisor had waited--see, I didn't know that Harvard had called, but Harvard called him, the advisor. And so he called me and he said, "I'm surprised," he said he got a call from Harvard, he was very surprised that I still had an application in there, that he thought I was going to Cornell. And I said, "Well, I haven't withdrawn yet." And then he went into this thing about, if--and I talked to him, I told him the only thing that was--was the home problem. And he--he then fixed that with the Dean of Students at Cornell.
Story_ID: 19077
Speaker 1: What about medical school [at Cornell University, New York, New York], was it all that you thought it would be?
Speaker 2: Medical school was scary and I remember I was very nervous. You always go in--even though I had a pretty decent record in the sciences at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. Back then it was kind of an idea that you brought students in, worked them like hell, and flunk them out if you could. So I had this fear that I was going to get--like flunk out. And I also felt very intimidated, I think, by the student--these students were a little bit different and they were more--well, they were not more competitive than the students at Columbia, but somehow I was like getting to the brink. Now, I was in medical school and some fear came up that now you're not going to make it, and now you're going to flunk out, like you've gone as far as you can go. And I didn't have anybody like to look to or saying, "You can do it." So I was--I was--the first year I remember I was--I was frightened and I was torn, I said, "Should I work hard or should I just try to relax and so on?" And I started working hard. It wasn't that enjoyable. A lot of it was a grind, but I did--. They didn't have grades that they told you, they kept grades back in the office, but they would not give you grades. So that took away a lot of the pressure, sometimes too much pressure from students who were used to just competing for grades. But then I went--went through and had some--. The Dean of Students, who gave me the scholarship was always very nice to me, would call me and ask me how I was doing. Then there was some other professors who were--who are racist, you know. They had southerners on there who were segregationists and all kinds of things. Department people who said they would never take in a black in obstetrics and gynecology. Surgeons who said blacks can't be good surgeons. You know, there was a tone, you didn't feel--a lot of rotations you went through, like the clinical wards you felt you would run into some people who really didn't stomach--couldn't stomach the idea of a black doctor in this--in this hospital. And I--you know, you would--you would--you would detect--detect it, you know, these feelings. And there were some of my classmates who were from all over the country, some of them who--who you can go to school with them, but you don't socialize with them. There were even students like that at Columbia. And I had--was very disappointed in a lot of my--some of my closest--closest friends at Columbia who were white. I remember one of them dropped me--who I'd gone to Stuyvesant [High School, New York, New York] with, because he had joined a fraternity and felt that I would not be acceptable brining around, so he disappeared. Another one invited me over to his house for dinner, he was from--also a graduate of Stuyvesant and then a week later came and rescinded the invitation because his parents told him they would not serve a black person in their house.  And he had to tell me that. This same student, this is funny, he asked me if black--black men had brown sperm (laughs). Could you believe that? I said, "What?" And I think I said something about: "Do brown cows have chocolate milk?" or something like that. But he actually asked me that question. So there's lots, you know--the race is so separate, there's so much folklores and mythology and everything, but he felt comfortably enough to ask. So he got the answer. But then I was--I was like very--he was very, very upset and disappointed and guilty that his parents said I couldn't come over to his--to his house. And so we kind of drifted apart too. And then there was a lot of expectations that you--you didn't go to a lot of social functions, that you--they didn't expect  you to and you weren't quite welcome. You'd come, they wouldn't throw you out, but it wasn't like this--you shouldn't be doing that. There were students at Barnard [College, New York, New York] I remembered from the South, Alabama and Mississippi, and you would go in the lunchroom and sit at a table with some of your friends and there'd be people sitting there you didn't know.  Sometimes, particularly the white girls from the South, would get up and leave the table. That they were not supposed to be eating at a table with a black person. So all of that stuff was there. I went--one time I went over to a folk singing thing at Barnard and I was sitting there listening to the music and the leader of the group, I think it was some young professor, said--turned to me and said, "Okay, now you can sing us some--some spirituals, some negro spirituals." And I said, "What?" He said, "Sing us some negro spirituals." I said, "I don't know how to sing. What makes you think?" But people--that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 19078
Speaker 1: What did you think--when you went in, what did you want? Did you know you wanted to be a major in psychiatry?
Speaker 2: No, I went in thinking I wanted to be a pediatrician.
Speaker 1: So how did this develop? How did--.
Speaker 2: Well, what developed was I found out very--see, I had done a lot of camp counseling in the summer and so on, so I was seeing kids in that context and environment. The kids--when I rotated during pediatrics, they were scared of you, because you're--they--you're going to give them a shot, right. So you couldn't develop some of these--I mean they were running away from you, and you know, "The needle, the doctor, the needle, the needle," so you had a--it was kind of that kind of scene. It wasn't like--. Then when I got to the in patient service, I discovered something that I didn't know that would happen. I had a lot of emotional difficulty dealing with kids dying. When the kids died, I would get upset. Somehow, I guess because I liked kids or nurture them, when they died I would get upset. I couldn't stand to listen to them holler when they were in pain and screaming. It would just give me the grippes. And I remember when I made my decision it was in an autopsy room and they were doing an autopsy on a baby, maybe four months old. And I was just--stood there and it upset me and I said, "I don't think I can go into pediatrics." So then I switched to internal medicine, then I was going to go into neurology and then I was going to neurology and psychiatry. And a lot of--there were a lot of people that encouraged me to go into psychiatry. Then I had the interest in psychiatry because of my brother [Kenneth 'Kenny' Poussaint], you know. Then I was like service-oriented and so on. Then the final thing that nailed it and I was going to go into neurology, but I found that after I would get to learn a lot of neurology and become very good at it, it got boring. And I saw--I would look down the road and I would say, "Am I going to be doing exams, sticking people with pins and reflexes, you know, ten hours a day?" That's not going to interest me because I'm not going to be--. And then when I rotated through psychiatry I kind of liked it. And the professors thought I was kinda good at it, you know, taking interviews and establishing rapport with patients and be sensitive to them. So then I still wasn't sure but I took my internship out of UCLA [The University of California, Los Angeles] and then I had to make a decision. The decision at first was to do both. And then a neurology professor called me in and said, "Listen, you're kidding yourself because I don't know anybody out there who's doing both psychiatry and neurology." He said, "You've got to make a choice, you know, do one or the other. But trying to do both isn't going to work." So I thought about it and thought about it and felt that I would in the long run be happier in psychiatry and also be able to keep my foot in like social science, not just medicine, I would have both roles. So I picked psychiatry. And I liked it. There were a lot of disappointments because I think I was more hard science-oriented than psychiatry was. I had a lot of trouble with the theorizing, the psychoanalytic theorizing that didn't seem to be based on sound science, but theory. And I think I even tended to be a little bit, even then, more biologically-oriented in terms of what did what. And so the research I started doing was treating childhood bed-wetting with medication, thinking that if I can stop the bed-wetting, their psychological status would improve dramatically, which was true. And why not do things like that, you know, that we could--. And about the time I was in my psychiatric residency was when all these new psychiatric drugs began to hit. I believed--I believe in psychotherapy, you know, helping people with that, but I also believed in medication to pull people out of the acute stages, but then I felt you should work with them and help them get their lives together and learn how to function and interact appropriately, be able to get jobs. So I was very pragmatic kind of approach I had.
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint, who was your mentor in all of this? Because what strikes me is that this is very--I mean, a lot of this is very atypical.
Speaker 2: Is very what?
Speaker 1: Atypical. I mean and when I say atypical it's that--was it that--or maybe I shouldn't make a statement, I should ask. Was it that typical that black people were going into psychiatry?  I mean a lot--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, there were very few. There were some--there were some going into psychiatry. I didn't--I didn't know any black psychiatrists at the time I made the decision, but then I met one at UCLA when I went out there. They didn't--they didn't have any at Cornell [University Medical School, New York, New York] at that time, or one that came around occasionally, Jim [James] Curtis, I think he's Chairman now at Harlem Hospital [New York, New York] still. So I didn't have any--I didn't even know the kinds of difficulties. But I also saw psychiatrists as like more humanistic humanitarians, which was not right at all, but that's the way I thought of it. I thought--thought of them as kind of senior social workers and you were going to go out--. And Bobbi Poussaint [sister-in-law/mentor] was a social worker and I think she made--you know, I knew about social worker and I knew that psychiatrists were connected with that and so then I felt, you know, I could really change people. And then I felt it was a challenge, intellectual challenge to understand people and try to help them. And each case was different so I didn't get bored.
Story_ID: 19079
Speaker 1: I would figure out a lot of things on my own and then not have--share the opinion of the profession [psychiatry]. I remember that in--that--when I--first year in psychiatric residency--.
Speaker 2: This is at UCLA [The David Geffen School of Medicine at The University of California, Los Angeles]?
Speaker 1: UCLA. I saw a gay man who was a waiter in his twenties. And back then being gay was considered a mental disorder; they were called psychopaths. And my supervisor--he came in depressed--my supervisor kept telling me I had to deal with his homosexuality, that was the underlying cause of his depression. So every session came in, I mean, and I started going, "When did you first," (unclear), "How do you think this thing," "What was your relationship with your mother?" Because they had all these theories, "And your father and so on." And one day he stopped me. He said, "Just wait a minute." He said, "Are you straight? You heterosexual?" So I said, "Yeah." He said, "Do you think that I can give you psychotherapy and make you homosexual?" And I just sat there like a bomb had hit me and just got this realization of insight what this man was telling me. And then he said, "When a pretty woman comes in a room, do you feel a little something?"  I said, "Yeah." He said, "When a pretty man comes in, I feel a little something." He said, "Do you think you can change that? Do you think I can change that in you?"  And from that day on, I stopped thinking that gay was a mental illness. But it was many years later that they finally took it out of the nomenclature by a vote of the psychiatrists. But what that man taught me--and it gave me the insight about what was going on. And he was absolutely right. And that he was feeling bothered and upset that I kept focusing on this when he wanted to deal with why he was depressed and his employment and his this and his that and I wouldn't talk about that,  you see. So I like felt I could--I would learn and think things through for myself and I still do and my colleagues still fight with me about some of the opinions I have about what's going on, including the one that extreme racism is a mental illness. They just don't--they won't have anything to do with it. But I think that if I wrote it out, I could prove it. I can prove it as well as they can prove anything about any other delusional disorder.
Story_ID: 19080
Speaker 1: When you were at UCLA [David Geffen School of Medicine at The University of California, Los Angeles] were there any disappointments, or did--. I mean, how were you figuring you were going to make a living? Did you think that there would be any issues about practice?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I felt there would be a lot of issues about--about practice. But when--when you're in a white institution--I mean, I think I saw one black patient while I was at UCLA for four years in the psychiatric department. I felt that I would probably be seeing white patients and black patients in private practice. I was disappointed in a lot of my colleagues, attitudes they had, racist beliefs they had. It was kind of--it was very troubling. And that made me assessable to doing something else because--. And I had a lot of racist encounters with patients in various ways. Things they would say to me including calling me a nigger. And I would go to my supervisor and I would say, "The patient called me a nigger." And my supervisor--I mean because some of these people (unclear), he said, "Well, that's something you have to get used to, you know. If you're going into this field you're going to get used to people calling you whatever they're going to call you and you've got to learn how to deal with it." But no like kind of working it through like that's reality. Then I had therapists that would disappoint me. I would try to talk about race and how prejudice and how that was affecting me and they would brush it aside and say things like, "That's a reality issue. Let's go talk about your relationship with your father and how that--" and they wouldn't talk. I had a lot of trouble with--with them. Then they saw black people as like downtrodden people who were not doing well and somebody that white people acted out with. Do you know what I mean? I remember watching two-way psychotherapy and this white woman came in who was dating astronauts and all kinds of people and I watched in two-way therapy and this session she told the therapist that she had gone on a date with this black man, I don't know, he was a pilot--or what he was. And he about jumped out of his chair--jumped out and said, "You what?" And she said, "I went out with a black--" and he said, "Why--now why are you doing that? Don't you know that all black people hate white people?" This was a former president of the American Psychoanalytic Association. And I said, "Oh jeez." And then the goal of his therapy became to help her to see that what she was doing with the black man was psychopathology and to be healthy, he told her she had to break up. And then wanted to make that a condition of the therapy, that she stop seeing the black man, as part of the condition of his seeing her. I said, "Wow." And all these other psychiatrists sitting there watching this thing (unclear). So I--I was--I just learned that they could--that the psychiatrists could be just as racist as anybody else. And a lot of them were. And a lot of them weren't going to refer me patients because I was black. All kinds of things.
Story_ID: 19081
Speaker 1: I'd finished my residency [David Geffen School of Medicine, The University of California, Los Angeles] and then they gave--they gave me the position of Chief Resident, which was a very prestigious position that I took--. It's one year, you know. So I stayed on an extra year as the Chief Resident when I could've left if I wanted to because I'd finished three years of training. And it was during that year I got a call from my sister and then I got a call from a fellow named [H.] Jack Geiger who's in New York, who's a physician with the Medical Committee for Human Rights. Then I got a call from Bob Moses [civil rights activist/education reformist] and I think Bob Moses was coming through LA [Los Angeles, California] or something, I don't know--meeting and talking to him and he--he told me they really needed my help down there. They needed a physician. And during--throughout my residency I moonlighted at clinics, so I knew general medicine. I knew how to treat everything, I knew how to sew up lacerations, I knew all that stuff. To treat everything, you know, because I had moonlighted to make extra money for those four years. And I had taken my internship in internal medicine. So I (unclear). So I finally thought about it and thought about it and went through most of the people at UCLA attacking me for wanting to do it and trying to psychoanalyze it, you know. I was doing it because I have a death wish. I was doing it because I was acting out anger at my father. I mean, just all kinds of things. Nothing about "You're going to be committed to this and you're trying to bring about change." And one of the conclusions I came to in my kind of little despair feeling at the time was that the best thing that I could do for black people's mental health was to eliminate--was to eliminate--help to eliminate racism. So I finally said, "Well, this will like be my Vietnam duty. I'll go down there for two years instead of going in the army for two years." Although they later drafted me, but I never went. And so I flew down--they wanted me to come look over the territory, I flew down in March, early March 1965 and spent about a week down in Jackson, Mississippi and meet all the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people. And then I went back to LA and then they called me back for the Selma [Alabama] March, to be--if I would be the foot soldier on the march from Selma to Montgomery [Alabama]. So I said, "Okay." So I went down for the whole week and literally was a foot soldier, carried my bag full of medical supplies, had a couple nurses they assigned to me who were in SNCC and we walked the fifty miles to Montgomery and I took care of people's blisters and so on. I always ask people, what do they think the most common disorder was on a march they had to treat to see how alert they are. Some of them come up with blisters, you know. Well, it was--and particularly if you saw people who seemed to be marching in their slippers or with cellophane, saran wrap or something wrapped around their socks. I mean, they didn't even have shoes. So blisters was the most common problem as well as a lot of other things with the sun. So after I came back from Selma, I felt so spirited or something and like connected and also saw first hand what a lot of the workers were going through and the stresses and things they were under, so I decided I really could make a difference. That these people--if I have to treat them psychiatrically or medically, whatever way--and there's a question of segregated hospitals and the whole bit, so by the time I came back from the Selma March, I then made the decision that I would go down. So I went down in June '65 [1965] and Bob [Moses] had taken off by that time because he had to get--he had to--to try to get out of the country because they were trying to draft him. So he fled to Canada, but then he came back and he came through Mississippi and then he started giving me an education. 'Cause by that time, he had changed to--he had spent time--he went to Africa, not Canada, he went to Africa and he came back with this whole thing about black consciousness. And he would come through Jackson and he stayed with me, would have meetings at my house talking about black consciousness. And he held one of the first meetings on black consciousness in New Orleans [Louisiana] long before the black power thing  broke and it caused a split within SNCC between the black nationalist people who were more (unclear) and the people who were for integration. And John Lewis, who was the head of SNCC, was integrationist they felt, so they were working to get him out at this time. 'Cause Bob was such a legend that people followed him. So if he came through talking about black conscious--that must be the thing-- that's the right thing to do and he would explain how they had to get a sense of self and self-determination before they could really, you know, be on an equal footing. You know, he made a whole lot of sense. So Stokley Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was actually the compromise candidate who was in the middle.  He wasn't really declared for black conscious and he wasn't willing to say he was an integrationist. And he had headed the Black Panther Party, the first one, in Alabama, 'cause his party was called the Black Panther Party--he called it the Black Panther Party, before they ever adopted the name in California. So they felt if he was like Black Panther Party, he was into the black stuff, but he was also integration. And then Stokley slowly began to swing more and more to black consciousness as he saw the integration thing crumbling and so on. And then I marked the time of the black conscious--Black Power Movement 'cause I saw it happen. And it was part done with the help of the media--create the movement--on the merit of the march, which I was on, I was responsible for the medical care. In Canton, Mississippi, [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Stokley and Floyd McKissick and them were talking on a school yard and the mayor said, "You can't camp out on the school yard." And they were talking to all these people, mothers, little children, babies, whereupon the--oh, Andrew Young [civil rights activist/ambassador/U.S. congressman]  had come around and said, "We think they're going to arrest King and the leaders tonight and we have to be able to continue to march." And he came out to the field and they got me because I had to do the medical stuff.  He said, "Let's go." As soon as we got off the field all of these state troopers came pouring in.
Story_ID: 19082
Speaker 1: State troopers surrounded the field and suddenly they went in and flung--flung on gas masks and start firing at the crowd--tear-gas canisters and it was bedlam. People started screaming. The canisters they fired at the people, not up in the air. So people were directly hit with these canisters and got burns and all kinds of things, but the most wrenching thing to me--. We ran out, went to the field, tried to get people, particularly on the--on the ground, and little kids, like one years old, had got detached from their mothers and their parents in the bedlam and they were running around saying,"I'm blind, I'm blind," 'cause they couldn't see because the tear-gas burned their eyes so bad. You know, they said, "Blind," they were "blind" and they were screaming. We went out there and all of these people, as the tear-gas cleared, were lying out there. One of my medical students was unconscious. And my ambulance driver was unconscious. We had to get them both--we had to call into Jackson [Mississippi]. And thank god for some courageous black people, but the funeral director, the black funeral home, sent up hearses as ambulances to bring these people down to Jackson and we said, "Send them down to Jackson," as fast--. We set up an all night medical station to deal with the burns. I called into Jackson to my friend Bob Smith who worked with me, a black doctor. I said, "We need doctors up here." He rounded up some black doctors, they all came up, we held clinic all night dealing with a lot of terrified people, but also with burns and trying to do triage as to who can go in the hospital.
Story_ID: 19083
Speaker 1: That same night Stokley [Carmichael, Kwame Ture] was on appeal and he started screaming, "You're killing my people, you're killing my people," and started running toward the troopers. And people started yelling, what are you crazy? You're crazy And we jumped Stokley We grabbed Stokley and said you are out of your mind and we took him and dragged him and put him in a car to take him away because they would've killed him, no question they would've killed him Stokley was in an absolute, as everybody, rage, that the police had done this, he was sick of it, you know, unprovoked attack. Didn't care whether there were little babies in the crowd, nothing, just a brutal thing Went through as they ran across the field, the police swung their rifles hitting people, you'd hear thump and kicking them, thump, thump, thump, they were really like crude maniacs Stokley was in a rage and about a day or two later, reporters, now and remember this is national press is there, every TV station, newspaper, coverage is on the Meredith march, covering it, who were bored by the way by this long three week march So I went up to Stokley to ask him about the tear-gassing and (inaudible) children and Stokley was still in a rage and they asked him a question and Stokley looked at him and Willy Ricks looked at him and the TV cameras were on, and Stokley put up his fist and said, "Black Power, Black Power, Black Power"  Went on every TV screen in the country They went running to Roy Wilkins, what's black power? Roy Wilkins said, I don't know They went to Whitney Young: "I don't know."  And so it took off and grabbed a hold, particularly of young people who started talking about black Power, then Stokley quickly followed up with Charles Hamilton wrote the book "Black Power" and it started rolling and hit campuses and they had a Black Power conference in Newark, New Jersey, which was infiltrated with so many FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigations] and intelligence people that it was a shame and provocateurs who stopped my workshop, which was on children and education, and I knew they were agents and it's since been known that they had the place infiltrated, because Hoover was terrified, remember, he put out the counterintelligence probe, but two guys disrupted my workshop, which was on children and education, taking care of children, by one (inaudible) up and said listen, wait man, wait, wait, before we go on, before we go on, I want to know if you're ready for assassination?  I said what? Are you ready for assassination? Some certain people just have to be assassinated So I just sat there and I said, remember, I spent a lot of time in Mississippi, there are agents all around I said, "This guy's an agent. He wants to get me on tape publicly to say that we should assassinate people."  I mean they would've come, I mean they were trying to--they had these kind of people provoking fist fights. Later, people who had been up for jobs who had been at that meeting say that they get questioned about their attendance at that meeting by the intelligence people They had the place covered, they were crawling with agents who were reporting back, people there, the workshops, and trying to disrupt it. We didn't know later until the papers on the counterintelligence program came out that this was planned strategy of the FBI, was not just a surveillance, but was to disrupt and create an atmosphere of paranoia within black organization That was part of the mission of the undercover agents And I interviewed some of these people later, so I got information, who talked to me, who were former undercover agents, saying that they had so many of them at some points that they didn't know what to do with themselves He would see other agents covering church meetings in the evening, community meetings of churches, intelligence agents that were working for the police intelligence or FBI and other places
Speaker 2: Were they black or white?
Speaker 1: Black.  Black.
Speaker 2: They were black. Who would've thought?
Speaker 1: The FBI acknowledging of at least putting, at least putting, we think as much, but at least putting something like fifteen hundred, seventeen hundred undercover people to infiltrate And they did it. And then we found out it was part of their program When that famous document where he says "black leadership had to be neutralized," that neutralized is a word the CIA used to kill people. So that's why people felt that the FBI was behind the assassination of Martin Luther King, I did too And Jesse Jackson and I even wrote an op-ed piece which we were shocked that the 'New York Times' [newspaper] published, suggesting that it was a plot--that the FBI may be involved.
Story_ID: 19084
Speaker 1: So it was then that the black consciousness thing broke  And I supported it I supported it. And a lot of people within the group that I worked for, the Medical Community for Human Rights, upset it and then I started writing about the black/white problems within the movement, which upset them a great deal, particularly because they felt, I guess that it was pejorative, but it's not pejorative, I was trying to be descriptive and I was using terms that the black civil rights workers used. But they would come in and complain that the white kids would take over the projects, which was true But the white kids were like college students.  A lot of them going to top colleges and the black kids, a lot of them were in college, and high school graduates, but not like some of these whizzes that were coming down there So they felt they would take over. So they started calling the white girls "white African queens"  So I wrote a paper on "white African queens," which infuriated everybody. They started calling a lot of the white men, said they had a Tarzan complex.  But there was strife within the movement as it began to unravel about the new direction See, when they started, when Bob started talking about black consciousness, I said, all the white workers had worked with them, some of them still not speaking with Bob. I said, what are you doing? We've been through hell together, we've risked our lives together, we were ready to die together, well how can you do this? How can you now say you're moving in this direction And Bob would say politically we have to, it's not that we hate you or anything, we need to do this to purge black people of the internal racism and so on and so forth. So a lot of them got very upset, but you should know, I mean I have the SNCC position paper on black power still in my files Some of the SNCC workers who worked on this, in fact one of the best papers on the subject at that time was written by a white woman--examining the pros and cons of the direction of the movement  Why this is bad to go this way, what was good about going this way What was bad about going with integration? What was good about going? At the end of the paper she said that I feel that the necessity right now is leans toward going in the direction of black consciousness to help black people come forth She just nailed it and said this is my opinion. So it wasn'tif you thought it through and they knew what was happening, the white kids would come, the workers, I heard this story so much, and it wasn't about any insincerity on their part or even maliciousness or anything, they knew that if they went out as a white kid and they said organize a meeting at the church of black people to come to the church on Thursday night, white kids would fill the church. They would send out a black worker, organize the black people to come to the church on Thursday night, probably nobody would show up. This would make the white kids start thinking, are they responding to me because of white leadership and that because they believe in white supremacy and if a white person tells them to do something they do it, but they don't respect black leadership? So a black person says it's important to come they don't come, but a white person says it's important to come, they come? You see what I mean, that they knew these kinds of things were happening And in fact in this paper she said the need for black leadership was, like, very critical. And to develop this black leadership and to have black people learn how to follow black leadership, not just Martin Luther King, the icon, but the local How are we going to develop them if we keep making them dependant on white people doing things? Then it was true because the white kids had the most skills A lot of them were sensitive to the issue, but would stand back and not try to do everything, unless we have to get this out, we have to get this out. And you know, black kids down there operating CPT ["colored people time"] time, the white kids operating on souped up whatever time, and they would come down there and work. But this had to be done You know, just, "We have to get this flier out!" and man they'd get everything running and black kids like, "What are you doing?"  So there was a lot of, like, jealousy and anger that occurred because of this. Not that they were against doing anything, but it was like it was not a match And then the black leaders in SNCC would say, "Well how are we going to develop these black kids skills if white kids are doing all the work?" So that they began to ask the white kids to pull out and then people started calling them racist and so on and so on And I wrote the papers, and sometimes I reflect on it, because I felt that the country needed to know that racial conflicts in this country were so great that even among civil rights workers who were in Mississippi and Alabama, there was severe racial conflict, that that's how deep it was And that we had to deal, like, with all of this, all of it in some way And that it would make a special point even to let them know that there's racial problems. And the media ran with this at first But it was okay because the publicity was going to scare white kids and stop them from coming down and that's what the black kids wanted They said we don't need, we have to do it our own way, Mississippi freedom democratic party, there's this and this and this and this. And we have to develop this leadership and we should be able to do it ourselves and that's what Bob believed in at the time So the only thing that I have misgivings about is in some way the media used it to kind of make it seem like the white kids were crazy or something, or stupid for helping out blacks You know what I mean? Or that blacks were ingrates, you know, that type of thing? And some of the terms that I know that the black civil rights workers were using and some of those kids, like, "white African queen" complex and Tarzan complex really hurt the white kids And then they got angry with me, not everybody, for writing about it and presenting about it That they hated, they still hate those terms. But that's the terms that the kids were using And it captured what they were feeling at the time and they had no voice And so I decided I would be their, a little bit their voice I would bring the problems out and talk about how they were going to be solved But a lot of the whites used it to completely abandon everything and took like the black consciousness thing very personally, that they were no longer important to the cause. And I remember one thing Martin Luther King said when, you know, 'cause he was on a march when Carmichael and them pushed SNCC into black power, he said you all are going to have a lot of trouble with your fundraising And he was right about that And then he kind of chided them, he said, you're all going out and talking about black power. He said, what's the most black organization in the movement? SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the fighters and workers, SCLC in the south were nearly all black, with few exceptions The black ministers or people with SCLC. But SNCC thought itself better, I mean, they (inaudible) in power Didn't they see themselves more in power than SCLC? Well, SNCC was always a little bit jealous of SCLC and even of King A lot of SNCC workers would not support the Selma march, they saw it as Martin Luther King grandstanding after the SNCC people are the ones that got beaten and now he would come over and was going to get all this national press leading a march and calling in all the celebrities, some that would get very annoyed with that. So there's a little bit of antagonism And then there was political differences, I remember, whenand I'm going to have to wind up because I have to get home, but I remember, and I'll say this as my last thing because at the end of the Meredith march, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] refused to support it, the NAACP refused to support it because they thought they were going to get stuck with the bills because none of these organizations had any money, but they did, so they wouldn't support it when we got to Jackson, when we were preparing the speeches on the Jackson state capital, Martin Luther, the NAACP came, (inaudible) it was his brother, they wanted a representative to speak on the capital steps and King said that's great because we'll show unity Stokley said, no, we're not going for this stuff anymore, they didn't support the march and now when the camera's going to come around they want to get up there and give a speech and they didn't support us for three weeks, I don't want them up there And he King argued it to the point that Stokley jumped out of his chair and went after King, and he was using every cuss word in the book. And King just looked at him and other workers, I remember one of them was Jose Williams, I remember very distinctly, grabbed Stokley and said, what are you? And pushed him back and pushed him back in his chair and King just sat there and they continued to talk and King continued to push his point that it would be very important in terms of the nation and the nation's image to have the NAACP there, so they didn't support the march, this is another issue. And he prevailed And the meeting took place on Tuvalu College campus So again, I thought, that showed the clash but these things had been like brewing with King dominating but SNCC people feel like they had the motion and were more on the frontlines than the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people, so there was a little competition there going on. And then you had people who were strong supporters of both like [Harry] Belafonte, and they would like be competing Belafonte raised a lot of money for SNCC, raised a lot of money for King, all the time a big supporter of King, the King family Supported anybody, Belafonte had me over to his house a number of times to give talks to people, who they were raising funds from and I came up from the south. He was very, very involved And I don't think he gets credit for it And a lot of people still have envy about it because they think he sees himself as the spokesperson, but Belafonte was involved and did a lot Personally these SNCC workers could go to his house in New York, his half sister, Shirley Wright, was a SNCC worker. He was very, very generous So you want to say something good about Belafonte I remember when I, at Martin Luther King's funeral, which was in March, where it's very, very, like, depressing, everyone got back to the airport at the same time and, like, I couldn't get like a flight back and I was standing in line and Belafonte and Shirley and I think his wife came, walked through the airport and he stopped and he said, "You're heading back to New York, Poussaint?"  And I said, "Yeah, if I can"  And he said, "Why don't you just come on my plane?" Belafonte And he took me out to his leer jet, I don't know whether it was chartered, I think it was his, and flew me to New York in this little six-seater with his family. Which I felt, I mean, he's going to the airport, he doesn't have to do that, but I think to me that expressed some of the spirit he felt of like generosity and connectedness with the people who were involved in the struggle for civil rights, be a part of it, that he always wanted to give an extra hand. So that's kind of buried, but I think it's been an important part of his career, and kept him maybe from becoming bigger than he would've become, because of it And people knew he had these kinds of identifications And open support., okay.
Story_ID: 19085
Speaker 1: When I left Mississippi, when I felt I'd finished my mission, and I was very depleted and Tufts made a faculty offer to me and to be an assistant professor, which they did because they were interested, I had done some field work for them, I had set up a community clinic for black people up in Holmes County and they were interested in setting up a neighborhood health center in Mount Bayou, so I was like, knew what was going on in Mississippi, they wanted me connected So they offered me assistant professorship to come to Boston and they wanted me to work in psychiatry at the first neighborhood health center at Columbia Pointer Housing Project. So that's how I got to Boston, and I wasn't planning to stay here. And I also, when I got back, these people had talked about, they call it post civil rights, like, compact, that fatigue or depression, you suddenly felt useless And these people, you had gone through so many intense times with, they weren't there any more and you really felt an emptiness and I think for a number of months I was depressed I know I didn't want to go out anywhere in Boston. I was staying with Jack Eiger's house and I would sit at home and sometimes he would jump on me why I didn't want to go here or there and I think I was just, you know, depressed about the change and all the people I felt so close to being there But I stayed very involved with everything I was involved with everything under the sun that connected to civil rights, in Boston and nationally. I was doing things for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I was working down at the black academy of arts and letters I started working for Jesse Jackson, Operation Breadbasket and then Operation Push and did a lot of work with that So I was working with all the organizations, I was going to conferences, meetings, and staying involved. I'd also made a decision at that time that I was going to do popular writing, because those other articles I talked about I wrote in journals Because, and I made that decision because I felt that someone has to put out this stuff all for dialogue and discussion and debate. And I know 'Ebony' [magazine] called me and you know how they indoctrinate you in academia, that you don't want to write anything for 'Ebony' or magazines like that Well, 'Ebony' called me and I don't know, remember, maybe (inaudible) or Bennett or one of the editors at the time back then, and their first question was, they said we need an article from you, 'cause you were there, on what this black consciousness stuff is. That's what they asked me They said what is this? What should black people know about this? What happened? You know, we know you were there, we know you're a psychiatrist Will you write us the article?  And I said yes And after that I wrote a string of articles for them, this string. They would ask me whatever the issue was, they had me write their first article on sex, because they felt it should come from a psychiatry professor and handle it gently, you know And they still haven't completely changed The last article I wrote for them I think it was on prostate cancer and they were still a little bit finicky about the diagrams of the penises that I sent in. You know, that was a little graphic, you know? but anyway I would use that as a forum and no matter what everyone, I mean, I don't even feel defensive about it, I mean, I'm a tenured professor at Harvard, so, I mean, I'm not going to feel defensive But it was a wonderful feeling to be at a meeting, at a black expo and have two young black men come up who looked like maybe they didn't graduate from high school, and they say, you're that guy who wrote that thing in Ebony aboutI don't think that what you said is right because And I would say, if I can talk and these brothers can talk to me and feel that they can talk to (inaudible) the thing and disagree with me and have their opinion, mission accomplished You know what I mean? And that this will bring the community closer together And then I decided I would doI almost became a contributing editor for a while, then we'd stop, but then I started writing for the 'Negro Digest,' 'Essence' magazine, all of them And then writing op-ed pieces, just like the psychiatrist would not be discussing this mental health issue with racism except I wrote the oped piece and they all got upset. What's he talking about? Slamming me all over the place to the heads of the association. But it caused a whole dialogue within the profession about how do they deal with racism? It's not even in the index of the diagnostic manual--racism, prejudice, anything---as big a psycho-social issue as that is.
Story_ID: 19086
Speaker 1: And I had a whole mess of publications before I left UCLA [The University of California, Los Angeles]. A whole string of them. So that when Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] hired me they hired me as an associate professor, they gave me a promotion based on--although I didn't ask for that, my vitae back then, but I had an offer from UCLA  in 1969 for full professorship, but I didn't want to go back to L.A., so I came over here and I start, also became an associate dean and was clearly here to help them deal with the new things that were happening around brining in minority students, 'cause their whole place was white, and so they brought me to handle everything and so on. And so I had my battles here with people and deans and everybody else, professors. 'The Cosby Show' came about because I also got into doing media and [Bill] Cosby [comedian/actor] had asked me, I had met him a number of times at black expos in Chicago [Illinois] and so on and so forth while he was doing documentaries. They were asking him to narrate documentaries, which he was getting so swamped with, he didn't have time to watch them. So he called me and asked me if I would fly out to L.A. to look at all these documentaries and give him a "yea," "nay," or "maybe." And he would take my opinion whether he should do them or not based on the content. And so I flew out to L.A. for a couple days and watched documentaries and told him: "No on this one," "Yes on this one," "Maybe this one if they change this and so on."  So he knew me. And then I knew Camille because we worked together Operation Push Excel, I was Chairman of the Board, she was Vice Chairman of the Board. So when he came to do 'The Cosby Show,' Cosby, who was very, very smart about things in the media and Hollywood [entertainment industry], when he started the show he called me up and said, "How would you like to be on the staff of 'The Cosby Show?' I said, "The staff of 'The Cosby Show?'" I said "What do you want me to do? He said, "I want you to read every script and critique it, screen stereotypes, screen put-down humor and make it," he said, "Psychologically believable." He said, "I want my show to be psychologically believable. I don't want it to be a lot of one-liners written by comedy writers. It's plot driven. I want the characters to be psychologically believable. I don't want the five year old saying some joke line that a five year old wouldn't say but a twenty-one year old would say." He said, "And I want you to do everything you can," he said, "where you see an opportunity to make the show more in the African American context and also generally educational so that people walk away with the show not feeling uplifted, but feeling that they learned something, that it was real, they identified with it," he wasn't going to do any, you know, 'Amos n Andy' stuff and which he was very troubled with with a lot of the other shows. And he wanted it to take place in a positive context, of an atmosphere of a loving family. Smoking wasn't allowed, drinking wasn't allowed, violence in the family wasn't allowed. None of that ever appeared on 'The Cosby Show' and it was a major hit of the decade, which shocked everybody, the network people. They didn't believe, a lot of them saw that show and said, they're always thinking of 'Good Times' and 'Jeffersons' and all these other shows that made it and said this isn't going to go. And it just took off with a crossover audience right to the top for years. And it was wonderful working with the writers and it was an education for everybody. It was wonderful working with the Cosby's for those eight years. And I think the show had a little impact, now it's somewhat distant and fading, but I think it had a lot of impact I mean, I would see kids interviewed in a newspaper, what do you want to be when you grow up? I think I want to be a doctor.  A black kid. Why? Well, I saw Mr. Cosby, [Clifford] Huxstable was a doctor. You see what I mean? So it was impacting. Black families, just by the score, and white families and reeducating them not to think in their stereotypic ways about black people. So I think it had a great impact and I'm very pleased to have been associated with it. It was again something I wasn't exactly trained in, but I think I used my skill as a psychiatrist to look at the scripts and also I think the combination of me being civil *rightsy, kind of political, plus a psychiatrist, by tying it all up, you see, and knowing how people in a system operate, like, helped me be able to deal effectively with writers, whoever I was dealing with, and also to support Bill, see, because it wasn't like he was brining, he said this guy knows he's black, and he would tell them, you listen to him. You listen, if he's raising a question, think about it. Don't assume you know it all. If I raise a question how they were dealing with Rudy, with her hair being combed and she's screaming all over the place and I say, listen, you can't do that that way, because, you know, the hair thing. And they would say why do you want to--white girls scream when their hair gets combed sometimes. And I would say it's not the same thing, believe you me. oh, you did--and they would, you see, and then Bill would say, no, you listen to what Poussaint says about the hair thing and how it should be treated in that scene, not you, 'cause you don't know the context, how do you know?  Why are you saying white girls cry when their hair is combed. But clearly you don't understand what the hair issue is in the black community, the nappy hair and kinky hair and such. So things like that would come up. And not because the writers were malicious and you couldn't even call them racist. What they didn't know was the context. You see what I mean? They didn't know. How would they know? And that was the trouble with a lot of the black shows, they were writing a lot of the black shows from other black shows they had seen, not because they associated with black people.
Story_ID: 19087
Speaker 1: What do you want to accomplish from this point on and two--.
Speaker 2: Well this point on, you know, I'm near the end of my career. I would like to write more, I will continue to speak more, but I think I'm probably going to begin to withdraw from activities. I have a, I mean not immediately, but over time. I have a young daughter [Alison Poussaint] who's about fifteen months old, I have a dinner date with. You know, I'm going to spend time with her and I'm going to continue some of these activities around the media, but at some point I'm going to have to give up things because I'm not--I can't run and move and keep doing all of these things and keep so utterly busy. And I feel that I did what I had to do.  You know? And I feel good about it. It was a contribution. I feel in some ways that I went about things my way with my own vision and I made Harvard acknowledge it as important, legitimate, with an impact on society in a scholarly way and a political way that they have stepped back and said yes, what you have done is highly legitimate, we recognize that now, you have done a lot for the prevention of mental illness, prevention of health problems, so on, so on, and so on, et cetera, et cetera. The things you've done and gave me tenure. Now, I'm telling you, getting through that tenure committee here is very, very hard. And I think it makes me feel that even Harvard has come to say yes, all of that was the right thing to do, that it wasn't off the wall and it was for the good of medicine and good of psychiatry and good for change and so on, and so on, that you participated in. even some of them saying that the impact you had on America by being involved with 'The Cosby Show' is more impact than any other psychiatrist could've had in the country, no matter what they did, and to recognize that as, like, a critical activity that impacted the national consciousness and say that's an important thing in a scholarly way because you were bringing your scholarly knowledge as a psychiatrist to that medium and it was nothing--it was now something to be exalted, not to look down on. Okay, last question.
Story_ID: 19088
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I want my legacy kind of to be what people make of it and what they take from it and what they take from my life, my legacy would be that I think being involved and struggling, and struggling on the side for black people and so on, to deal with all of the things that are dealt with, but human rights in general, and being committed to that in someway in whatever work you do in terms of giving to the community and working on behalf of that and not quitting. And knowing that as much as we would like things to take place immediately they don't. And that you have to just stick with it, you don't quit and you realize that  any good that you do is important and educational. And I remember a time, and I'll end with this because it's part of King, we were in Mississippi and King was just going to speak at a church, and it was all around that King was going to be the speaker and very few black people showed up. I think they were scared in this little community, I don't know, ten, twelve. And it was like embarrassing. And King was talking to people, he said, never, don't get upset if the audience is small. He said if you have an opportunity to talk to ten people, talk to ten people. And he got up there and gave his speech like he always did, like the church was full. He said each one is important if you can reach them and educate, these are the ones that made it to the church. He said don't take that personally, do what you're supposed to do. And that's what he did. And I heard that and sometimes, you know, I'll go places and few students show up, and you would like to have talk to them just like you would talk to a full house.  And so I think education is important, teaching is important and I hope people will balance their life between the typical success with the goods and the materialism, with the other kind of success and good that comes from being committed to your society and to other people and to change and to social justice, economic justice and that's important. And I see all of that even in mental health terms, that this is what's going to make people feel better, be better, be less stressful, if their lives are balanced, not just all material and give me, give me, give me and not caring about the injustices economic and otherwise that exist in society and perpetuate ills. So I would like to see myself as a political social community civil *rightsy psychiatrist who dealt in all of those areas using my psychiatry along the way as well as being an educator within the medical school. And the other thing I think, because people don't know everything I do or did, or situation I was in, is to--if you feel what you're doing is right, you feel it's fair, not to be afraid to fight with people who see it another way, but because of power relations see it another way. I mean I had fights with professors here, I still do, about things that I think are not right, that they're doing.  And I bring it up. And they used to get angry with me, even when I didn't have tenure, I'd fight with them, knowing that these guys weren't going to be for me, but you would take up the cause almost of the truth, of what's the truth here? What's the ethical thing to do here? Why are you doing that? You know? and to advocate for people who don't have advocates and I think frequently black students, black people in institutions don't have advocates and people watching out and helping to interpret how they see something, helping the white people to see it in another perspective, all that. So I'm kind of moving now into a multicultural thing, but not missing out on the core role in the position of black people in America and the their special relationship to it. Like being very key to all of this and has provided the leadership for all of it, in a very, very big way. And I think that sometimes around Martin Luther King day and Black History Week I get very troubled because people are always talking about Martin Luther King, no one ever discusses about, maybe not as important depending how you look at it, but critical. When the black students come up with an African American association, I say is this due to Martin Luther King's work and they sit there and go yeah, yeah.  No.  No. No.  No.  No. It's due to black consciousness, Stokley, Carmichael, Bob Moses work, that you have a black student union. You weren't thinking black student union from Dr. King. King never talked that way. He was for integration. That's what he said. White boys and black girls, you know, walking together hand in hand, and so they leave out that history because that history still scares them. But that history had the enormous--that's why we're not calling each other Negro anymore, right? It's the black conscious people, that's why we're calling ourselves African American. Black conscious people, that didn't come from the typical civil rights movement. And that yet has impacted our lives in so many profound ways that it's never recognized, it's never given due respect and recognition during any time. It's like we're hiding it from black people too. So the young kids coming up will think Martin Luther King started all of this. He didn't start all of this. And I think people like *Stokley Carmichael who just faded away with prostate cancer and died, like *(inaudible) can't recognize for what he contributed and none of these people. You know, Malcolm X has gotten some tribute, but it was these young people in SNCC who pushed the black consciousness movement that led to this new black identity stuff and internal liberation that they were seeking for black people. Hasn't accomplished its mission totally yet, but it's moved in the right direction.
Story_ID: 19089
Speaker 1: Wife, Tina Young Poussaint. On the left Alvin and Alison, their baby, probably like eight months old or something, at home.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint poses with wife, Tina and daughter, Alison, 2001-2002. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Eldee Young]
Story_ID: 19090
Speaker 1: Christmas 1947, the whole Poussaint family. In the back, Richard, Delores, Clement, Lillian, Christopher, Kenneth, Alvin is on the left under Richard [siblings]; then Christopher, his father; Julia, his little sister; Harriet [Johnston], his mother.
Speaker 2: [Photo - The Poussaint family poses at Christmas, 1947. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19091
Speaker 1: Kenneth ['Kenny,' brother] and Alvin.  Alvin's sitting down, 1936.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint with brother, Kenneth, 1936. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19092
Speaker 1: Alvin Poussaint, about 1940. I'm guessing first communion, but I'm not sure about that. Whatever it is you do when you're about six. His family was catholic.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint takes his first communion. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19093
Speaker 1: Taken from Ebony, October 1964, featuring Dr. Poussaint at the UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] Neuropsychiatric Institute.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint featured in 'Ebony' magazine, 1964. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo, 'Ebony' magazine, October, 1964; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19094
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint receiving the John Jay Award for Columbia College Alumni its an alumni honor, 1987.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint receives the John Jay alumni award at Columbia University, 1987. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19095
Speaker 1: The Meredith March which took place in 1966 and Dr. [Alvin] Poussaint is wearing sunglasses kind of part-way back, kind of in the middle of the front of the pack.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint joins the Meredith March, 1966. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19096
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint, 1969 publicity photos, probably after he started at Harvard Medical School.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint poses for a publicity photograph, 1969. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19097
Speaker 1: Taken from a magazine piece done on him when he became Director of Student Affairs at Harvard Medical School when he first started at the Medical School, or when he hadn't been there very long, 1975, is that what it says?  Yes, September.  1975, that--I think it was when he was acting as Director of Student Affairs at the medical school.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint, Director of Student Affairs at Harvard Medical School, is featured in a magazine article. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19098
Speaker 1: And that's taken from the same spread, the biographical piece in 1975.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint is featured in a magazine spread. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19099
Speaker 1: Photo of Alvin Poussaint with his brothers. Alvin's on the left, then Clement, then Kenneth, then Richard, probably taken in the mid '70s.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint poses with his three brothers, ca.1975. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19100
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint at the Harvard Medical School in 1975, when he was Dean of Student Affairs.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint, Dean of Student Affairs, poses at the Harvard Medical School, 1975. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19101
Speaker 1: From the cover of 'Black Family' magazine, 1982, Dr. Poussaint with his son, Alan, who would've been about five when the picture was taken.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint featured on the cover of 'Black Family' magazine with his son. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo, 'Black Family,' 1982; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19102
Speaker 1: Taken from a Jackie Robinson dinner gala kind of event. Sharon Robinson on the left, Jackie Robinson's daughter. Dr. Poussaint in the middle and Mrs. Camille Cosby on the right, done May 1988.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint poses with Sharon Robinson and Camille Cosby, 1988. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19103
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint on the--or near the set, of the Cosby Show when he was serving as production consultant with Tempest Bledsoe on the left and Lisa Bonet on the right. Lisa was only there the first couple of years.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint poses with Tempest Bledsoe and Lisa Bonet on The Cosby Show set, 1985. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19104
Speaker 1: This was taken from a 'Child' magazine article, 'Lessons from Life,' 1993. Dr. Poussaint at the med school talking with students. The student whose face you can see, I think is Janella Green, it's listed in the caption I think.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint is featured in a magazine article, speaking with students. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19105
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint's mother, Harriet Johnston Poussaint, I have no idea how old it is. Judging from the other pictures, it may have been around the time that he was little, like around 1940 or something like that.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint's mother, Harriet Johnston Poussaint, poses for a photograph, ca. 1940. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19106
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint's mother on the left and presumably his father on the right, probably also from the 1940s, but it may be later. Except all the pictures look around the same date and that definitely looks like her in that group picture I saw.  I guess in the 1940s.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint's mother poses with an unidentified man, ca. 1940s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of black and white photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19107
Speaker 1: Alvin Poussaint holding his daughter Alison in the hammock of their summer home in New Hampshire. That was this summer--she'd be around eight months old. She was born in November, 1999.
Speaker 2: [Photo - Alvin Poussaint holding his daughter Alison, 2000. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photo; from the collection of Alvin Poussaint]
Story_ID: 19108
Speaker 1: This is part two of a HistoryMaker interview with Dr. Alvin Poussaint, Professor of Psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School, Associate Dean of Student Affairs at the Medical School and Director of the Media Center at the Judge Baker Children's Center in Boston, Massachusetts.  The inter--this will be a follow-up interview and a completion interview.  The first interview was conducted by Julieanna Richardson in the year 2001.  The interviewer today is Robert C. Hayden.  The videographer is Luke Bernard Vall, and the date is March 25, 2005.
Story_ID: 19109
Speaker 1: Let me continue with young Alison [Poussaint, daughter of Dr. Poussaint], what is she doing today and what are her interests, your young daughter?
Speaker 2: Well, Alison is a very active little girl who likes to engage with little kids and be friendly.  She loves to do all those things that kids should love to do, including being read to, but also reading, reading herself, drawing.  She's very physical in the sense of athletic, so she loves gymnastics.  She loves to swim.  If you get her near a pool, she'll stay in all day.  She's taking ice skating.  She loves to sing.  She's very lively, and I would say, kind of a joyous type of, of child who is, have, has a lot of social skills as well in dealing with both adults and others.  So she's--for a child, I mean in terms of what you have to deal with, the responsibility, you know, she's, she's pleasant, and, and is fun to be around and to do things, to do things with because she, she gets--and enjoys things so much and enjoys the new and enjoys adventure.  She enjoys going up to the cottage in New Hampshire.  She enjoys going on vacations.  So she, she's, she's pretty, doing pretty well and developing in a, in a way that we, we like and encourage.
Speaker 1: Would you tell me your wife's name?
Speaker 2: My wife's name is Tina Young Poussaint.  Young is her, her maiden name.  She's a physician at Children's Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] with a specialty in Neuro-radiology.  That's kind of high tech to me (laughter).  I mean you have know a lot of, about computers and math and a little bit about physics in that field.  And she, she's interested in academic work.  She's, she was recently promoted to Associate Professor of Radiology at, at the [Harvard] medical school.  So she's on that academic track.  So I expect that probably in five years or maybe a little more, a little less, that she's probably gonna get promoted to full professor because she's heavily engaged in a lot of research.
Story_ID: 19110
Speaker 1: You also talk a little bit about your father [Christopher Poussaint, Sr.] and his work at the YMCA at 135th Street [Harlem, New York].  And he saw himself as the provider.  But I wanted to ask you this, did your father live on to see you finish medical school and your residency at UCLA and your movement in the civil rights medical field?  Did he live during those years or not?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my father lived through my college, my medical school, my residency, and lived through the time that I worked in the South [with the Medical Committee for Human Rights].  He died in 1970, right after, shortly after I'd returned from Mississippi and settled in Boston [Massachusetts].  And it was from Boston I flew back and forth when he became, when he became ill and then deteriorated during that time.  But I was in Boston and back and forth to New York rather regularly when he was beginning to, to lose a lot of his function.  It started with a, with like congestive heart failure, but my father was the type, like so many of us still are, culturally, where it was, you were proud never to have gone to a doctor, and you would try never to go to a doctor, even if you were sick, like you, it was like being strong and no circumstances, you don't need a doctor.  Well, that was the kind of person he was.  So he, he didn't go to doctors for routine checkups in any way for what he felt were minor symptoms, which could be pain.  And so he finally had to go because he had a lot of shortness of breath.  And when he went in, the found that he had fluid in his lung.  Then when they evaluated him some more, they found that they had had an old, very massive type of heart attack, and he was in heart failure.  Then they also discovered that he had diabetes.  And they also discovered that he already had kidney involvement.  So he finally got to the doctor when a lot of his systems were beginning to fail.  And so a couple years after that, it was kind of like downhill, until his kidneys failed, his heart failed, and he finally died in 1970 at the age of sixty-seven.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But he was, he was a strong individual, and I think, in retrospect, he had much more influence on me than I even realized at the time because he, he would--he, he was political.  You know, back at that time, he, he used to, he had a print shop.  And he used to do a lot of printing and because there was discrimination even in the newspaper business, some of the people who hired him were left-wing newspapers, like "The People's Voice" [weekly black newspaper] and other kinds of publications.  And he would learn a lot about the left-wing movement from them.  And then eventually, he got involved in American Federation of Labor party [sic, labor union federation].  And he used to talk to me about a lot of political, political stuff and the oppression of black people and the discrimination out there, right in New York, and how you couldn't get ahead and how they just kept you out of the unions and all kinds of stuff.  So I think that I was hearing that all the time, as well as his heavy involvement in the Y, YMCA on 135th Street and his community service to the boys department, where he was kind of like the manager over, sort of the boys department.  So that I think he gave me some sense about being involved with the community, trying to bring about change, trying to make things better for, for black people, being careful, encouraging a little bit of my paranoia, like you just can't go out there and trust everybody, particularly, if they're not--you know, if, if, if they're white, you know; that you have to protect yourself.  And he was also very supportive of, about getting an education, with that being like a way out and a way of protecting yourself.  So he was always supportive of, of getting an education, although he, he wanted to control where it was going to be (laughter).  That is, which he said, he, he wanted me to--my mother [Harriet Johnston Poussaint] had died by that time, and he wanted me to stay in New York, and I think still be--live in the home and be part of the home.  So he--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What did he say to you about your academic achievements and progress through medical school residency, civil rights medical work?  I mean did he reflect back to you his feelings about how you had arrived--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he, he was, he was, he was very pleased with my becoming a doctor.  He really was very proud of my becoming a doctor.  Psychiatry, he didn't say too much about, but I think he was proud about that.  He was pretty quiet about my going to Mississippi, that is, he--I think that it, it, it bothered him a bit or scared him a bit, and he saw it as, it's like, something maybe sidetracking my career, you know, as a psychiatrist and as a doctor.  So he didn't say much about it.  He didn't talk against it, but I think it was something that made him feel a little nervous about the whole thing and what was gonna happen and what, what I would do with my career or where I was headed.
Speaker 1: And what did you say to him?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't say too much.  I think he knew that it was, that this type of thing was part of like who I, who I was and part of my commitment.  And I also had a sister who was very involved in, in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] in New York, managing their office.  And one of my close friends was already in Mississippi, Bob [Robert] Moses, and Bob Moses was the one who recruited, flew out to, to Los Angeles to recruit me, to go--come down to Mississippi to help them with every kind of medical issue, including, you know, with civil rights workers, but also to desegregate the health facilities and the, and the hospitals.  But my, I think my father was, was proud of the fact that I was doing good things and getting recognized for doing good things with the Civil Rights Movement because he was involved in his own way in doing those types of things himself.
Story_ID: 19111
Speaker 1: I wanted to be sure how you happened to go South and become the field director of the Medical Committee for Human Rights, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And I know Bob [Robert] Moses, I know what he's done.  And was it really Bob who was the guy who got you there?  I mean, was there--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I wouldn't say he's the guy.  I had to be willing to consider it.  And I, I know what my thinking was at the time, but also some, some doctors from Boston [Massachusetts] who flew out, one of them being Jack Geiger, who was at Tufts University who was already connected with the Medical Committee for Human Rights to try to--I didn't know him, but he flew out to Los Angeles to try to recruit me to take it and encouraging me to take it and even encouraging me to go down for a visit in March, early March of 1965 to, to take a look for myself, to look at the Movement, at SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Cojmmittee], what was going on, to meet some of the black doctors.  And we stayed at a black, a black doctor's house who remained one of my friends over the, over the, over the years.  And it was also part of my own feeling that I wanted to be, be involved in this and from a number of standpoints.  One, I always had a strong interest in doing away with discrimination and racism.  That had just been--in college, I was in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I was in all kinds of left-wing groups (laughter), that later got on the subversive list of the, of, of the government, you know, when I was a teenager.  So I always had that kind of interest.  Then I think some of it came from my increased knowledge and sensitivity to the mental health issues of black people as I became a psychiatrist.  And I remember saying to myself, the biggest mental health issue for black Americans is racism, discrimination and segregation.  And if I could play a role in, in tearing that all down, that I would be doing much more--something great for the mental health of black Americans and much more than I could ever do seeing individual patients, one on one.  So that was my, part of my thinking too.  And then my sister also encouraged me to do it.  After I went down for a visit in March 1965, I came back more assured, thinking that I would do it.
Story_ID: 19112
Speaker 1: The Vietnam War was going on, and I wasn't planning on being--in fact--they had investigated me after I became a doctor because they had my name on some subversive list, and told me that they wouldn't--that unless I came clean with, and named names of people who I knew in the past, that they couldn't give me a security clearance which I needed to be made an officer.  Doctors are usually automatically made an officer, Lieutenant, Captain, whatever.  And--I told them I wouldn't do that.  I--in fact, I literally said to them at the time, "That's your job, not mine." To get names of people.  And I wasn't gonna give them the names of the people I knew for any reason.  So, they said, they were gonna draft me and make me a private in the, the Army as a doctor.  They're gonna make me a private.  So I said, well, if that's, you know, the way it's gonna be, I would, that I was not gonna give them any names.  They finally came back--this was when I was at UCLA, came back months later, and asked me if I would be willing to take a lie detector test, then to, to clear me or they'd know I was telling the truth or whatever and so on, at which time I told them again, I wasn't telling them any names.  So if they asked me stuff about names of people and so on, I wasn't telling them.  But I told them I would willing to take a lie detector test.  So they took me over to some place in Pasadena and gave me, with--some Defense Department place--and gave me a lie detector test, and then later told me I had passed it, but also, I saw in my folder they had some stamp or note saying "if this person is ever drafted, the Intelligence Department has to be notified."  But I was gonna plan to resist going into the war anyway.  So my thinking then was like, well, you know, people going to Vietnam and being drafted to spend two years, that my two years will be service to the Civil Rights Movement, not to the Armed Forces and to the Vietnam war.  So that was influencing my thinking too at the time, that this would be my two years of service, although they tried to draft me out of Mississippi.  And--I don't know if I talked about this before--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Let me hear it, this is good, this is very good--No you didn't.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously).They tried to draft me out of Mississippi, which was political because the other black doctor who worked closely with me, his draft board was in Mississippi.  My draft board was in New York.  On the same day, we got a letter drafting us into the, into the Army and telling us to report in three weeks to some place in Tex-, Texas.  And we said, "What?"  So we started calling all the people connected with the Medical Committee [for Human Rights], the cvil rights people, etc., etc., etc..  We felt that this had come from one of the Congresspeople in, in Mississippi, and the White Citizens Council, the maneuvering.  And so we put a lot of pressure on, and do you know that in about three weeks, they sent letters to both me and the other doctor withdrawing the draft notice, which is unheard of.  People told us it was no chance.  But apparently, it was so hot politically in terms of what people knew happened, that someone was gonna get heavily incriminated, and I think I know who it was--the person who was head of the Armed Services Committee at the time, in Congress and Senate was [John C.] Stennis, Senator from Mississippi.  So this was a way of getting the two major civil rights doctors out of Mississippi.  So they cancelled our draft notices, and we were, we were just flabbergasted and they--it was so swift that after they canceled the notices, I got letters from Texas, where we were supposed to report saying I should be--if I didn't report for service, they were going to come after me.  But it had already been canceled.  But that was, that story, I love to tell because it's, it's--it shows you how political and the attentiveness that they, they gave you, and, and how the enemies worked.
Speaker 2: That's an important story for us to have in this record.  And I don't think you explained this the last time.  This is very good.
Speaker 1: And so we got rid of those draft notices and we kind of both shook our heads.  And, and in some ways, to, to draft us both on the same day, was--from different draft boards--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, would you give me the name of the other doctor?
Speaker 1: The name of the other doctor is Dr. Bob Smith.
Story_ID: 19113
Speaker 1: Dr. Bob [Robert] Smith.  He was a General Practitioner.  He's the one who worked closely with me [in the Medical Committee for Human Rights, founded by Smith].  He was the one I referred civil rights workers that I couldn't handle with certain medical problems, or, or who were injured, I would refer them to Bob Smith.  And he would come--I probably saw him nearly everyday, practically, down there for one reason or talked to him on the phone.  We socialized.  He helped support the nurses, our whole staff, etc., getting medical equipment, you know, showing me the ropes.  He was very involved in Tougaloo, and I got involved in Tougaloo College as well.  He's still down there.  He recently wrote me a note, and he has--tells funny stories about my coming down.  He says when he first heard that I had accepted this job to come down, he said, his first thought was, "This doctor is probably crazy." (laughter)  I mean he says that because to come into this situation the way I was coming from, he didn't know what he was getting himself into, you know, to come, to come down at the height of that kind of situation.  So he's, he was a big support, and we worked very closely.  And we, we accomplished a lot during, during that time.  I went back--after I went to Mississippi in March of, of '65 [1965], the first week, I went back to Los Angeles.  And then I got a call from the civil rights people and the Medical Committee asking if I would go down to the Selma March to be the, the foot solider doctor, that is, if I would go down and march the fifty miles with the marchers to provide and organize medical care for the marchers.  And so I went back down, flew back down on March 20 or 21st, 1965 and walked the fifty miles with my satchel case filled with medicines and held clinic when we pitched tents along the highway to sleep, took care of everything from blisters to colds to whatever it was, had other volunteer doctors, had two nurses working with me who were members of civil rights organizations, and got to know a lot of people then who were from Andy [Andrew] Young to, you name them, to, to a lot of the civil rights leaders, to [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], to [Ralph David] Abernathy because you were together all day on the march, and I got to know them.  And, and I was there to support all the organizations.  So when I came back from the Selma March, I was convinced then that I was going to return to work with them, and that they all had encouraged me to come.  So I went back, and I told the people, I, that I was looking at other jobs, you know, in psychiatry, that I was not interested.  I was going to Mississippi.  It's interesting, the response I got from some of my psychiatric colleagues, which was uniformly negative in that they would say in different ways, but they would, they would say things like, "You're acting out your anger that you're displacing from someplace else, and you want to let out your anger in this situation."  Some of the them suggested that I wanted to go put myself in that risk situation because I was harboring suicidal thoughts, and I needed to, to have more psychoanalysis to discover why I was doing, doing these, you know, these things; that it indicated that I was troubled, that I wanted to, to do that.  Everything except that I wanted to do it because, like I was committed to doing it because I stood for just whatever it was.  They were like trying to diagnose me.  "NO, you're suffering from depression," you know, etc., etc., etc.  And I think, considering that I was a young psychiatrist at the time, to hold them off in that way and not have them make me think that I was like disturbed because I wanted to, to go work in the, in the Movement and move to Mississippi, I think showed that, probably the strength of my other resolve, that this needed to happen.  And I knew it, if they didn't.  That made me carry out my plans.  Although I remember my first week in--when I went to Mississippi, of feeling really out of sorts, feeling nervous, out of place.  I didn't know many people except Dr. Smith and set--getting an apartment and all the things and dealing with a lot of the overt kinds of racism that was there, I mean from going to a grocery store to taking your, your clothes to the cleaners, and there being a colored side and a white side to the cleaners, to dealing with, with bank tellers, who didn't want to look you in the face, to have--going to grocery stores and having them wait on all the white people.  And every time a white person came, they would set you aside and not wait on--I mean it just all over--to being put out of restaurants.  I mean stuff, clearly, that I was not used to.  And I was working hard to learn to adapt to see where, what to move, and I had a lot of people helping because the civil rights people knew it.  And there were a lot of lawyers, Marian Wright Edelman was down there.  What's the Congresswoman from D.C.?  She was, Eleanor Holmes Norton was there.  I mean it was just lots of people who I got to know who were smart and who were savvy.  I got SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] workers.  When I had to travel out of Jackson [Mississippi] to go up to cover marches or demonstrations or look at a, a hospital in different towns, they would send a Civil Rights worker with me who knew the State of Mississippi so I wouldn't go into a wrong spot.  I knew how to go and get out of town, and they would provide protection.  And we were providing doctors and nurses, volunteers to all those demonstrations that were going on, maybe daily, not only in Mississippi, but in Alabama, Louisiana, and I remember spending time going in Louisiana at a similar march to the Selma March.  And though it was, took a couple of, three days, and we camped out, and we provided--we think, provided the care and so on.  So, and then the Meredith March, the same way, which was a three-week march in Mississippi.  So you, we, we could see directly that we were helping.  We were helping people.  We were going after hospitals that were segregated and getting to the federal government to enforce the law, and next week seeing that, them to begin to dismantle the segregation apparatus in the hospital, the signs coming down, every, everything.  So like you saw, like the effects.  If you help the civil rights worker who was sick, you saw the effects and that you were helping to support the Movement.  And I thought of the civil rights workers as like, your troops; that this was like warfare (chuckle) and this army.  And these were your troops, you had to keep in good shape in every way you could to be able to stay part of the struggle.
Story_ID: 19114
Speaker 1: Dr. Poussaint, when you left the civil rights work in the, in the South, you came to Tufts University, is that correct?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And, you then came to the city of Boston [Massachusetts], essentially.  How did you find this city?  What was going on in the city?  How did it hit you when you first got here?
Speaker 2: Well, let me just first say, I, I came here to Boston to work at the Columbia Point Health Center, which was a neighborhood health center, when Columbia Point was a city-housing, low-income development with lots of problems, to, to work with the, the, the people out there.  But I found Boston a place that was not very receptive to me as a black person.  I found people unfriendly, even a lot of the support staff at Tufts [University], like the local people.  I found at Columbia Point, as soon as I moved out of like, Columbia Point and I had to do work in Dorchester with some of the white people, that they were like almost shocked that a black person or a black doctor was coming in there.  And you got the feeling that some of them didn't want to, didn't want to work with you.  There was kind of a, a nega-, a negativity.  I thought people were unfriendly in, in public situations that I went into, there was kind of a coldness.  And then there were a couple of incidents that, that blew my mind.  The first was a lot of racial tension in the city.  When peo--when you get to a city and people say, "Don't go to South Boston because they--you may get beat up," which they would tell me.  "Don't go to the North End because you may get beat up there too."  "Be careful where you go around the city, that the whole city is not opened to you, and that you might--even may not find they're that receptive to you when you go to restaurants--they're not gonna stop you from going in, but they may not really want you."  It was all of that kind of talk that people were, were, were feeding me.
Speaker 1: So how did you cope with all this then?  How did you begin to deal with this?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I began to deal with it by, one, by recognizing and knowing it exists, and there was a pret-particularly egregious thing that happened that was worse than anything people, people--well, it wasn't worse than anything did the South, but it was bizarre. I didn't have a car when I first got here, so I was at Tufts and one evening I was--I had an apartment in Cambridge--one of the white social workers at Tufts agreed to drive me home.  And she drove me home, and we were walking near Harvard, she was next to me.  And a car of white guys pulled up, and yelled out at her, "Nigger fucker!"  And I said, "What?"  And they yelled it again.  And that, and I just got like startled and scared because any--that's like a high level of aggression.  You figure the next step, they were gonna stop the car and get out and beat your butt.  So that was like shocking to me that that level of thing was going on, like, near Harvard Square.  So you, you--it was kind of an uncomfortableness that you knew and didn't know when you would be around people of that ilk when you went out, when you went out publicly, that that, those kind of people--and I remember reading the "Boston Globe" where they were always interviewing people from South Boston, North and--and the people regularly saying things like, "Well, the niggers do this, and the niggers do that", and they were printing it in the newspaper.  And so you got a feeling of a lot of racial tension.  And then, of course, the busing thing hit, and then that was all racial tension in the [Charles] Stuart case [in which a white man claimed that a black man had shot him and had murdered his pregnant wife; it later was revealed the husband himself was guilty.]  And there were times where I felt very threatened like a lot of black men in the city, that I was not safe, as a black man because they--you, you may be targeted or, or whatever, that this prejudice was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What role did you play in the Stuart case situation?
Speaker 2: The Stuart case, not much.  I guess to follow it.  I'm trying, trying to think.  I know that people interviewed me about it a lot, even on, on television after a while.  And I remember that I was, I was suspicious from the beginning.  I don't know, I don't know everything, but I was suspicious of--the stories didn't add up to me, you know, what he was saying, what he was--telling.  So I was glad it got exposed, and I still was shocked, but it wasn't like I felt like, oh, like this, this was impossible.  It was like I was saying, something's not right here, you know, with this, this story, and the description.  And then the whole posture of--and they were trying to go after black men.  And that's when all the black men were scared.  And then they would actually find one who they were gonna somehow convict of this crime, you know, who was innocent, but they were so determined to get him.  And so, then I was involved in the Alma Lewis School a lot.  There were other incidents around the city that got buried.  I remember there was, there was some body or something left in a bag next to a elementary school.  And they said something about it on it, "nigger", something or the other.  Now, maybe you can look that up in the archives of the "[Boston] Globe", but I remember something like that.  And I remember the, that, even at Alma Lewis School, how you felt all of the, like separate from the city in a lot of ways, you know, trying to struggle to make your presence heard.  I didn't feel that there was much support from the politicians.  You had the [anti-busing activist and mayoral candidate] Louise Day Hicks, who was very popular in the city of Boston, who was clearly against black folks.  You had mayors who would, like run after your vote and gave you a couple of jobs, but you never felt support from them, as caring about, really caring about the black community, and ambivalent messages to the population.  And when the, I remember one mayor who, when they gave the order for busing, said you had to obey the law, but I'm against it, encouraging the people.  And then, another thing I remember, because we were concerned about the children, people were volunteering to ride the buses with the kids.  And I rode the buses with the kids to the high schools and so on, and saw all the stuff, "Nigger" on the walls; kids shouting at them, niggers, this, this, this, and really feeling afraid for the kids because you thought you were gonna be attacked, that they were gonna attack those buses.  And so that was a, also left a kind of indelible mark--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I was gonna ask, at what point did you begin to cut into and intervene in some of these things, and getting on the bus with the children I think is an example of what I was looking for--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well, I was intervening.  I was having meetings in--around school busing.  I was involved with Exodus and, you know, and I was involved with a lot of organizations.  In all, I know I was like, at town meetings that were televised--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --on the, not Basic Black, I don't know if it was called that when--back then, but all of these shows talked--so I felt like it was still part of the Civil Rights Movement.  And you were still struggling and you were still fighting back, and this was, this was the way it was.
Speaker 1: It would just come up North.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so it just came up, and here it is in, in, you know, in Boston too.  And the, the fight goes on.
Story_ID: 19115
Speaker 1: This leads me to a couple of concepts that I wanted you to talk a little bit about.  One is black consciousness, the other is black leadership.  And let me go back to black consciousness.  What was the level or degree of black consciousness in Boston, and in the South you had Black Power, and that was beginning to catch hold out of the Civil Rights Movement, you were there.  But what was the level of black consciousness in the '70s [1970s] and '80's [1980s] as you got here?  Was there any consciousness, people being black here?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, you had, you had, you had some developing, with some of the younger blacks in, in particular.  And I remember Brian Rollins (ph.) and a few other leaders calling meetings, getting people together, particularly black men to talk about what their roles should be in, in the new Black Power, Black Consciousness Movement.  But I also remember people at that meeting expressing fear about being involved with it.  And even said that if they got involved with it, they felt they may lose their job, and also.  So there was a lot of, like more intimidation than I felt like was necessary of these people making the step because they knew there was so much opposition from whites, that they would suffer retaliation by openly supporting Black Consciousness because a lot of them felt very isolated and alone in these institutions, whether they were universities or whether they were businesses and so on, and felt they had a relatively small black community, and a, a black community that, in the past, even though they were segregated, were kind of like, well, things at some point will get more integrated.  And also, I think they were fearful politically of retaliation from the politicians in terms of what, you know, black people got.
Speaker 1: You know, in 1965, there were roughly a half a dozen black educators in Boston schools.  And John O'Bryant attempted to bring the other five together, right?  Jean McGuire was one of them, okay.  And John used to tell the story that they said, "Ah, John, no, no, no.  I don't want to be seen off--you know, in a separate group.  We, we can't do that.  It's gonna--we'll lose our jobs." But those five black educators, not John, were very reluctant to come together, in what eventually became the Black Educators' Alliance [of Massachusetts], you know--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --of the system, but that was the feeling of black teachers, that they didn't want to be seen with each other. You know, it's interesting.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right.  People who actively were opposed to Black Consciousness as being wrong-headed, not the way, not the way to, to go.  And you have to remember back then that some people couldn't even deal with the word "black"--that didn't like being called black. So, so it, the whole thing was very foreign,  foreign, and repelled a lot of, a lot of people to take that step and say we're black people, and there's something--we have a culture and it's something we have to be conscious of.  Although I think that the Alma Lewis School reflected that, and she was pulling in a lot of leadership nationally, it was coming to the black cultural part--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --particularly, at the Black Consciousness movement which then spins in--off into the political part.  And then there was Mel King [former state representative and mayoral candidate] who was not afraid of it--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you see, even though he was running for public office--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --he was clearly supporting a lot of black political power.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, he was about power, he had a power theory.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) change, but he-- the Black Power theory.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  So I think that helped the, the city and helped to mobilize people.  And I think, nearly the entire black community was mobilized around Mel King, even those who like didn't support his politics.  But they liked the idea that a black man was inroads, surprising inroads into the political situ--situation in Boston, then changing some of the attitude of the new white leadership, like Ray Friend, you see, you see what I mean.  So it, it was what you needed to do.
Story_ID: 19116
Speaker 1: Speaking of leadership, I've been wanting to tell you this for a long time.  One of my favorite articles, and one that I use with my students at the college level for over twenty years, it's part of my reading list, okay, is an article that you wrote that appeared in "Negro Digest", 1969, "Black Roadblocks to Black Unity".  Do you remember that article you did?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember I wrote an article with that title.
Speaker 1: I have, I have used that with students at Northeastern and places that I've been teaching.  "Black Roadblocks to Black Unity".
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was seven to eight that you laid out.  Are those roadblocks still there today?
Speaker 2: Those what blocks?
Speaker 1: Those roadblocks?  I mean where are we today in term of--?
Speaker 2: (Smultaneously) Well, I, I think there's still some, and then I think on every level we could be more organized and pointedly organized in what we do, you know, politically, and the people are still torn sometimes between identifying as black and joining some things black.  I mean they still get upset with the word, like if someone calls them a "separatist", you know, that they're doing something wrong together as, as black people.  But I think many more black people came together as evidenced by the great strides, some that's made in the, in the cities in terms of, of people being black mayors and city counselors, and other people coming forward and the black community giving them lots of support.  I think our voting patterns, with eighty-five percent of our votes in the presidential elections and other elections, lining up around the candidates who are supporting things that are gonna be helpful to black people or being--not being bought off as easily, you know, and trying to show their political muscle.  But I think it could, like very much, very much improved.  I think that, that one of the, the deterrents that's different now, I think is that we're distracted by a lot of kind of entertainment cultural stuff, not necessarily positive.  In other words, I see a lot of young people caught so much into the entertainment and the propaganda that goes with entertainment that they don't know they organize about anything.  They don't know what the, the politics are for anything and are being steered in certain ways that ultimately freq--are frequently self-destructive to them, and don't have a consciousness about, about it.  We were trying to, we, we--in our media center, we had some teenaged black girls, and we showed them some tapes of this real stereotypic stuff about black people in the media.  And they were just cracking up laughing.  And the instructor said, "Well, what do you--don't you think a lot of these things are stereotypes?"  And the teenaged girls--they were about fourteen, fifteen, they didn't know what a stereotype was.  Okay, so the educator, you know, who was talking to them, had to step back and said, "Wow, you know, I, we have to start like from the very beginning about what all this is about." Because they were taking it all in as, yes, this is a accurate portrayal and laughing and thinking that--. Well, it's the same way that they've taken now--and I'm not saying that all rap music is past--bad.  I think rap music is a musical form, but I think a lot of the content is, and that a lot of the, the, the young people are taking the content and believe in it and model themselves aft- after it, and not to their benefit.  And I think it's not just affecting low-income kids.  I even see middle class black kids getting affected by it and doing things to themselves that are self destructive, that get them in trouble trying to imitate someone, what they think is authentically black which end--comes down to, I should be a little bit thuggish.  So I think with our young people, if I compare them to the young civil rights workers, the black ones that I knew in Mississippi and in New York and in Boston--a world of difference.  You, you don't seem to have that population.  And you, you had civil rights, black civil rights workers, who were only high school grads who were very politically savvy about what was going on and the politics of it, and not being distracted frivolous stuff that they knew was, was not in their interest.  So how we've been able to pass down information and, and keep up the ideological, whatever you want to call it, movement, to young people has like fallen by the wayside.  And I think it's, it's, it's because the civil rights organizations don't have as much input to the youth, the group.  And the media has taken over.
Story_ID: 19117
Speaker 1: You have just, you have really moved right into, very nicely, what I wanted to, to talk with you about, and we'll continue this right now.  I wanted you to talk about black youth identity.  And that identity is, of course, multifaceted.  It's very complex, there're a lot of factors that shape it.  But the two that I was looking at here, one was the hip hop culture and the other was the media.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay? And those are just two, and, but there's something called cultural collision going on in our schools.  I mean these youngsters coming in with the media impact, the hip hop impact upon them.  Then they're coming into schools that are responsible for social development, academic development and emotional development, okay.  And a lot of these things are colliding in our schools.  And so I wanted to see if you could address, you know, how, what, what do we have to do in our schools with our teachers and guidance counselors and school administrators to, to bring some kind of balance between the school and the culture that the students are bringing in.  And some of it's positive.  It's not all negative, but some of it's positive, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, I, I think one, one thing is, and this goes as white teachers and there's black, black teachers.  And a lot of the hip hop model stuff, because it's so profane really turns the teachers off at an emotional level.  My, my older sister [Dolores] is a principal in an all-black school in Queens [New York], at an all-black school in Queens.  And they used to have these Ebonics arguments going on, and they had "Meet the Press", these black kids, black English, on them.  And she, she would tell them this, "my teachers can deal--my black--" she said, "my black teachers can deal with Ebonics and the white teachers can deal with Ebonics, and no, they should teach standard English."  She said, "What they can't deal with is a five-year old kid calling them a motherfucker."  She said, "They can't deal with that."  That no matter how much you kind of tell them this is a product of the kids (unclear), that a lot of them get personally turned off and begin to think of this kid as a bad kid.  This kid feels personally offended and disrespected.  And she said, "Then they begin to reject these kids," you know.  Now, part of that language stuff, that language is all over, right?  I mean I was listening to satellite radio soul station on the way in to work this morning.  And this guy was talking about his big erection and what he was gonna do with it.  I mean like--and these kids listen to all that stuff.  So, and so they listen to the "bitch" stuff and the "ho'" stuff and the, just all the profane language that they adopt as regular language and don't know the boundaries, what to use where, and what they could move out with, so they'll, they'll bring a lot of this stuff right into the school and think that's the appropriate be-,  behavior.  And then a lot of the, the bad rap stuff is rebellious.  It tells you to be anti-authority, right?  It tells you to be anti-authority.  (Unclear), and the kids go in with that kind of attitude, that to be, to be black and to be, be whatever, hip, cool, whatever, you shouldn't listen to the teacher.  You should be against the teacher.
Speaker 1: So what do we do in the schools on a day-to-day basis?  I mean the youngster's gonna come in with this attitude.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, on a day-to-day basis, the, that everybody has to be involved in like the mission, that is, a mission to get these things--kids socially and academically to do the best that they can and to try to eliminate their biases including biases about the way the kids speak.  In other words, they shouldn't take it personally, right.  And with a kid who curses them out and so and so, they should not discard.  They should still try to bring that kid in and do whatever disciplinary, teach him about what, what kind of language you use, and this language, you don't use in here, and so on and so forth.  And then focus on some of the positive things they're doing.  Like there's too much negativity towards the kids, that they need to, to look at what kinds of things can they be successful at, that they're being successful, looking at the catching up some of them may have to do because the kids are coming into the schools from different backgrounds in terms of learning, and that's a big problem.  So my sister will tell me, she could go in first grade or kindergarten and she could tell me which kids were gonna be drop outs.  I said, well, how can you tell that?  She said, because this is kindergarten and there're some kids who can read already.  And she said there's some other kids the same age who don't know the alphabet and aren't gonna learn it for about a year.  And she says that some kids in this class, in this kindergarten who don't know colors, who can't tell you what's blue and what's green and what's red.  And she said, the way school is structured, those kids just get left behind because their teachers are moving with the kids who are supposed to be at a certain level.  And these kids, when they come in at five, have not learned a lot of basic things already from their environment or their home, which handicaps them severely, she feels, in the educational system.  A lot of people paying attention to that.  So she would say, these kids are in trouble already.  Down the line, they're gonna keep lagging, and because no one has the will to do anything about it, that they just, you know, get lost.  But at the same time, I think we're losing kids who are motivated because it, the schools aren't teaching them.  You, you know what I mean, so that the schools have to be about, we're gonna teach as much as we can.  We can't win everybody, but we can certainly do better than what, what we're doing.  I mean the situation's in some ways worse than ever, with the high school drop out rates, and it's terrible for, for black males, you see, who get more and more rejected, coupled with the increased incarceration of black males, which is just unbelievable.  And, and by all of this, the drop out rate, the incarceration, you weaken the entire black community.  And beyond, just role models, but you don't--you, you weaken the family, and you add additional burdens onto the community in every, every way.  Young men unable to get jobs, so what do they do?  It's a trade so they go back to jail.  They become homeless on the street, through all the inequities in the criminal justice which we know about.  They're like they're discarded.  And I think it's a tough, hard struggle, and I think anyone we can salvage and rescue is like worth the effort.  I see medical, black medical students coming into Harvard Medical School, who were raised in a, in the ghetto, with a single-parent mother, who once was on welfare, and made it all the way through college, and we, we should be looking more, well, what has this particular mother done that made that happen, rather than concentrating on all the, the negative.  That's, where can we make things happen, even against the odds, in a lot of families?  And we look at some of these families, is that someone had a commitment to do it.
Speaker 1: You and Dr. [James P.] Comer of course, did an important book 'Raising the Black Child' [sic, 'Raising Black Children'].  Now, do you think you might do a book in terms of 'Raising the Teenager', or?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in raising the black child, we did have a whole section devoted to, to adolescence or teenagers, which may be a little bit dated now, particularly in terms of the, the hip hop culture and the burdens that come with that and the way that's taken off for many of our young people and where that may be--come before school.  And, you know, and, and before achievement, or modified notions of, of achievement because the, the, the role models on T.V., athletes and entertainers mostly, make a lot of money, and that's very attractive, in you know, like almost a fantasy way, that they go that route.  Or they just think that going that route in simple ways, like if you got the best pair of sneakers, like these Jordan sneakers they just came out with, a hundred sixty dollars.  And there's lines of kids lined up to buy them, poor kids because of the status symbol to have those sneakers.  And so they're into the materialism no matter where they are, but still trying to get more and thinking that they're gonna start making money like Fifty Cents.  And who are the big ones making money?  Outkast, not as profane, you know, but then all the other big ones, Nelly and Fifty--that kind, have come along since the '70's [1970s], have been the most profane, who are now, it's a lot of them Hollywood stars.  I remember Ice T, right?, who's now a Hollywood star.  And he had that, he went that route.  Ice Cube, who started out with "Niggas with Attitude", they're stars.  So you, you--all of these images are there, and you don't have enough positive images to counteract it or the positive images of themselves become rejected because they're not supposed to hip or they're square.
Story_ID: 19118
Speaker 1: At the end of your first interview in 2001, Dr. Poussaint, you said, and I quote, "I'm nearing the end of my career, and I may start to withdraw from some activities".  So that was 2001.  Here we are four years later.  What's been happening, Dr. Poussaint, in the last four years.  Have you, have you begun to relinquish certain responsibilities?  Have you changed any parts of--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't, I haven't changed much, in a way.  The main problem is trying to head off taking on too much still.  So I try not to take on too much.  So I'm less likely to hop down to an affair for a conference.  I'm less likely to accept an offer to be on a T.V. show.  I'm less likely to go to a Operation PUSH convention, all of those types of things, you know, that I, I always felt I always had to be involved in.  I don't do that as much anymore.  I don't see patients as, as much as I, as I used to.  But I'm still very active.  I'm still on the lecture circuit, but much less, but I still go on the lecture circuit during, during the year.  And I try to spend more time with my family, my wife and my daughter.  And, as you know, if you're running around all the time, when you're working full time and getting home around 5:30 or 6:00, and then if you're taking the evening out to do a television show or to go to a meeting or to go to this town meeting, you don't have any time to yourself.  And I feel that's not good for in, in my later years or good for my, my, my family.  So I've been trying to cut back, but I still remain, like very busy.
Story_ID: 19119
Speaker 1: I still have a lot of duties here at the Judge Baker Children's Center [at Harvard University], the media, the media--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous).What are those duties specifically--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm in charge of the media center, and what we do is consult with the media, try to influence the media on the behalf of children in every way.  We do consultations to, to television programs to try to make them positive, and people call on us as, as consultants.  We have a campaign on right now to--for commercial-free childhood, which we're looking at the marketing practices of people with children, where they target children to market a lot of products that are not good for them, including junk food all over children's television.  So with, and with the obesity epidemic, we're making that a big part of, of our efforts in what we, we do.  I'm involved nationally, and it's--in a positive way in trying to eliminate corporal punishment in the schools, where it's still allowed in twenty-two states.  And my former civil rights background helped with this because I got a hold of Julian Bond and [Kweisi] Mfume and, and--some of the--Jesse Jackson, Marian Wright Edelman, all of these people to sign on against corporal punishment in the schools and then issued a proclamation with all their names on it and every time the issue comes up in a school board, a state, we send this as a press release.  One of the reasons for that, that strategy is that a lot of the supporters of corporal punishment in the schools are black.  You see, so we, we turned it around in Memphis by letting the community and the black, black people that support corporal--that the black leadership in the country, every civil rights organization, etc., is opposed to corporal punishment in the schools, and in, and that, in fact, black kids are two to three times more likely to get paddled than white kids, and that the same kids get paddled over and over again.  So it doesn't work.  But it's teaching the kids that violence is a way you solve your problems, and the teachers and principals are doing it.
Speaker 2: What percent of your time is spent with the Media Center?
Speaker 1: Media Center, I would estimate probably close to fifty percent.  The rest of the time, I'm still working the medical school.
Story_ID: 19120
Speaker 1: What are you doing at the [Harvard] medical school currently, what are your responsibilities?
Speaker 2: The medical school, I'm on all kinds of committees.
Speaker 1: Do you teach, do you teach courses?
Speaker 2: Like, one on one.  The way the medical school is set up now, everything's like small teaching, but I don't teach courses the way I used to when I first came.  I would like run the course in psychiatry of the first and second-year students.  Well, it's not set up that way quite anymore so I don't do that kind of teaching.  But I do a lot of counseling of students, and--around various things from academic to person kinds of things across the board.  And it's still very much concerned with Harvard maintaining the high level of diversity.  We have twenty--about twenty-two percent of Harvard Medical School are underrepresented minority students.
Speaker 1: Twenty-two percent.
Speaker 2: Twenty-two percent.
Speaker 1: And when you started on this initiative, it was what percent, going back?
Speaker 2: It was, you were talking about one or none a year.  Now, we just sent admissions notices to over thirty-some odd black students, about ten Mexican Americans, six Puerto Rican, Dominicans and five or six Native Americans, over fifty-some odd app--acceptances.  We're not, we're not gonna get all of them because people compete and there's other issues, but we're admitting a very high percentage.  That's over a class--that's over, that's close to sending acceptances to unrepresented minority of close to twenty-five percent.  And we're gonna probably end up with more like fifteen to twenty percent, or a little bit more, depend, depending on what the issues are for this, this group.  So that--Harvard has maintained that very well, not always easily.  There have been lots of struggles along, along the way, just numerous ones.  But again, I think my civil rights experience helped teach me how to deal politically and otherwise with a lot of situations and also not to be intimidated.  In other words, you can't do certain things if you're intimidated or you're trying to win approval from certain people, or you're trying, you're worrying too much about whose gonna be on your side if you want to get promoted.  When you stop doing all of that, you can act in the best interest of what needs to happen for the students because a lot of the things, as, as you know, you'll come in a situation, and they say, we want more diversity here, and we want more minority group students.  And that's lip service, and it doesn't mean everyone here believes that.  So you can get someone on the Admissions Committee who doesn't believe that at all.  So you have to deal with, like resistance and sometimes doing things that they say they want you to do, but a lot of people don't want you to do.  That is still troubling to them.  So that means you have to keep up a, you have to keep up the--not just the pressure, but also do it in a way that will make more sense to them.  So one of the things that we had been doing for the last thirty-five years, that I still focus on, is flooding the place with as many applications from minority group students as possible, you see what I mean.  So if you get all these applications, then they can have their pick without feeling they're doing anything like to change anything.  So they're picking, if you look at the profile of these minority group students, they look like the profile of the other students.  Do you see?  But that's because we make--if we don't get those applications in, we will risk the numbers going down because they will not bend but so far in, in, in certain things.  But if you give them a lot--. So for that reason, we're still sending out letters to students, posters to students, saying, "Hey, we'd love your application" and all of that kind of thing to make them feel welcomed because it's hard to get over the stereotypes that even follow Harvard around.  You talk to students out there, you go to a historical black college.  And they'll think there's two black students at Harvard Med School.  And we say "No, there's, there's, there's twenty in the first-year class."  And they say, "Really?"  Or they'll say, "I hear Harvard is a cold, impersonal white place." But we have twenty-two percent min--you, you know, you--so you, you have to keep overcoming these images and get them to feel positively about applying here.
Story_ID: 19121
Speaker 1: On February 12 of this year [2005], there was a testimonial for Dr. Poussaint in Boston.  How did you feel about that and what did it mean to you, and what was that all about?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I was very flattered by it, by the fact that the initiative came from some of the minority alumni who graduated way back in the '70s [1970s] who are out doing great things, some professors at other institutions, and they sit on the alumni council.  And they got together with Joan Reede, who heads the Office of Diversity and Community Partnerships.  And they said we wanted to pay a tribute.  One of the, one of the alumni had some contact with Bill Cosby and asked Bill Cosby, if they gave a tribute to me, would he come and perform and be part of the tribute?  And he said, yes.  So they got him.  People think I got him.  I didn't get him.  I, I--cause I wouldn't ask him to do that, that specifically.  So he accepted doing it.  Then they, they put it--Barbara Edelin, with Edelin Events, Ken Edelin's--booked the Westin Hotel and started making it into a big fundraiser, got all these people to volunteer, who gave their services for, like token amounts, the designers, everybody else.  And then James Taylor agreed to come and perform, who I know, and he knows my brother-in-law, Owen Young, who's a cellist for the, the Boston Symphony Orchestra.  And so they got together and they played musical pieces.  So that attracted a crowd.  So what happened was, they were looking for five hundred people, and they got six hundred and thirty, and they had to cut off ticket sales.  So the place involved, and the evening went very well.  Bill was great.  People in my family talked, colleagues from psychiatry talked, Bob [Robert] Moses gave one of the most moving speeches cause he's, you know, he's, you know, he doesn't do that, but he gave one of the most moving speeches.  People almost came to a standing ovation about how he came to L.A. to ask me to come to help him [with the Civil Rights Movement], you know, and so on and giving that background.  James Taylor and Owen Young performed beautifully.  People were very moved, and it was just smoothly done.  So I was, I was very moved by it, and it was, that was not just the part of the tribute but--all during the day on that Saturday, alumni, minority alumni, most--many of them professors or in high or places of office, in public health and so on, presented scientific papers, a lot of it dealing with issues around minority health.  And they were professors from the University of Pennsylvania, from, from Maryland, some of them from here, from Johns Hopkins, all come through the [Harvard] Medical School.  When the medical school at the time had no expectation that these students would ever reach those kinds of levels. Do you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: I hear you.
Speaker 2: It was like, "Oh, well, we're training them to go out to serve their community."  And these students are doing the same things their other graduates are doing, you know.  There's one who's president of the medical center in Texas, a black student.
Speaker 1: Who is that?
Speaker 2: Roy Wilson.  He's, he's president of Texas Tech Medical Center or something.  He used to be Dean at Creighton Medical School in, in, in Omaha, one of our graduates.  People are heads of departments, including--the other thing that was very flattering to me is that the Latino students participated very actively and also showed up in very large numbers.  And Native American students--so that there was a kind of feeling of togetherness of all the, all of the groups.  And then many of the white students and Asian students attended the dinner.  And then a lot of people contributed a lot of money, people I knew from the past, people I knew from the showbiz world, sent in contributions because the tribute was to set up an Alvin Poussaint Lectureship Fund, which they had established.  And it's gonna be used to invite a lot of our graduates to come back to Harvard as visiting black lectureships so--because Harvard doesn't keep in touch with them.  So they could see all the things that are happening.  And not just minorities, but also to use it to bring in white professors who are concerned about issues we're concerned about, like disparities in healthcare, inequalities and equities in healthcare, to help keep these issues in the forefront of the consciousness of the medical school.
Story_ID: 19122
Speaker 1: Beyond 2005, what have you not done that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I've always want--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You've done, you've done--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I've always wanted to write more than I've done, actually, and I've, I've--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You've written a lot of already (unclear)--
Speaker 2: People say I've written a lot, but I've always wanted to, to write more, and felt that I would if I wasn't so busy with administrative things, (unclear) constantly, and setting aside the time, and it's even more problematic with a young daughter, you know, because you don't want to take our evening writing.  So I would like to do more of, more that.  But I also would like to, to do things that I feel I won't be able to do that I've always wanted to do, including a lot of travel, a lot of places I haven't been and seeing, seeing a bit of the, the world, and going at an easier pace.  I think things like consulting, particularly to the media, I'm used to doing, so I can look at scripts and--I mean I have a--since I've been doing it a long time, I kind of know how to do it, and I know how to work with the writers, and I know what--so, I do that, I--and I enjoy doing that.  The other thing I, I like to do is, is to promote and push forward younger people so that if someone sends me a manuscript, sometimes I, and I shouldn't be doing this, I'll take the time to look at it maybe and tell them something, and it's very time consuming.  Well, if they write me for a blurb, then I will, more times than not, look at it and give them a blurb for the book because I feel that if it helps promote certain ideas that are important, that the community should know about and the white community should know about, that I want to support and, and, and push that, push that ahead.  So it's, it's--I still, as long as I'm working, want to encourage the students in aiming high and, and kind of doing their best and setting that kind of tone for them and trying to propel them as much as I can into leadership roles because it, it--the facts are, if you have more than the leadership roles, better things happen for minority patients, in terms of health policy, everything.  That's, that's been shown, and, in fact, more than--if you look at what the minority group students are doing, Latino or otherwise, most of them are in some way involved with the minority community.  So that by producing these doctors, you're helping the healthcare and the well being of a minority community around health, health issues.  And at the, the symposium that they put on, you, you could see it.  I mean some were putting on talks about the incidence of diabetes among African Americans and among Latinos and among Native Americans, and what kind of interventions you needed with Native Americans that were different than with other populations.  I mean, so they're adding a new level of skill insight, and even research thrust that's different from a lot of the majority doctors.  So that's important to make that continue to happen.  And that can be nurtured.  But at some place, I'm gonna step back from that because I'm just not gonna do it anymore.  But while I'm still involved in it, I still, you know, I still give it my time.
Story_ID: 19123
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community at large?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes and concerns, that they will be able to throw off some of the, the shackles, overcome some of the--more of, of being shut out from the system, but sometimes I think it's gonna harder and harder, that there's an acceptability somehow to certain people being at the bottom.  And there's been a wave of new immigration in America, and you still see the same patterns developing, where you're gonna find blacks at the bottom, as these other groups move in the society.  And it's not gonna be all--that blacks don't have the effort, you what I mean.  It's gonna be a lot to do with preference of employees who they decide to hire, who they don't usually hire.  You're gonna be dealing with what I call an immigrant's psychology in the immigrant.  And this is, this is not negative.  I think to be an immigrant from any ethnic group, you have to be, have a certain thing about going in to make it.  I mean if, if I think, for instance, that, that as a, as a worker, I was gonna migrate to France.  I mean that would be scary.  And if I went, I would be doing everything I can to make it, whatever job I needed to get, whatever way I had to survive, I would do it.  And I think that a lot of immigrants come over with that kind of psychology.  So President Bush is always saying, well we need the immigrants because they want to do the jobs that Americans don't want.  And that's, that's not true.  That's not true.  That's a--what, what's happening is some of these employees are hiring the immigrants because they pay them lower, and won't hire the black worker because they have to pay them, pay them more.  They also hire them because they feel they'll be--go up against them less because they're immigrants and afraid.  So they feel they have more control, where they feel that native people assert themselves more, in terms of fairness and everything else and what they're doing to them.
Speaker 1: You know, in Martha's Vineyard, where I live, there were close to 2,500 full-time immigrants from Brazil, and in the summertime, it was another 1,500 Brazilians that come in the summer.  And when you knew--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right.
Speaker 1: That's what you're talking about, and they're working three, four or five jobs and when they make it, they're taking over the vineyard, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, so you, you're gonna see a situation, the unemployment rate for blacks is still very high.  I think it's around ten percent for the black community.  And then if you find men with blemishes or women with blemishes on their record like incarceration, you're gonna find even more unemployment and less, and less willingness to hire these, these people.  Then if you have a high school drop out rate of fifty percent and not--and us not recognizing the competition that's out there for, for jobs and work, and then with outsourcing, right?  I mean the outsourcing is amazing to me, as I discover what, what it means.  I know an orthopedic surgeon who operates, right, in another state.  After the operation, dictates his note that gets, goes to India.  It is transcribed in India, and then electronically sent back to him the next day.  He doesn't have to use anything in America.  So all those jobs that someone would have transcribing are, are--will go away because it's cheaper to do it that way.  The same to do with who makes the toys, you know, it goes to China.  Now, the, the whole fabric textile stuff is gonna go entirely to China because they just removed the tariffs.  So you're gonna find the kinds of jobs that blacks had in the past in industry, that is if that still exists, harder to get, and without a high school education, and Bob Moses is very concerned about this with the Algebra Project, not being technologically literate.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, over the twentieth century, we have dealt with our situation through organized collective efforts, NAACP, PUSH  hat you've been associated with, the Urban League, Southern Christian Leadership Conference, SNCC , which you've been involved with, do you think we're gonna need new forms of collective leadership, black collective leadership to deal with some of this?
Speaker 2: I, I think we do.  I think we do need collective forms of black leadership because with leadership and unity, there's power, right.  If you pull people together, you have, you'll have much more clout with the politicians, with the corporations, anyone that, that we, we are in deep trouble if we stay passive.  Passive, they'll just forget about you with all the things that are going on in the country, that the man's making.  So you have to be, I feel that the black community has to stay activists, and individual blacks have to stay activists and Latinos have to stay activists and Native Americans; otherwise, they pass you, pass you by.  And often they're not thinking about your problems, unless you assert what they are.
Speaker 1: Well, hopefully, this new group in Boston, it's about two years old now, you've probably heard of it, it's called the New Majority, started by Chuck Turner, you know, they've had symposiums at Humana House, and where Latinos, blacks, Native Americans have come, cause we are the new majority in our city as you know, and so that's a new group.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, and I think we have to form those kinds of alliances which can be formed because our interests are the same.  Sometimes they're different.  I, I'm talking about the different ethnic groups, but you, you do have splits, and you saw that in the, in the recent Bush where eighty or eighty-five percent of blacks were voting the other candidate and, but close to forty percent of the Latino population was voting for Bush.  So you--there's a split there, and so that's another question about--in terms of the future.  If you have new groups in, and then turn out to be captured by the more conservative people, sometimes, using undercurrents of racial messages or feeling that the people at the bottom are still black people, and not wanting to identify with them, so going the other way, you--we have serious political issues down the road.
Story_ID: 19124
Speaker 1: One last question, and we'll finish up.  Dr. Poussaint, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as someone who came from, say a lower socio-economic backgrounds, and through feeling that I could do something and having some support of my family, was able to do much more than I felt I ever could achieve.  I feel very proud of my contributions to the Civil Rights Movement, not just in the South but overall.  I feel pleased that I tried to stimulate a lot of thinking and discussion through things that I've written and wrote.  And, and my ability or willingness to do that in lay publications when I knew my colleagues--listen, when I would say I was gonna write an article for "Ebony", you know, that doesn't go in academia.  But I knew what I had to do, that if you're gonna talk to black people, you got to talk to them so that--"Negro Digest" published that "Roadblocks to Black Unity", you see.  So I feel pleased that I took kind of my own direction in the things that I felt were important, not just for the, the black community but oppressed people and dealing with discrimination and racism and provoking people and getting them, and when I wrote the op-ed piece for the "New York Times" saying extreme racists were mentally ill, man, I was hit with more stuff (laughter).  But I feel that stimulates and now they have it on the agenda to look at, the American Psychiatric Association, just what is racism, extreme racism, what makes people go out to kill?  They had totally shut us--.  So I feel good about those kinds of things, and then about my, my children and family.  So I feel that in some way I made some kind of mark or produced some type of change, helped produce change during this historical time, and participated in it with others, to, to, to do it.  So I feel, I feel satisfied, even though, you know, I'm not--I don't think I'm gonna go down in history as some, you know, great leader like some of these other people, I feel that I did, did my part and that it was important.
