Story_ID: 80903
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe, I'm conducting the interview for The HistoryMakers, this interview.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns and I'm sorry sure is Paul, Paul Bieschke, right?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE:  Bieschke.
Speaker 1: Bieschke.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE:  You got it.
Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke, and I'm sorry, Paul.  It's a habit, you know.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE:  You know they say we all look alike (laughter).
Speaker 1: And to start it off could you please state your name and spell it for us please and give us your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Edward Buzz Palmer.  Palmer is P-A-L-M-E-R.  Edward is just like it sounds.  Buzz is B-U-Z-Z.  Edward Buzz Palmer and my birthday is May the 13th, 1936.
Speaker 1: All right and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 14, 2002, and this is approximately a quarter to 12.
Speaker 1: All right.  (unclear)  And where are we?
Speaker 2: We're at HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a research associate at the Institute of Government and Public Affairs, and I'm also the president or co-president of the People's Program.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Both located in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80904
Speaker 1: Now, I've got like some "People" magazine type questions that we always ask and the first one is like what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably Indian food.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh it's Italian food.  I like Italian food better.  Green.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I travel all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite travel destination, I mean, favorite destination when you travel?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It might be Moscow [Russia].  It might be Prague [Czech Republic].  It might be Paris [France].  It might be London [England], Stockholm [Sweden].  Last year I spent my vacation in the mountains of Sweden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say autumn.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, politics, the mob is in the street.  I must see where they are going for I am their leader.
Story_ID: 80905
Speaker 1: All right let's talk about your background and your family background, your parents.  Who are your parent--can, can you state your parent's name and spell them?
Speaker 2: Yes, Edward Louis Palmer, same name as mine.  And my mother's maiden name was Ruth Mae Woodson, W-O-O-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and you know where was your--well let's start with your mother.  Where was your mother from?
Speaker 2: She always said Memphis, Tennessee, but we found out later that she was really from Mississippi.  Holy ox or Holy Springs, a suburb adjacent to Memphis.
Speaker 1: Yeah Holly Springs.
Speaker 2: Holly Springs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she pass along any stories, any family stories about her parents or ancestors?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.  One of the things that she talked about was her grandmother who was apparently an Indian, Native American, and she used to sit on the porch with a pipe, pipe, because she always remembered that she smoked a pipe and she would just rock back and forth on this pipe. She never told me anything more about her, and I guess the other thing is I believe her father might have been a minister, but non-denominational minister.
Speaker 1: Did she pass along any stories about slavery days or--
Speaker 2: No, she must have been born I'd say after slavery.  I would say around 1920 or something like that.  She talked a great deal about the apparently there were some major race riot because of a young man [Eugene Williams], the beaches in Chicago were segregated at that time and he made the mistake of swimming into the white area where he was dragged out of the water and killed.  That's all I remember about.
Speaker 1: Was she here during the race riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That, that's the riot was in 1919.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so she was born around 1920?
Speaker 2: I would guess; I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she came here [Chicago, Illinois] probably in early '30s [1930s], early, when she was a young girl.  I'm not even sure about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80906
Speaker 1: What about your father [Edward Palmer]?
Speaker 2: He was more interesting.  His mother was German.  They lived on the North Side, and I never heard of blacks living on the North Side.  This was around 1901, and he told me that his father was a boxer and came from Algiers [Algeria] and for years felt that was fascinating that my grandfather who had died came from Algiers until I went to New Orleans [Louisiana] for a wedding and I'm in the Holiday Inn and I look out the window and this huge sign is flashing Algiers, Algiers (laughter), and it dawned on me then that it was actually Algiers, Louisiana, and so that was just about him, but it was even more fascinating he also told me that his parents or her parents, the German woman, one was French and one was German and lived in Berlin [Germany] and I couldn't, I thought his facts were off because I couldn't understand how a French person would get to Germany, to Berlin, and then marry and my grandmother was a byproduct of that.  But, later I found out that there was the Huguenots, the French Huguenots around the Paris [France] area, and they were forced out by the Catholics, and they moved to Berlin, so when it became more logical that when they got together in Berlin and they had children and my grandmother, who I never met either, I never met any of these grandparents came to the United States.  And on my mother's side I always remember that there was a white end of the family and was from Birmingham, England, so it was quite a mixture obviously, African, which was basically untraceable.  But, there was Indian [Native American], German, French, and English.
Speaker 1: And so did your father have any stories about growing up, any stories about, about his upbringing in that, in that kind of, in that situation?
Speaker 2: Just basically growing up on the North Side being very prejudiced.  He was very proud of his penmanship, which I could never figure out why anybody would spend a lot of time on the penmanship.  At that time, there was this method called the Palmer method, no relationship, but he was very proud of his handwriting and he told me he did, he was not, he was not one that would teach me how to play baseball or tell me about the birds and the bees.  He just worked very hard.  He worked at the post office, which at that time was a very good job and left me basically to my own devices and which I later found out was very wise.  He didn't want to be a buddy of mine.  He wanted to be my father.  That's what he was my father, very, very good.  I had both my mother and when I hear tales of dysfunctional family I'm always a little put off by it because mine was so stable and normal.
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: I don't know, probably at a dance.  They never talked about that.  I remember my mother [Ruth Woodson Palmer] saying that my father [Edward Palmer] at one time drunk a lot, and he got sick from drinking at a party.  I guess it was bathtub jet, and from the 1930s to the time he died in the '80s [1980s] he never touched another drink of any type.  At Thanksgiving he would have some wine, but that was just about--I guess he was still thinking about when he got sick while drinking bathtub gin.
Story_ID: 80907
Speaker 1: So, you were fairly, you know, free to do what you wanted to do.  Did you have, you know, the means to do really what you wanted to do when you were young?
Speaker 2: Yes well, when I was young what I did was I became a paperboy.  We delivered the [Chicago] Sun-Times and the [Chicago] Tribune and I guess paid around $5, $6 a week delivering paper.  And that was more than sufficient for what our needs were.  At that time, I guess most people had one suit and two or three shirts and two or three pants.  We weren't in the age of consumerism yet and so we were quite, quite content.  We always thought we were middle or upper middle class.  And it was only later that we realized that we were really lower class (laughter), and during that period I remember that there was more of an elite type of blacks that were primarily around the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] area, that ours was a working class community.  We didn't know it was working class at the time, but just had people work and we were rather disdained for them because we sort of regarded them, probably it might have been envy, probably a degree of reality that we felt that they were snobs, and the men weren't very strong.  The girls were sort of disdainful, people that didn't, whose parents were either doctors or lawyer, but at that time it wasn't, the class divisions weren't very clear.  It was more accidental or inadvertently.
Story_ID: 80908
Speaker 1: So, can you tell us what part of the South Side, something about the neighborhood you grew up in.  What were some of the sights and sounds or smells associated with childhood?
Speaker 2: One of the fascinating things was the area that we lived in was Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], but was really Ogden Park and blacks lived in this area.  It was 63rd street to 59th street and from Racine to Loomis, around four blocks.  Later I called it an island because like an island if you went past the boundary you were in danger, and I can remember as a young man around 12, 13 years old we're in the library, the public library was called Ogden Park Library and it was about approximately 65th or 66th street in the middle of the park and what we would do is organize groups of young men and then we'd rush into the library to get books and then before the whites, which were primary racist at that time could organize to beat us up, we'd run back into the island where we lived, which was across the border on 63rd street where it was safe.  And when we returned the books we had to do the same thing.  We'd organize four or five of us to go there.  They had a swimming pool too at Odgen Park, of course we weren't allowed to use.  That was just basically it.
Story_ID: 80909
Speaker 1: Then in high school I always prided myself in being very physical.  And one of my neighbors was the Parkers.  For some odd reason, Parker House Sausage, he decided to live with working class people, Judge [H.] Parker.  I've never forgotten who Judge Parker was.  He founded Parker House, and his son was one of my best friends, and he taught me how to box, and I became very good at that.  And when I was in high school, I had a little scar on the side of my head which probably took place 50 years ago, and I had went to--I had just came out of a civic class where we were talking about we are all American.  And so when I walked out of the, to get lunch out of the high school, I went to Lindblom [Technical High School, now Robert Lindblom Math & Science Academy], and when I left the perimeters of high schools some white guys started calling me nigger.  They were approximately 100 yards.  I could have just ran away and I just came out of the civic class.  So, I went back to explain to them why we were all American, plus I also knew I was very good with my hands.  I always felt I could handle four or five guys almost simultaneously and what happened was when I was talking to the bulk of 'em, one of them came up behind and hit me with a steel pipe and that's--and then they were very solicitous.  My head was on the ground, so they picked up my head and tried to kick my eyes out, and I had a hole in the side of mouth that I could stick my tongue through at the time.  Luckily I had two or three friends, they heard the uproar out there and Willie Parker and Tony Samuels came out and they were even more physical than I was.  They immediately knocked one guy out.  Tony's favorite weapon was just picking somebody up and throwing them.  He was only around 5, 5'7", 5'8", but incredibly muscular, and so he threw him and the guy bounced, I guess, and the only thing I remember is one of them picking me up by the cup of my jacket, leather jacket and said, telling me are you okay, we got a little more work to do and so they beat off around 8, 10 white racists, but these guys, my friends, were very, very good.  Later we found out that they had broken one guy's jaw.  So, that evening when I went home and again this is racism that existed in Chicago at the time there were two high schools, one was Englewood High School, which was across Racine, and the other one was Lindblom, which was a very good high school and in the white area.  And every year the Board of Education would try to move the borders out of the black area, this three block wide area, and make it Loomis would eliminate all blacks.  And I remember this to this day when I went to the hospital they just looked at me and said oh you'll be okay, just go on home.  But, my mother was not satisfied and took me to another hospital where they put in, I believe it was something like 17 or 18 stitches on the side of my head and three or four on the side of my lower lip.  So, that taught me a great deal, you know.  No matter how good you are, always look behind you (laughter).
Story_ID: 80910
Speaker 1: And that's a fascinating time in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  I had--my political education began--the YMCA in Chicago had put together these little satellite YMCAs, and one was called Ogden Hill.  This guy, Milton Carter, got the bright idea (he was the secretary then) to put together a youth government and this would bring kids down to Springfield [Illinois] to act as legislatures.  But, before we went we had to have mock types of conferences to learn how to be, be a legislature and this we did.  And I decided to run this--one friend of my, Ivory Hardy, for lieutenant governor and it worked--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay now you were talking about a student senate.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called Youth and Good Government, yeah, and so I ran this guy for lieutenant governor, Ivory Hardy, and he became governor.  And what I very quickly learned followed me all my life is that even small groups if they're well organized they can change everything including the world.  I'm always interested in changing small things like the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of student were you in school?
Speaker 2: In school, I was always bright, but I really felt even at Lindblom High School, Lindblom Technical High School that they weren't as smart as me, so I prided myself on never having to open a book.  I never opened any type of book for the four years I was at Lindblom.  I'd read other types of books, but not their books because they were dumb.
Speaker 1: And so this isn't just figurative, you're actually telling us that you never really, okay.
Speaker 2: But I read constantly and at eighteen I joined the [United States] Air Force.  Funny, this ties in everything that I say I try and tie it in.
Story_ID: 80911
Speaker 1: What happened was that I joined the Air Force and so they gave me this test.  And so when the test came back, they, the counselor, apparently this is 1955, a white guy and very decent, he said man you blew the lid off these test scores and so I had always felt that the only thing that I would be capable of doing would perhaps be an air policeman.  He said with these scores, shit you can, you could get into intelligence.  I said oh now they'll never take me in intelligence.  He said well let me put it down.  I'm thinking he's crazy as hell. I said well first choice go ahead intelligence, second choice air traffic controller, which I thought was just reaching for the star.  I knew that I wasn't going to get into intelligence.  And the third choice was air policeman, which I had thought I was going to get into.  Then, the score--then they came back and they said they've accepted you into intelligence and now this is surreal intelligence.  This isn't the dumb peep in windows intelligence.  We were supposed to be able to predict wars.  Give the country 72 hours' notice on impending wars.  The Air Force was a branch of the National Security Agency [NSA] and if I just doodled on a piece of paper we had what we called 5-ply, and 5-ply was two copies of this, as soon as we were doing intelligence we were monitoring what I did later is I monitored the Chinese communist air-defense system in China.  And then when I went to Germany, I monitored the Polish and the Russian air-defense system.  And it was fascinating.  And we were in this building where I was learning this trade for 13 weeks.  We were in a building that was four feet, had four stories.  I believe it had seven stories underground.  There were no windows, just completely blank, and in this room, in the class there were also Russian linguist, they were training future linguists that would go--the Russian linguist would go to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York], and the Polish would go to Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana].  The Vietnamese would go to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] and Cornell [Ithaca, New York], and the Chinese would go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  So, we're all in this mix and just incredible, just tremendously bright, bright people, the brightest group that I've ever been affiliated with.  One of my friends was Richard Hudland (ph.) and he had spent three years at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] , and his money ran out.  He got tired of being the poor boy on the block, so he joined the Air Force.  So, he was studying Vietnamese and Indonesian and when we got out I was an intelligence analyst and there was always friction.  There was three branches of intelligence in the Air Force, the real intelligence.  You know, there were some door shakers, you know, similar to the FBI, which we regarded as clowns.  There was 201s which were code breakers, crypt, cryptanalysts.  Then there was intelligence analyst, which is what I was, and then there was finally the linguists, and there was always friction between the intelligence analyst and the linguist 'cause we always called them queer speakers because a lot of them, not a lot, maybe four or five percent of them might be gay and at that time this is 1955, so and whenever I, I was the only black in, in the Far East, I went to the Philippines.  One other intelligence analyst, but he was in Japan and see what we did was we rang the Chinese communist with these listening posts, and when I arrived in the Philippines the first thing I went to my unit and the guy asked me what was I, what was I reporting in as and before I could say anything said you must be the new clerk.  I said no I'm not the clerk.  And he said well are you a radio operator?  I said no I'm not a radio operator.  I was just gonna run it all the way on out, and so he said finally what are you gonna do here?  I said I'm the intelligence analyst, and I had a crypto clearance.
Story_ID: 80912
Speaker 1: Okay I just want to back track a little bit.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about, go back to your childhood with your developmental base and ask you what, what kind of books did you read when you were young and, and what were your aspirations when you were young?  Did you have, or did your family have aspirations for you, like we want you to be this or that?
Speaker 2: No, no, no aspirations at all.  I guess they just hoped that I would get some type of a job and The Count of Monte Cristo [Alexander Dumas], the Cyrano De Bergerac [Edmond Rostand], and then I begin, read a lot of adventure stories about U-boats, these--I believe they were called Q-boats and they were fighting the Germans then and they were camouflage boats, and they were travelling all over the world and so, and, and as I indicated my family was not middle or upper class, it was lower class, so the question of college never came up and I never even thought in the remotest possibility of going to college.
Story_ID: 80913
Speaker 1: Now what was the--what level of education did, did your parents achieve?
Speaker 2: My father [Edward Palmer], who I thought was very educated, he graduated from high school, and my mother [Ruth Woodson Palmer] I don't believe she--maybe first year of high school.  And the family we just thought it was tremendous that he had a high school education, so he we had no aspirations of going to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or any of the black colleges, that we could have probably gotten in to.  I would probably have done very poorly though.  I would have felt that I knew more than that did.  In high school, I was always embarrassing teachers.  I usually knew, not usually, almost 95 percent knew more than they knew.
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in high school that inspired you at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, one Mrs. Manekis and I believe she taught civics.
Speaker 1: Can you spell, can you spell it?
Speaker 2: M-A-N-E-K-I-S.  She was Polish, and her husband taught at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], so she was somewhat of an intellectual.  She, she would always pull me over to the side, and she said I know you're loafing, you can do much better if you wanted to.  I think she did push me a little.  She did push me a little to, maybe that was the time that I read one of the books, but I knew same way I am today I know basically more than most academics will ever know in their lives.
Speaker 1: Now when you--
Speaker 2: Plus I'm arrogant (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 80914
Speaker 1: I was wondering like if you were--did you participate in any or, or get a chance to view the, the cultural or intellectual life of the city on the South Side in those days if there was any--
Speaker 2: We weren't allowed.
Speaker 1: They, they were, yeah.
Speaker 2: See if you grew up--
Speaker 1: I know you had a few people like--(unclear)--in the city and people--
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--Ishmael I met later.
Speaker 1: Washington Park forum crowd.
Speaker 2: No, nothing at all. We were in an island and on this island you talked to other people on the island, but when you ventured out it was a major adventure.  We did go to the 63rd street beach, but that was just about the sum total of it.  It turned out--oh, there was one interesting thing my aunt, aunt Sue, Sue Woodson, she was a communist and she lived over around 37th and Woodlawn--Oakenwald, I believe it was.  It's different from than it is now and I was a staunch anticommunist and we'd argue about communism.  If she's somewhere rolling around Heaven now, she's probably immensely proud that she laid some seeds in my head, even though I resisted them all the way through my young life.  But, I can remember arguing with her, debates.  Fascinating during that period another friend of mine was a Jehovah's Witness and the Jehovah's Witnesses are, they are very strong on bible studies, and a friend's father and I would get into it about Jehovah, Jehovah's Witnesses almost constantly.
Speaker 1: Are you religious?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  My mother [Ruth Woodson Palmer] when I was growing up she'd insist on me going to St. John A.M.E., and I believe I was baptized in A.M.E..  But, I was always whenever I'd go to Sunday school I was somewhat of an embarrassment because I'd always want to know where did God come from, you know, and they regarded me as somewhat of a heret, heretic or, yeah heretic, and I was always questioning them about the religion and so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you a regular at church or--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: When my mother would force me to go (laughter) and then I would sit in the pew, pews and make cracks about, you know, religion all the way through and so I believe eventually my mother just said well this is a lost cause.
Speaker 1: Was your father [Edward Palmer] religious?
Speaker 2: No.  And she was in a way, she didn't go to church, but she wanted us to go to church.  Gotta believe she thought probably intuitively that it imparted values and I disagree, but that's, that's the way the cookie crumbles.
Speaker 1: Were your parents strong on values?
Speaker 2: No, no.  They expected me to tell the truth, and I believe my father told me once, I think he did, he told me I could do anything I wanted as long as it agreed with him, and I never, I only got spunk, and spanked once in my life and that was a terror.  My mother at one time she told me you've been so bad, go outside and bring me a switch.  So, I went outside and brought her this huge limb (laughter), and she just bust out laughing and said go on boy (laughter), stop acting silly.  That was, that was the sum of it, but I don't believe they even knew what corporal punishment was.  It's just that they didn't practice it.  My mother told me if he said something he expected it to be done, and if it wasn't done you could see that he'd get angry, and you didn't want to get him angry.  You knew he wasn't gonna hit you, but he was going to get inside of you mind somehow and you'd be very sorry that you made him angry.  He was a master psychologist without knowing it.
Story_ID: 80915
Speaker 1: Now, did you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How many and can you name 'em and give their birth order?
Speaker 2: Well my oldest, my oldest sister was Ruth, Ruth, then came I, and then my sister, Caroline, and then my brother, Otto.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't ask me what years they were.  My sister is 2-1/2 years older than me, and my sister Caroline is probably five or six years younger, and my brother is seven or eight years younger.
Speaker 1: This is a very stable family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you, did your parents encourage you to read or was this just something that you--
Speaker 2: Something that I did.  I believe my father used to read us.  I vaguely remember him reading, but not like I read.  I read constantly and it got so bad in my house they'd insist that I turn out the light at 10:00, upon which I bought a candle.  I stole some candles from downstairs from the kitchen, and then I'd put the sheet up over the bed, then I'd read by candle.  I just read all the time.
Speaker 1: Well, what else did you like to do when you were coming up?  Read, debate, and--
Speaker 2: Well, I liked to box.
Speaker 1: Box.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I started to box, that was funny.  A guy by the name of Tomcat.  I was weak and this was before I start boxing, and what had happened was I was coming home through the alley and this guy's name was Booker, Booker, I can't remember his last name now, but I was so timid that he told me to get behind the tree and then he was gonna throw, stick my head out every now and he was gonna throw rocks at it.  And I did that for awhile and then he faked.  I didn't hear anything fall, so I looked out and that's when he threw the rock and hit me in the head.  I guess I was around 8 or 9, and so from my reading I knew that I had to get strong.  My whole face was just filled with blood, and so I went over the playground and this guy Tomcat, you know just all the time boxing and I said could you teach me how to box.  And this was before I wasn't bright on this and I should have asked Willie, Willie Parker, but Tomcat he told me to put up my guard, which I did, and he said okay now put it down, upon which he hit me in the pit of my belly (laughter) and he said now that will teach you never let your guard down, and I never did (laughter).  And then Willie began teaching--
Speaker 1: Teaching the hard way.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 80916
Speaker 1: And you know it worked superbly and later in life whenever I'd go into a meeting I always felt that I could win intellectually, but if that failed I will kick your ass, and I at 66 I still have that inclination, and I have to control it because at 66 your reflexes aren't what they were when you were 20 or 30 years old.  There, there was this guy he's very famous in the city, very rich, and we were at a meeting at the University of Illinois when I was about 55, and he was trying to do a roundabout for O'Neal, and I told him say one more word and I'm gonna kick your ass right in front of Earl (he was Earl's boy) and he sta--he started to say something and Earl--you know who Earl O'Neal is?
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Earl said no, no, no, no, please don't say anything else (laughter).  He said listen Buzz from now on if there is any problem you and I get together (laughter)--I liked Earl (laughter).  He understood (laughter).  We came from different sides of the track, but we understood each other.
Speaker 2: So, was it, was it tough growing up being a reader and you're not religious, you know, religious community--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was religious.  I don't know anybody who was a regular, you know.  What I did was once I started boxing and reading immediately I always, I'mma organizer, a born organizer.  So, what I did was I started this club called the Aristocrat, and these were guys that also liked to read, but we could also fight and what we, what we derived a great deal of enjoyment out of was telling other people, yeah we read and we aren't sissies and if you believe we, we're a sissy, we'll kick your ass, but we read.
Speaker 2: Militant intellectuals.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In my neighborhood you had to be (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, people who read get stigmatized like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We never got stigmatized (laughter) 'cause we really would kick their ass (laughter).
Story_ID: 80917
Speaker 1: Okay. now, you're in [U.S.] Army intelligence and how did you get--
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: Air Force, I'm sorry, Air, Air, Air Force, and by, by, by this time was it actually Air Force or was it the Army Air Corp?
Speaker 2: No, it was Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you manage to become the only black person in this--?
Speaker 2: Well, in every theater what we call theaters there were only four or five analysts in every theater, so in the Far East the listening posts for the Air Force, for NSA [National Security Agency], were Kadena and Okinawa, Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, and ones in Japan.  I don't believe we had any--no we did have a base in Taiwan and--(unclear)ring--.  So in each one of these cases I would say only--there weren't, you know there weren't a lot of intelligence analysts running around.  Cryptoclearance, people that had cryptoclearance, which is one degree above top secret.  There aren't many--to this day there aren't very many people.
Speaker 1: So you think it was your capacity to, to do this that really got, got you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went through intelligence analyst school.  The washout rate is phenomenal.  If you get through that, you know like I said one of the guys remained a friend of mine all these years.  He spent three years at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], so this was a cream de cream.  I did have to study then (laughter).  I really had to study, but in all the studying you couldn't take your books home.  Everything was done in this four or five story building.  It was seven feet, seven floors underground--(unclear)--.  That was fascinating.  And see what, what was important here was if you can knock out a country's air defense system it's like a huge cyclops that has one eye, no matter how big and how strong they are if you can knock out their air defense system they're dead.  They're dead meat.  That's what I was supposed to be able to do, and I could.  But, that's a long, 50 years ago (laughter).  If I tried to do it now, it'd take me at least a week to get up to speed.  That's a joke (laughter).
Story_ID: 80918
Speaker 1: So, were there any, any outstanding--tell, tell us a story about something that took place when you were in intelligence that really stood out or what's your most, most memorable moment of this experience?
Speaker 2: Well, finding out that we were supposed to commit suicide if we were overrun (laughter).  That was my most memorable, some guy, some major telling me that I was gonna--they had, they had a little box which they kept, I guess it was cyanide, it said poison.  And before women and children could be evacuated, we were to be evacuated.  And they almost kept [U.S.] Air Force, aircraft available to get us out of there, because if we were captured we knew so much and so, some of the guys, black guys they were--my roommate was a Chinese linguist and very dark-skinned brother went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and you know for linguist and he kept a .38 at home in the barracks and if somebody came and said well we're being overrun and you gotta kill yourself we were gonna have a big shoot out.  We weren't gonna commit, you know, that's fascinating.  It sounds weird, but remember how Francis [Gary] Powers, the U-2 pilot what he was doing he was flying missions for NSA [National Security Administration], which is our parent organization.
Speaker 1: Now that, that was 19--, just for those who watch this in the future this is like what, what year [1960]?
Speaker 2: I say it early 19--, it was when [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower, I believe was in.
Speaker 1: Between, I think it was between--
Speaker 2: '58 [1958] or '60 [1960] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was just before [President John F.] Kennedy was elected president.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the fall.  I think the campaign was going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What he was supposed to do is when the plane went down, remember he had the poison needle that he was supposed to stick himself with, and he said shit (laughter), and that was a major embarrassment because [Nikita] Khrushchev accused Eisenhower of knowing about these missions.  He said we don't do them.  He said oh you don't, well, let us introduce you to Francis Powers one of your pilots that we captured.  Oh, here's his plane too, the U-2.  So, see what we were doing we were constantly probing the former Soviet Union and the Chinese government to see how fast they respond, what aircraft, how fast they could put a aircraft up in the air, you know, those type of questions.  That was my most memorable-
Story_ID: 80919
Speaker 1: And then I believe I had something, I believe I set off an alarm in Washington [D.C.].  I can't remember how I did this, but I think it was something about missile cries, no the missile crisis came after I was gone.  But, I did find out that they were releasing balloons in Europe and then using the jet stream to take them across China while they were airborne, they'd be taking all kinds of picture.  This was the age of military intelligence, really heavy, heavy military intelligence.  And I remember that 747s used to fly, not 747s, 707 I guess, and the Russian anti-aircraft could only get to around 35,000, so with these aircraft working for us and they would fly to 35,000 and then use jet-assisted take off to get to around 45,000, 55,000 feet and Russians couldn't touch 'em.  Penetration mission where we were actually flying.  U-2 wasn't the only one that was flying over the Soviet Union or China.  At that time, I was rather nationalistic and the ungodly, even though I was ungodly, ungodly regimes of the Soviet Union or China.  Now I look at that period of time and then say my God what an ass I was at that time, but that's how you were trained.  It always fascinated me too on the military because up until the time I came in before there was a draft, you know you get a letter in the mail and it's from somebody that you don't know and they say listen we want you to kiss your mama and your girlfriend goodbye and come down here because we, we're gonna give you a gun to fight somebody that you don't even know.  And it would be different if this was just one side, but the Russians were doing this, the Germans, the Japanese, they all, the whole world, you know, just to get some type of letter that say come on down and you gonna go and kill somebody and they gonna try and kill you and you go without any thought on it at all.  Why am I going here?  Up until the time of Muhammad Ali when he, when he began contesting the war, the Vietnamese War he said the Viet Cong never called me nigger.  Patriots, patriotism and nationalisms are very pathological, just stupid.  Most of the people that I deal with and I deal at the highest levels worldwide they don't think.  It's more a rote type of response, you know.  If you hit me on the knee, my leg would jump, but some of the, some of the more complex questions or critical questions facing the world are so very simple questions, but they are not smart enough to deal with them.  Now, I've bewildered you (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I had a question--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Say what is this guy talking about (laughter)?
Story_ID: 80920
Speaker 1: One of the questions that I had was the kind of question that I wanna ask in this kind of interview or, or I guess maybe, but how do you think or, I guess my question is then people, all people are affiliation oriented--(unclear)-- and they form into groups.  You, yourself, formed a group--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --based around your own interest in high school, and you say you're a natural organizer are not--
Speaker 2: Probably the best.
Speaker 1: Okay, but are not like nationalist expressions and the expressions of countries.  I mean, if they, well, what's the difference between, you know, organizer group and dealing with a group that already exists around a national identity?  I mean, are you getting what I'm trying to get to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, vaguely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm still trying to follow your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me give you another example.  I have a nephew, very smart guy, came out of Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] (at least he thinks he's a very smart guy) and we're holding a meeting on I'm organizing something on African disinvestment [divestment].  So, he comes to the meeting with his smart ass little self, and he says well listen this is good what you're doing, but what about slavery in Sudan.  What about women mut--mutilation or something like that, and so I interrupt him before he could get too far, he's getting his wind up.  I said first let me introduce my nephew, he's a very smart guy (laughter), but, but I just wanted to tell Aaron, Aaron in this meeting what we're talking about is this disinvestment.  Now, if you wanna start something on slavery in the Sudan or female mutilation I think it's excellent.  You should go down the street immediately and open up you a shop to deal with it, but here we're dealing with this investment.  I have a tendency to be relatively hard.  I don't suffer fools or even very smart nephews easily.  There is nothing wrong with people, for example, you have a dichotomy between, for example, nationalists or socialism or what have you, that's good.  Only thing I request and require is that when I put up a flag and this is what we're going to fight for that's what it mean.  Now, if you ain't happy with that I ain't pissed off at all.  Go down the street and do whatever you want, but in my shop this is what we're doing.  Now, I'm clear and I'm--I don't wanna use the term A, A-hole hard, but that's what I mean.  Everybody has an opinion, nothing wrong with that, as long as it's in the parameters of what you call the meeting, what you put the flag in the ground for.  Now, I'm sure that people will come in and from doing a transatlantic conference on race, well why don't you have this or why don't you have that.  Well because I didn't want to (laughter).  Now, if you want to do that, you go and form something similar or something completely different, but don't think that I haven't thought of the implications of this.  There is a reason why I'm doing this.
Story_ID: 80921
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, interviewer for The HistoryMakers for this particular interview and our videographer is Scott Stearns.  This is continuation of our earlier interview.  That's why you look a little different, maybe a little later.  But, we were discussing your career as a young man in the NSA [National Security Agency] and --
Speaker 2: Yeah, [U.S.] Air Force, Air Force Security Service that reports to NSA.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you described how that worked and you talked, you talked about Francis [Gary] Powers being shot down and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was supposed to commit suicide and he didn't.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that broke--poor [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower sent to this meeting and [Nikita] Khrushchev who sitting there and Eisenhower basically contended they weren't doing over flights violating Soviet airspace on espionage flight and Khrushchev let Eisenhower go through the whole rigmarole and he said oh by the way we have one of your planes and I believe Eisenhower tried to deny it, but we also have the pilot and it was Francis [Gary] Powers.  So--
Speaker 1: He made his point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so this was 1959 [sic, 1960], I guess or?
Speaker 2: Yeah I believe so, around '59 [1959].  I can't--I'm not very good on time.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, all right and how long did you stay in the Air Force?
Speaker 1: Five and a half years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I went in when I was 19, and I came out when I was 24 and 18, 18 and a half when I went in.
Speaker 2: Now, you say, you say, you said on the previous interview, I mean tape, that you were extremely, you were gung-ho about the con--you were, you were--
Speaker 1: No I wasn't conservative.
Speaker 2: You weren't conservative, but you were like extremely nationalistic--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you knew that you were protecting America--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and in the Cold War--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --atmosphere that existed.
Speaker 1: I met a woman that I really cared for and she told me that I was much too smart to be as dumb as I was, and she introduced me to Frantz Fanon and I began reading and it was the height of the Civil Rights [Movement].  The Civil Rights struggle was just beginning and so I--
Speaker 2: Were you still in the Air Force at this time?
Speaker 1: No, I was out, I was out.  We were pretty isolated.  I spent a year and a half in the Philippines and then I spent three years in Germany and that's why I speak German to this day.  And like I said introduced me to international affairs willy-nilly.  So, after I came out of the military because of my job description I couldn't tell people what I did, so I couldn't--they had me down as clerk typist.  I barely knew how to type.  I knew intelligence fairly well and in every theater I was usually the only African American that was an intelligence analyst and the way this operates is by reports.  They'd go to NSA and at Fort Meade, Maryland, and GCHQ, general communications headquarters at Chelt, Cheltenham, England, or UK [United Kingdom].  So, I had a cryptoclearance, which was one degree above top secret and I was never supposed to talk about what I did, but that's been so long ago.  That's 40, 50 years ago and I think I can talk about with some degree of security.  If somebody comes in and puts handcuffs on me, well then I know that I've talked too much.  But, then when I came out of the military I couldn't get a job, so I worked as a bus driver, at the post office.  The post office was a fascinating era, because what you had down there you had African Americans that couldn't work in their profic, their profession.  You'd have lawyers, you'd even have sometimes doctors down there in order to make means eating throwing mail at the post office.  Then from there I went into the police department.
Story_ID: 80922
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me, I have a question.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The [U.S.] Air Force, the U.S.A. government, made no per, per provision for your employment after, no--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --no, they had no place to channel you after, after your service?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not, absolutely not.  I thought I told you there in intelligence there are primarily three, three major fields of intelligence.  One is cryptoanalyst, breaking of codes.  The second one is intelligence analyst is what I am, was.  And the third one is linguist because he needed to know languages.  For example, if you were in the Far East--my roommate was an African American that went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] for Chinese.  Another friend of mine went to the Foreign Service Institute for Indonesia and Vietnamese, and these were tremendously cream of the cream and when we got out, you know, that was it.  One of the people that is a Chinese linguist I believe he is in New Jersey selling fire extinguishers, and he would, he would have one of the major determinate whether there was a war, whether the United States went on a war footing or not, and he's selling fire extinguishers, but then you know the world is strange.  I was talking to another friend of mine.  He said that Sammy Davis's wife, Altovise, is a waitress now in Virginia.  So, the society has a way of throwing people in garbage bins, you know, once they're finished with you, they're finished with you, but they always want you never to tell what you did.  What it basically was, was real intelligence is monitoring the communication in the Far East, the Chinese communist, and the, and Germany, Polish, and Soviet communication network.  You were supposed to be able to predict war and give the United States seventy-two hours advanced notice that there was a war brewing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80923
Speaker 1: But, you were, you were just at the verge of joining the police department, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So, when I joined the police department--
Speaker 1: Was it just because you needed money or did--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just because I needed money primarily and what happened to me, what really changed I began reading.  What really changed my life was there were some famous picture in the old "LIFE" magazine of an 11 or 12-year-old boy that had been shot during the Newark Riots for stealing a six pack of beer, and I said that's it.  So, I began organizing black policeman who were really conservative, bluntly really conservative, and I had, I pulled the people together.  The one that gets the acknowledgement for starting the Afro-American Patrolmen's League who, who will remain un, name will not be mentioned, but he was telling everybody else that I was gonna get everybody killed 'cause I believe they had a nickname for me: Lee Harvey Oswald.  Another name they had was Sandpiper.  There was a movie out called "Sandpiper", I believe, about this guy who liked women and at that time I liked women a great, great deal, you know, and still do, but I'm older now (laughter), but that, and those were the two nicknames for me, Sandpiper and Lee Harvey Oswald.  So, after that I had a meeting in my house and then we made a determination that we were--I came up with the expression that we weren't, we were no longer going to be pawns in a brutal chess game against the black community, and in fact what we were going to do we were going to serve and protect African Americans.
Speaker 1: Now, how were those early meetings, how many people attended those?  Did you have a pretty good attendance?
Speaker 2: I'd say no.  I'd say there were around 7 or 8 people at mid best, and at the height of Afro-American Patrolmen's League I'd say there were only about 30 or 40, but I also knew propaganda.
Speaker 1: Had you any organizing training prior to this?
Speaker 2: I'd been in intelligence.  I knew how to organize.  This was simple.  Stokely, Stokely Carmichael after I started this he said you know Buzz you ought to come up to Chicago [Illinois] and I'll teach you how to organize.  Well, that was sort of like somebody telling [Vincent] Van Gogh how to paint or Rina, [Pierre-Auguste] Renoir, I'm going to teach you how to paint.  You know I appreciated it, but I, I really--if there is one thing that I can do even to the day I die I'm an organizer, and I can organize anything in this world.  And I always feel that I'm one of the last revolutionaries.  I never gave up.  I just keep on, the little red train that kept on chugging; I never give up.  Conditions have not changed for African Americans and somebody's gotta go out there and fight for us.  And what we have now is we have a generation that is growing up ahistorical and apolitical and as well as being opportunistic and, but I'm philosophizing and you wanna know what happened, so at any rate I announced the formation of the Afro-American Patrolmen's League, and I've seen some old footage of that and my voice was quivering because I was scared.  Bluntly, I was scared.  I was going up against the most powerful mayor in the United States, [Mayor] Richard [J.] Daley, and I was taking him on, and I took him on.  Bob Lucas who was the head of CORE and then he was head of Kenwood-Oakland said black people in Chicago were so scared of Daley that they would never say anything critical of him even when they were in their bedrooms with their wives.  And if they did, they pulled the blankets over their head because they were so worried about retribution from Daley.  And one of the fascinating things about the Afro-American Patrolmen's League was that we carried guns.  We were not Black Panthers.  We were authorized to carry guns, and we were putting that at the disposal of the African American community.
Story_ID: 80924
Speaker 1: Now, now this is something that I guess the city [Chicago, Illinois] will look at and say this, this was never supposed to happen--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --to have people like you with guns.
Speaker 2: The most Uncle Tom segment in the general society rebelling and saying they were no longer going to be lackeys to the system, system that oppresses black people, and I thought it was historical.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people like you shouldn't exist by the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --measure of--
Speaker 2: See the, the funny thing Fred Hampton who started the Black Panthers then I was over at the old Crane [Junior] College, which I later changed to Malcolm X [College, Chicago, Illinois], and Fred Hampton was going all over calling us dashiki pigs, you know, in other words people that have the appearance of being progressive, but are still pigs (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, he didn't trust the--
Speaker 2: No, but in a memorable meeting with Fred Hampton we met at Crane Junior College.  He wanted to meet me, and they [the FBI] knew who to kill.  Fred Hampton, I believe he was only 18, 19 when he got killed.  He was very brilliant, brilliant, and he was beginning to study things that people don't normally study.  We met from around 10:00 until around 3:00 in the morning, and at the end of it he told me you know they're going to kill you.  He said you're too dangerous.  I told Fred they'll never kill me; I'm much too smooth and two weeks later they killed him in the famous--first they drugged him and then they shot into the building and yeah, but now see the system has the ability to co-op and during this period people that started out militant the system said what piece do you want and we're prepared to give it to you as long as it's not the whole piece.  We control the whole piece.  So, people like Fred Hampton, people had forgotten basically that Bobby Rush [HM] was, I believe he was a minister of information, and but they knew who to kill.  And during this period, there was a tremendous avalanche both nationally and internationally of assassinations or killing.  Now, everyone knows about, of course, Fred Hampton, Malcolm X, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], but then we began probing a little deeper you got the Kennedys, both of the Kennedys [President John F. Kennedy and Robert Kennedy], who talked about changing the system.  You had Jimmy Hoffa who just disappeared (we're probably driving over him on the highway) and then you had throughout the country you just had massive types of selected targeted killing going on almost in every area.  Whitney Young had began to become more militant.  He went swimming off, off a beach in Lagos [Nigeria] and drowned and George Wiley who's the head--people have forgotten who he was.  He was head of the Welfare Rights Organization.  He was on a boat, on his boat and fell off of it and drowned.  It's doubtful I would have to look at actuarial tables to see what the potential of that is.  Around the world you had the same phenomenon, Patrice Lumumba who we talked about earlier.  They overthrew him in--(unclear)--.  They--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it just goes on and on and on. It was really an orgy of assassinations both nationally and internationally that we're still suffering from because what they did was they killed off the cream, people that had the potential of leading.
Story_ID: 80925
Speaker 1: But, so one of the functions that I thought the Afro-American Patrolmen's League had to do was to begin protecting the leadership at the risk of our own lives.  And a famous incident Jesse Jackson, Sr. [HM], Reverend Jackson, he was going to testify for the labor community, and I asked him did he need any protection and he said no I don't think so.  I talked to the attorney general, who was Tom Todd [Thomas N. Todd, HM], who was very good, and they'll have protection.  Why don't we come by to see if you're okay.  So, we came by there and it was Tom Todd and one of their attorneys.  That was it.  There was about I'd say 3 or 4000 raging white trade unions in front of us.
Speaker 2: So, so it looked like Tom Todd could handle--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Tom could, Tom was good.  I've always liked him.  So, what we did was we formed a corridor around Jesse, and these white trade unions they didn't know what the hell to do about some black cops with Jesse in the middle pushing into a trade union.  So, the Daley administration didn't know what to do, you know, this was basic contention was a number of us, I wasn't in uniform, but a number of them were in uniform and as a result of that the mayor was saying we had acting illegally, and at that time there was only one state, one congressman, and that was Ralph Metcalfe who I didn't particularly like.  I regarded him as more or less of a lackey, and who turned out that when you do bold things it emboldens other people to do bold things.  So, we met over at Ralph Metcalfe's house to try to get these policemen that had protected Jesse back on the police department.
Speaker 2: They were suspended?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and Ralph Metcalfe he called [Mayor Richard J.] Daley, and I believe I was in his presence with Reverend Jackson and it was finally resolved.  Later Ralph Metcalfe's friend, Herb Bowden (ph) who was a dentist, he was leaving a meeting that I had arranged and he got pretty mauled up by the police, and Metcalfe--this was the straw that broke the back.  He called up Daley who he thought he had a very strong relationship with and just asked him to come out and meet with and apologize to the black community, and Daley refused and then after that they went after Ralph Metcalfe's congressional seat, which he was able to defend. I forgot the guy's name, one of the silent six.
Story_ID: 80926
Speaker 1: You know it's fascinating during this, during this era we complaining about the silent six, now we have around twenty-three alderman and they're even more silent, so, but what I think again this is a policy of cooptation.  You want more money, you want more jobs, but let us make the main decision.  The only time that that changed was when Harold became mayor.  Harold Washington became mayor.  During that time--well, well and during this time when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to Chicago [Illinois] I was in plainclothes.  I was a policeman in plainclothes and so unwittingly I mapped out all the marches for King, all of them.  When he went into Gage Park [Chicago, Illinois], when he went in.  There was a famous incident that took place.  I was in an unmarked car and a mob of whites came up to me and they said they were gonna kick my ass, and I said that was fine.  I said, but there's one problem.  They said what, what's the problem.  I said I have this friend with me, and I pulled out a .357 magnum and I said this friend of mine doesn't allow me to take any ass kicking, and I forget there was an attorney, I can't remember Harold's, Sam Patches [Samuel A. Patch], Sam Patches, but I can't remember it was his attorney's friend.  He ran for office a couple of times and didn't make it.  I've always liked him, but he always remembers that because he thought I saved his life, and I told them, you know, when I pulled out the .357 I told them, you know--Orlando Wilson, I believe, had been superintendent and I said you know Orlando Wilson didn't allow us to get our ass kicked, so if you wanna come on be my guest.  I don't know whether if they had of came on, I don't know what the results would, but I definitely know I was not a, a nonviolent person.  I believed in violence.
Speaker 2: And you were in a position where the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --city required you to use violence--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in case--
Speaker 1: And then after that--
Speaker 2: --and as part of your job.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then after that I formed the Afro-American Patrolmen's League.  That's the two things that I'm thinking about.  One was a picture [in "LIFE" Magazine"] of this little boy pooled with boy, 11 or 12 years old and so the political dialogue that was going on in the city was fascinating.  King he had brought in people like James Bevel.  At that time, Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson [HM] was in absolutely awe of James Bevel [HM] and Andrew Young [HM].
Speaker 2: James Bevel led the students in Birmingham [Alabama], right--(unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was a fascinating character, really brilliant.  Unfortunately, I thought he was a little off too.  He was married to Diane Nash who was a great leader in the Civil Rights struggle and that set the tone and it continued on.  The political activism of African American carried on to when [Edward] Hanrahan killed Fred Hampton.  Lu Palmer [Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, HM] came up we shall see and I believe that was code, but we defeated Hanrahan because he had killed Fred Hampton, and you don't ever hear, you never hear anything about Fred Hampton, I mean Hanrahan.  A fascinating time.  There was tremendous political activity that is incredibly and solely lacking now.
Story_ID: 80927
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you didn't--you were the founder of the African American patrolmen's league [Afro-American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League], but you didn't remain in it very long.
Speaker 2: No, for two years.  There was a coup d'etat and because some of them members felt that I was becoming more and more radical.  In fact, when Fred Hampton got killed, they came over I was working over at Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] and they came over and they said the Afro-American Patrolmen's League can--can't take a position on his killing, and it really drove a stake through my heart.  And so what I said, "Well you guys aren't prepared to take a position on the killing, the least--the least you can do is go by the house and see how he was killed."  I made them go by the house where Fred Hampton was killed, and--just filled with blood.  And I said, "Are you still don't want to," and they said, "Well I guess we"--and so I said, "I won't make the statement, but Saffold should make the statement," and Saffold did.  [HistoryMaker] Harold Saffold.  But that was the beginning of the end in my role in the Afro-American Patrolmen's League.
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna change tape right here.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 80928
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see where were we?  We were talking about Comprand and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the development of, of programs to increase the number of black physicians and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people in the health profession and some of the things that spun off from Comprand LICO CAHMPs program and some of those things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, urban health program and--are we taping or what?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're taping now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Comprand, you said Comprand--
Speaker 2: Comprand--
Speaker 1: Comprand and Westside Health were all--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a part of the same grant at one time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, what we did was it had very definitely political agenda.  It drove me into relationships with then congressman by the name of Paul Simon, and I don't know whether I ever told, told you the story of how Harold [Washington] got to congress.  At that time, Dick Newhouse was much more widely known that Harold was.  And Harold and I were--Harold, Dick, and I were driving back from Springfield [Illinois], and I was in the back seat.  So, we stopped to get gas and so while Dick Newhouse was getting the gas Harold and I went in to take a leak.  So, while we were taking a leak Harold said Buzz is there something you could--because I really steered Dick most of the time, he said I really want to go to congress and Dick keeps on saying he doesn't know whether he wants to run or he doesn't want to run.  I really appreciate if you can get him to step and get out of the way.  I said okay.  So, I got back in the car and he started driving and I said listen Dick, Harold really wants to run for congress.  You've got enough going in the state.  You just became chairman of the legislative advisory committee.  He really wants to run, why don't you just get out of the way Dick.  Dick said okay (laughter).  That's how it happened.  Harold went on and ran for congress.
Speaker 1: It's as simple as that.
Speaker 2: So, whenever you're urinating you can also think, and then when--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And then when Harold became congressman I told him that I wanted him to go over and look at the black troops in Germany to see how they were being treated.  They said they'd never allow me to do that.  I said if you allow, if you let me write the letter I guarantee that Caspar Weinberger who was secretary of defense he'll have no other option but to.  He said well go and write the letter I don't believe he will let me go.  As soon as I wrote the letter, Caspar Weinberger agreed that Harold should go and meet with the troops in Germany.  And when he came back, I was just getting ready to start another initiative on the defense department, and Harold was then asked to run for Mayor [of Chicago] and I never will forget over in his office (his office was over on 79th and Cot, Cottage [Grove]) and I was talking to him about it.  About this time, Lu, Lu Palmer [Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, HM], Lu Palmer, Vernon Jarrett [HM], I forgot, around five or six of them--(unclear)--all got together and they were doing--(unclear)--on who should run.
Speaker 1: As we shall see in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 80929
Speaker 1: And they did something very sli, slick and I know the reason why they did it.  They did put up a site, but they didn't have Dick Newhouse on the--(unclear)--and I believe that because Dick's wife was white and Harold [Washington] won it.  So, I had a meeting with Harold later.  I didn't have anything to do with this.  This was, I believe in [Lutrelle] "Lu" [F.] Palmer's [HM] basement.  So, I meet with Harold and I told him man you know you got a lot of pressure you gonna have to run.  He said oh Buzz I'm not even thinking about running.  He said I got the best job in the world.  I'm a congressman.  I don't have to worry about getting cats out of tree, getting people garbage cans.  He said this is, this is just perfect.  And I--then the pressure continued to come in from just about everybody, and Harold--I was meeting again the same time, same place, about the same time and I was telling him that he was gonna have to go over there and kiss [HM Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson]'s ass, and he said I ain't going, I hate him.  I ain't going no place near him.  I said well I thought you were a politician.  It wasn't only me, but I don't mean, I'm sure that Lu and Vernon [Jarrett, HM] and everybody was jumping up and down that he was going to have to go over there and genuflect before Jesse.  So, finally he did.  He did go over and genuflect before Jesse.
Story_ID: 80930
Speaker 1: The hidden story that no one knows is (that I feel nobody knows) is that probably the per, person that black intellectuals admired most was Dick Durham [Richard Durham], founding editor of "Muhammad Speaks."  And what he did, what Dick told [Mayor] Harold [Washington] he was gonna write a book about Harold and the campaign, and Harold was so flattered that the leading intellectual was going to write this book and what Harold didn't realize is that the last thing in Dick's mind was writing a book.  What he wanted to do was get into Harold's head.  So, every morning at 6:00 Harold's limousine would come and pick up Dick Durham, and Dick would get in the back with Harold and then I know how Dick operated.  If I walked through that door right there, just a regular door, he'd say oh Buzz you walked through that door oh that's wonderful.  For around an hour I'd be smirking about, then it dawned on me everybody walked through the damn door, but he was a master of flattery and so what he'd do he'd ask Harold all these rather silly questions, Aristotle type of logic or Socrates type of logic.  What he was doing was he was shaping Harold, and Harold up into the time that Dick Durham died he never knew what he, what Dick was doing.  And, we were having a chili fest out at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] and in Africa they say that when a great man dies it just rains like crazy, and I'd had never seen rain like this before.  And, I believe Mark came in, his son, and told me Dick had died, just died in New York.  So, I went over and told Harold (he was mayor then), and said Dick just died.  I said let's cancel this, and he said okay let's get in the car and we'll by and see Clarice [Durham].  So, we went by and saw Clarice and then at the funeral there were five people who gave the eulogy, Harold, Oscar Brown--(unclear)--,myself--it might have been Earl Durham, his brother, I'm not sure.  But, as we went through who Dick Durham was you could see Harold, my God I know what happened.  When he got up, he acknowledged it.  He said, you know, Dick was so subtle.  You didn't even know you were being steered 'til you ended up--(unclear)--on where ever he wanted you go to.  He was a truly--and he's another great, great man.  I was talking and they did--he did--he wrote part of my life story.  It's called "Bird of the Iron Feather".  It was a 26 series on PBS.
Speaker 2: Right, when we interviewed [Okoro] Harold Johnson [HM] who--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah Harold, yeah, yeah.  Harold was--he was the one--Harold played a major role in pushing Dick to the floor on that.  He pushed him to the floor, but Harold directed it, but Dick wrote it if I'm correct.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a great man.  I know Harold agrees that Dick was a great, great, great man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he talked about him when we interviewed him.
Speaker 1: Oh man, he was phenomenal.
Speaker 2: Harold Johnson.
Speaker 1: Phenomenal, phenomenal.
Story_ID: 80931
Speaker 1: If you ever want to read the real story of Muhammad Ali he [Richard "Dick" Durham] wrote the book, "The Greatest:[My Own Story]", and "Muhammad Speaks" he took and ran it into a 2 million, 2 million a week circulation.  You remember when you were coming up you couldn't go anywhere without people pushing "Muhammad's."  You'd buy one and you'd find one dated 2 years ago, because Elijah Muhammad had a very simple way.  He said that if you wanna--you gotta sell these (laughter).  You can put 'em into your basement (laughter), you can put 'em and--
Speaker 2: I had to buy 'em first.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had to buy 'em (laughter).
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And suddenly all these guys out there selling the damn paper (laughter) and Dick was a genius though.  He was a---the way that he got--he was not Muslim obviously, and Elijah Muhammad said he wanted the smartest black newspaper man in the country, and he kept coming back.  He said--(unclear)--he said we can't find 'em.  Where's my editor, we can't find 'em.  So, finally he said what's going on.  Well everybody said it's Dick Durham is the smartest newspaper man in the United States, but he's not a Muslim.  He said you didn't understand me.  I said I wanted the smartest black newspaper man, and so he hired him.  And Dick gave the center section of "Muhammad Speaks" to Elijah Muhammad and he could talk about flying saucers--(unclear)--and all the rest, but the rest of the paper just hard analysis, it was brilliant.  And anybody whenever I--I'll never forget when I first met Louis Martin.  Louis Martin was probably the most powerful black man in the United States.  I told Dick I wanted to meet him.  I found out--
Speaker 2: Now Louis Martin--this is the same Louis Martin who was in charge of the Civil Rights office for [President John F.] Kennedy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, minority affairs--
Speaker 2: Minority, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for Kennedy, [President Lyndon B.] Johnson, [President Jimmy] Carter, and it would have been for except he was dying.  He was also vice president of the Chicago Defender.  He was a master too.  Masters recognize masters, so Dick and him got along even though they were on different sides of the fence.  Dick was very, very left, and Louis was middle of the road.  So, what happened with I called Dick, said I need to meet with Louis Martin, so call me back in an hour.  He called back and said call him in 15 minutes and tell him you're taking him to lunch.  That was the start of the relationship with Louis Martin who also put together the Joint Center for Political Study [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies], Eddie [N.] Williams' shop [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  We have had some great, great people, but it looks like we're running out of time.  Anything?
Speaker 2: Well.
Story_ID: 80932
Speaker 1: Now the last thing is just some quick vignettes, some quick shots.  I started an organization called the Black Press Institute, and I ended up in Moscow [Russia], and I told 'em that I wanted to meet with the editor of "Pravda".  The secretary general in the union of--(unclear)--became a friend of mind.  He's not gonna meet if you're not a communist and you're an American and you're black.  He said why would he want to meet with you?  I said well ask him, well just ask.  So, he came back an hour later and he said I can't believe he's agreed to meet with you.  So, we go over to "Pravda" and we're sitting under this huge bust of Lenin with just Ivanitsky (ph.), the editor of "Pravda", most powerful, probably one of the most powerful men in the Soviet Union, and my friend, friend Raphael.  So, I asked him about [Mikhail] Gorbachev and it dawned on me as he talked that at that time the Soviet Union had all these old gophers, gophers kept dying.  As soon as they became chairman of the party, they would die.  [Leonid] Brezhnev had died.  He was 80 or something like that and then there was [Yuri] Andropov, you know, they just kept--
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they just kept dying.  So, what he wanted to do was he wanted to rejuvenate the party.  So, he began looking around for some young guy, and he found this guy Gorbachev and since "Pravda" was the Bible of the Soviet cabinet, he kept writing about Gorbachev, Gorbachev, Gorbachev.  So, after awhile they began to say man this guy must be a genius.  Every time we see him--and it dawned on me that he had made Gorbachev.  And I asked him, I said --(unclear)--you know Gorbachev was in charge of the party and prime minster and whatever they called him, he said yeah I call him two or three times a day and I always felt that Gorbachev was a complete idiot.  You know anybody that can have the second largest world power and in three years it disappears you got to be an idiot (laughter).  So, I often wondered where Ivanitsky is kicking himself.  He's probably dead now.  He used to--fascinating man.  He told me that in the summertime he waterskied to work.  He was so powerful, you know, they'd provide a boat and he'd water ski (laughter), weird.  On the river Neva, I remember that, river Neva.
Story_ID: 80933
Speaker 1: Then I became a friend of Olof Palme, prime minister of Sweden.  He had a great sense of humor.  He asked me one time when I was over in Stockholm [Sweden].  He said you ever been to a Nobel Prize Award, and I said no.  He said would you like to go.  I said sure.  As a joke, he put me over all the kings and queens of Europe and I saw this huge door and after the ceremony he and his wife--his wife name is Ruth or Lisbet [Palme] I'd always mix her up, and I went over there to thank him.  You know, he never had gone to anything like that and I walked over to him and I said Mr. Prime Minister I just wanted to say thank you for--(unclear)--incredible opportunity.  He said well what did you think of it Buzz?  I said--(unclear)--.  He said well quite frankly I find this tremendously dull (laughter).  That's the way he talked about the dullness.  Then he told me and said well Buzz I wish we had more time to talk, but getting a taxi in Stockholm on a Friday night is very difficult.  Now here's the prime minister of a county and he's getting a taxi to go home that's how he got assassinated, and then you might have known Jan Carew.  I'm in San Francisco [California], Jan calls me up and says listen I'm down in Jamaica and I just got finished talking to Michael Manley [prime minister of Jamaica] and Michael Manley would like to meet you.  I said he would, why.  He said well I told him you were probably the greatest organizer in the country.  I said shit I don't know, I'm sorry, I didn't know that.  I said when does he want to meet me, and he said tomorrow.  So, I have to catch a plane from San Francisco to Miami [Florida], Miami, to Jamaica.  So, I get there and meet with the day after Jan and I.  I said what the hell we gonna tell him.  He said well I thought you can figure that out.  So, that night we just spent brainstorming.  The next night we go out to Jamaica House.  If you've ever been to Kingston [Jamaica], this is seat of the government, it's a yellow building.  I go in and I thought it was just gonna be Jan and myself and Michael.  He's got four of his cabinet there and we sit down and he says well, Michael starts the meeting off says, we got a very busy schedule, so Jan I understand that you wanna tell us something, and Jan said yes and Buzz will explain it all (laughter).  That was my introduction, and so I explained it to him and so Michael turned to, Michael Manley turned to his cabinet he said from now on Buzz Palmer is to have carte blanche in Jamaica.  Anything that he says you can assume that it's the same as coming from me.  So, I had carte---this was during the election.  So, I had carte blanche and unfortunately we lost so, but I did have carte blanche and the other one was I had this count from some journalist in Mexico, Mexico City and this guy kept, the head of the (unclear) Mexican Journal.
Story_ID: 80934
Speaker 1: He kept saying Buzz I want you to meet the director of the Third World Institute [Instituto del Tercer Mundo] and I was saying listen we jamming we don't have any time, I don't really think we have time.  He said you gotta meet him.  But, what he failed to tell me was this was the former president of Mexico (laughter) who was also the head of the Third World Institute, [Luis] Echeverria.  So, we went over to meet with Echeverria and Echeverria rolled out his world view.  Well, hell I got a world view too, so I rolled out my world view.  Echeverria, you know, was being translated.  He speaks a little English.  He said this is much too important for just a short conversation.  What I'd like to do is invite you back, the group back this evening where we can continue the discussion.  As a result of that, Echeverria gave Alice [Palmer] and I--we developed a relationship and if Echeverria knew I was in Mexico he'd send--he never didn't believe in limousines he would always use vans and it was like when you get in the vans like you're in an Aztec palace, you know, just laid out.  And if he knew I was in Mexico, he have two translators and we would talk for--we'd start around 8:00 and go into 3:00 and 4:00 in the morning and finally the translator said we can't take it anymore we gotta go home.  So, he told me just as an aside we got the pictures of this I told him I'd like to know more about Mexico, so he turned to his chief of staff, a guy by the name of colonel--can't remember, it slipped my mind--(unclear)--or something like that.  Said I'm gonna put all of our mansions at the Palmer's disposal, so we travelled all through Mexico, and then when [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was running the second time, Echeverria had said well you might need some help in the Mexican American community.  His chief of staff was taking notes and he said I want you to go down to Chicago [Illinois] and explain we want the Mexican community to support Harold.  The guy was writing and this was on a Tuesday and he said I want you down there by Saturday.  So, I spoke a little longer and he said no make that Thursday.  And I was just thinking to myself if this was a black leader and he said to his chief of staff I want you down in Chicago, and he came in, and the day after tomorrow and he said well boss you know I gotta wash the car, me, me and my wife are planning on going, he never stopped writing, you know, do it, and it was done.
Story_ID: 80935
Speaker 1: And the last one, I don't whether you knew Rob Mier.  He was the director of economic affairs for the City of Chicago [Illinois] under [Mayor] Harold [Washington].
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When he was dying, he told me this great joke.  Bill Ware [William Ware] and I couldn't get along (this was Harold's first chief of staff) and Rob was telling me that Bill Ware said that his biggest job was to keep Harold away from because Harold would do anything that I told him to do.  I never knew that either.  If I'd known that (laughter), but you know Ware and I just, you know, Ware was right in the middle and I was always left, and he died too.  Fascinating little life we've had.
Story_ID: 80936
Speaker 1: Now, now let me--can I ask you a couple of--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --things that we--I think we have time for a couple of things.  One, one thing that you're a confidant for two of the European members of parliament--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You wanna talk about that relationship and how that developed?
Speaker 2: How did that develop (laughter)?  Some of this is just hilarious.  I went to Manchester, England, and there was this guy who was chairman of the races, committee on race, Glyn Ford, and we just locked in.  And he's younger than I am, so he has my old affliction ,he likes women (laughter), shhhh (laughter), so we just locked in and also funny his wife is Danielle, and she's an Italian woman, and he's at UK [United Kingdom], so we're in this, in Brussels [Belgium] at the European Parliament and he says Buzz damn it's time to get something to eat let's go down and get something to eat Danielle.  He said I want you to meet somebody.  I go downstairs and there's this black guy, and I said ain't this something.  What he wanted me to know is that he's got a black friend.  You know, I got some really important business to take care of, just bringing a side show, you know the guy is nice so we sit down and he ask me what I'm doing.  I said I'm putting together--(unclear)--.  I wanna be involved in this.  The future of the welfare--he said I wanna be involved in that.  He wants to be involved in everything that I'm doing.  So, I'm thinking I gotta figure out a way to pay for this guy to come into Chicago [Illinois] and just some minor type of guy, black guy, Glyn has been fairly quiet.  So, I said well I have to think about it.  So, I said excuse me I have to go to the bathroom.  So, I get on the phone to Paris [France], the United Township Organization and say listen I'm meeting with this guy, Harlem Desir, who the hell is he?  You're meeting with Harlem Desir?  He's probably the most famous person in France (laughter), so I come back in and he gives me his card then, he's a member of the European Parliament too.  So, I told him of course you can come (laughter), and Harlem and I became very, very good friend.  And, but what was equally funny was you know Calvin [O.] Butts [HM] of Abyssinian church, Harlem comes in and he says can you set up some meetings to do something in Washington [D.C.] and then he goes into New York, arrange for him to go and meet Calvin is an old, Calvin Butts is an old, Reverend Butts is an old friend, and Calvin Butts just went berserk.  He said you know it's a new day when Harlem comes to Harlem (laughter).  So, afterwards we went to--(unclear)--where ever the church, you know, and I never asked Harlem how he got his name, but he told me that his father always believed the heart of black culture was Harlem, so when he was born he named him Harlem, that's how he was named.
Speaker 1: Har, Harlem Desir.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The other thing is--
Speaker 1: We have to change tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 80824
Speaker 1: So, so you said in the--so you were talking about you're, you're at the end of your involvement in the African American Patrolmen's League.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always believed in giving credit to people that deserved credit, and one of the unsung heroes was a guy by the name of Tom Mitchell.  I don't know whether we mentioned Tom Mitchell.  Tom was a master in propaganda.  He was just an absolute genius.  And when people write the history of the Afro-American Patrolmen's League it's okay I don't mind being airbrushed out of history, but Tom Mitchell played as integral a part as I did.  With that the reality of black policemen rebelling this was the most Uncle Tom segment of black society, and it was in all the newspapers that African American policemen were refusing to enforce unjust laws against African Americans.  So, that when the Detroit riots started, [President Lyndon B.] Johnson [LBJ] called, I believe it was either 101st or 82nd Airborne, and they refused to go.  And one of them was quoted as saying if some Uncle Tom black policemen can refuse to press people, then we can too.  People also--in Doris Kearns [Goodwin]' book on LBJ in the middle of the book he talks about why he came up with the Civil Rights legislation.  His contention was that the country was on the brink of anarchy, and if I would have known that then I would have pushed even harder, but that's what--when any type of leader calls up its military or its paramilitary and they refuse to obey, you're on the brink of anarchy, and I didn't know that at the time.  And, the people are apolitical and ahistorical, so a lot of this is why I think it's important what you're doing in The HistoryMakers, not with me, but to get the trap, tapestry of the warp and weave of what's happening because some day they'll be some young black, white, and Latino kids that will come along and say well what happened?  Why was there a Civil Rights struggle that eventually evolved to Women's Lib[eration] and gay rights, the whole SDS, Students for Democratic Society, what happened--(unclear)--.  Where did all this spring from?  What, what was the wellspring?  The other thing is that during this period I was very much enthralled by Malcolm X, but looking back now in hindsight [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was a real revolutionary.  He was a real revolutionary.  Malcolm talked a good game, but Malc, Martin Luther King actually did change the world, and to me it's fascinating, you know.  When you're in the heat of battle, you let emotions overwhelm you and at that particular time I was very much a Malcolm X person, and now looking at the history, the cold analytical history, Martin Luther King was a revolutionary.
Story_ID: 80825
Speaker 1: Okay, now I wanna backtrack a little bit--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --when, when the [Afro-American Patrolmen's] League was formed and you said, you said you were a little bit afraid, of course, stepping out there with it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and when, when you started to get in the news and that sort of thing, I mean, where you threatened by the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Only once or twice, only once or twice.  A white sergeant he asked me wasn't I frightened by the white policemen, and I had told him I understood propaganda very well.  I told him, no sarge, I'm not worried at all.  I always carry my gun with me.  When I was doing was saying to them anybody that messes with me I was prepared.  And whenever I went into a new station, I'd always try and find the biggest bully and then I'd ask them could he teach me--I remember this one his name was Guadja (ph.) or something like Guadja or something like that, he was built, you know, pushup and I asked him boy, you know, I was just admiring how strong you are and I was wondering whether you could teach me how to box, and he fell right into it.  Yeah, I can teach you if you--well after I finished beating him half to death the word got around the station don't mess with Palmer because he's a crazy, and he knows how to fight.  And so when I told him, when I told the sergeant, you know, that I always carried my gun with me when I went to work I wanted the signal to go out don't mess with me.  There's another word--(unclear)--this is for posterity I once said don't F with me, okay.  In all my life, I've been physical.  It's incredible at 66, I'm 66 now, if I get into an argument and it's with a high ranking official I'm always thinking can I take this guy; that's just my nature, it's in the blood.
Story_ID: 80826
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you, at this time were you married or--(unclear)--?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you didn't have a family to worry about?
Speaker 1: No.  I, I had a friend and I was living with her, and she had a young son who I loved and still love.  But, during this period fascinating when we went to trial before Prentice Marshall who had eventually insisted that there be a quota in the [Chicago] Police Department--
Speaker 2: That's the federal judge.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One of the people--there were two people that [Mayor Richard J.] Daley relied on for this.  One was Earl Neal [HM] and the other one was Richard Phelan, and our attorney he said that he had never known Earl Neal to make so many errors.  Earl Neal kept making errors, and it eventually dawned on me that what Earl O'Neal was doing was he was throwing the case.  And years later I ran into Phelan I believe was running for governor, and he wanted to know whether I was still angry at him because he had been one of the city prosecuting.  And I told Phelan no I've never been angry at you, we won, yeah.  So, that takes us almost out of, but the interesting phenomenon I believe out the police that policemen are not also intellectuals, but the reality of it is the movement that we started with the Afro-American Patrolmen's League had tremendous ripple effects.  Almost every superintendent of police or chief of police came somehow or another out of the movement that was started by the Afro-American Patrolmen's League.  So, we did--the present day what we weren't able to do was develop--(unclear)--that would ensure that there was a new type of policeman, black and white, because sometimes some of the black policeman that I see now are as brutal as--and these were, these were issues that we fought against and now they're just as brutal and yeah just life, you know, you learn things, you know.  Every country is trying to codify revolutionary policy or etiology.  Mao Zedong I believe he talked about the new man.  Fidel Castro talk about the social man, and you know attempts to ensure the original fervor of the revolution was kept intact.  You had the same thing here in the United States with Thomas Paine, Benjamin Franklin that were much more progressive.  But, everything eventually begins to be pushed toward the middle, and I believe Rodney King said it very well, "can't we all just get along."  Yeah, if you're prepared to surrender we can get along.  I've never surrendered.
Story_ID: 80827
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how did you--where you--did you voluntarily leave the Afro-American Patrolmen's League or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, they had, they called a rump meeting and they put it gently, what they realized was the intellectual impulse, even they knew that there was an intellectual impulse, and they said what we'd like for you to do is step down, but for you to keep giving direction to the League, and I said okay fine.  That's the way it is, that's the way it is.  Of course, I never gave them any direction again in life, and it just disappeared off of the scope because they didn't have ideas and they didn't, you know, it just became some type of high school reunion arguing to get more blacks on and better pay conditions.  And what I was arguing for was better conditions for the black community.  It was lucky for me because if I on retrospect if I'd stayed in the League I would, I would have still been talking about police mattered, and now what I do is I talk about world events.  I talk about world affairs.  When [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was the chairman of the Chicago Sister Cities Committee, I was chairman of the senate advisory committee on Southern Africa.  You know, it just goes on and on, and if I had remained--they actually did me a favor, and I never, I never held any type of malice or animosity.
Story_ID: 80828
Speaker 1: These [Afro-American Patrolmen's League] were guys that had never had any notoriety and this was their opportunity for notoriety, and the only thing I have ever begrudged them was airbrushing Tom Mitchell out of the picture because he was seminal.  I recognize that and--
Speaker 2: What, what happened to him?
Speaker 1: Well, Tom's dead.  He got shot maybe 14 times in the chest and he died.  And he--
Speaker 2: Did, did he die, I mean, when, when, when did he die in this scenario?  Did, did he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, after the league had changed dramatically, and I'd always came up with ideas, put together a black opinion poll and asked him to run it.  He did brilliantly at it.  Did so brilliantly at it that he became the editorial director of Channel 2, WBBM.  He had to sell me out to get there, but you know this was his, his shot.  This was his opportunity and also I felt that I owed him.  You know, he had carried the water for the League, and he told me, you know, and he, he told me when he went to Channel 2 what he had to do was he always had to--when he met with the station manager he needed to say two things that were very insightful and one thing that was humorous, and he, he told me that this was his opportunity.  If they told him to jump, he was willing to jump and he did for, I guess, around a year and a half and then he went off.  It was on infant, black infant mortality.  He wanted them to do a series on black infant mortality rates.  Well, infant mortality rates are really a gauge to tell you how well or how sick a community is just using infant mortality.  And the station manager said they weren't interested in black babies that living or died, and he went off.  Tom reverted--(unclear)--.  He can only do it for so long.  He was a brilliant fellow, and so he took on the station and they fired him.  Then he, I believe, he got into drugs and yeah.  The last time I saw him Lonnie Edwards was, Dr. Edwards the commissioner of health, and Tom had moved down there and threatened him about not doing anything with infant mortality rate, and it got heated and Tom told him he'd kick his, kick his ass, upon which Lonnie Edwards had him arrested and then he spent the night in jail and when he came out he came by my house and he was bitter and he told me that I didn't really know what was going on, you know.  He was telling me about development of the AIDS in South Africa that was a new weapon and blah, blah, blah, and I told him you are absolutely right, Tom.  I don't know about all these different things, there's only so, so many hours in the day.  So, he stormed out, out of my house.  The next time I saw him was at his funeral.  He'd been shot fourteen times.  He was a genius, an authentic genius.
Story_ID: 80829
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do after you left the Afro-American Patrolmen's League?
Speaker 2: Oh, again Tom [Mitchell] he was working, he had went to work for--[President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson had put together a comprehensive health planning agency to oversee healthcare in the United States.  He asked me could I put together one for the South Side, which became known as Comprand.
Speaker 1: Now, now are you going to school during all this time or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  So, I formed Comprand and I had 850,000 constituency and just about anybody that was a black leader was at one time on the Comprand were [Mayor] Harold [Washington], Dick Newhouse, Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow [HM], --(unclear)-- Andrews, you name 'em, Bob Lucas--this was my way of setting a net.  There were, there was an organization right down the street called Mid South.  There were three.  The other one was Westside Health Planning Organization, which was run by Danny [K.] Davis [HM] and they always con, contended that Comprand was the most political because we, we didn't really do planning; we did advocacy.  As the head of Comprand, I had to lead the fight.  I got some money from HEW, what was called HEW to do a head count on the number of black physicians in the Chicago [Illinois] area and it turned out that there were more black doctors in 1930 than there were in 1970.  So, I began agitating both the state and the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], which was the largest medical school in the country.  At that time, there were probably two or three percent medical, black medical school and I met with the chancellor of the University of Illinois and I told him that his function was to get more black doctors out there in the medical school.  So, he disagreed.  So, I had to ask for the resignation of the vice chancellor of the medical school, the executive director of the medical school.  While I was at it, I asked for the resignation of the department of public health for the State of Illinois, and they all thought it was hilarious a black guy coming, but I'm notorious for beating on people, and six months later all three of them resigned.  Then, I told the chancellor--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute now, now what did you do to make them resign?
Speaker 2: I used the legislative process, Dick Newhouse, Harold Washington, even Cecil.  Cecil Partee joined in.  We were holding up money.  We were holding mirrors up for the lack of activity.  I had Marshall Field, who's an old friend.  I was using the [Chicago] Sun-Times and the daily news.  I was using everything and the heat got so hot that they had to resign.  Then I went after the chancellor, and I told him the famous meeting with the chancellor, Don Langenberg, I told him either he was going to have to leave Chicago or I was gonna have to leave, and I had seniority since I was born here.  And I kept telling the then president of the University of Illinois that he was dumb as a rock, and he kept saying what the hell are you talking about?  He was former deputy director of the National Science Foundation [NSF], but what he didn't know was that I had went and talked to the director of the National Science Foundation, John Slaughter, and I ran down what I thought about Don Langenberg, decent guy, decent man, but just dumb as a rock.  He just didn't understand politics and so after I talked to John Slaughter, John Slaughter, I believe, he was chancellor at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] at the time.  He went on to become president of some Pepperdine [Malibu, California] or I've forgotten which college out there and they gave him a yacht (he was a very bright guy).  He said you're right.  Don was my deputy and he's a very decent guy, but he is, he's, he just doesn't understand politics.
Story_ID: 80830
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Well how did you--now did you--most, I don't know if most people would have done that, would, would, would of thought to talk to the some, someone who was the former boss of somebody to figure out what kind of relationship they could have with--
Speaker 1: He was black too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: John Slaughter was black.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: That's why I'm a good organizer.
Speaker 2: You're surrounding the problem.
Speaker 1: I don't miss anything, I don't miss anything.
Speaker 2: You're surrounding the problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, he later became, Don Langenberg later became the president, after I ran him out of Chicago [Illinois], he became the president of the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] system.  I used to tell people like in Baltimore where you were talking about, anytime you have any problem with the University of Maryland just call Don Langenberg and you can tell him that you understand that Buzz Palmer is moving to Maryland (laughter).  So, after that they brought in the, let's see, Max (unclear) Schmidt.  He was the former a doctor's, doctor, and he was the former head of Federal Drug Administration [FDA], and we used almost get into fist fights over his desk, and finally he said I'm gonna do the right thing.  He said we're gonna get blacks in here.  I said as long as you do that you have a friend.  The day that you don't we're enemies again.  And Max to his credit opened up the flood gates.  The University of Illinois' medical school now has the highest enrollment of minority medical students in the country with the exception of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Every time you see a black doctor or a Latino doctor thank me.  Now, they of course, think they go there because they were talented and they could pass tests, but for the last 100 years they weren't getting in, and I set up a number of programs, urban health program, begin pulling them out early.
Story_ID: 80831
Speaker 1: I set up the CAHMCPs [Chicago Area Health & Medical Careers] program over at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Dr. Regnal Jones.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Reggie doesn't like people to know history, but that's what happened (laughing).  Once people set up program, you know, become head of program, they actually think that they invented it.  No, no, no, no, no, that was tremendous pressure in from Comprand.  Not an ego maniac, but the only thing anybody has to do is just go and look at the records of the Illinois Board of Higher Education.  And one of the main players in this was a guy by the name of boom, boom, boom, Mark Lepper.  Mark Lepper was the dean of Rush Medical School [Chicago, Illinois], and one of the greatest--two of them were great thinkers, Mark Lepper and Joyce Lashof.  Lepper-Lashof report.  They designed the healthcare system and I turned to Mark, and Mark and I became very, very close.  He's dead now too, but he was the head of the State Health Coordinating Council, and Joyce was the head of Department of Public Health, and I was fighting to establish a black medical school.  And eventually they said we can't set up a black medical school, but what we can do is we can set up two programs:  Urban Health Program and the CAHMCPs program.  John Lasley (ph.) is over there.  He worked for Rich and Joan.  That's--if you ask John he'll tell you how it happened.  Like I said I don't take credit for many, anybody, but where, where the rubber hits the road is where it hits the road.  Unabashedly clear about Tom Mitchell who was a damn genius and he played as much of a role in the development of the [Afro-American Patrolmen's] League as I did.  I always owe him.  I always owe him even though he's dead.  He's the one that brought--[Howard] Saffold [HM] doesn't realize this--but he's the one that brought Saffold into the League.  He told me listen I found this really bright guy and I want you to talk to him and see if you can't bring him into the league.  So, I met with Saffold and like him, still do, but he was the connecting link, and he was just, he was just smart as hell.  [Richard] "Dick" Durham was my mentor.  He was the founding editor of "Muhammad Speaks" and when I first met Dick, you know, he's, he'd thought I was too adventurous, too, too radical, and then we begin--see there's all kinds of history that no one knows about.  The reason why [Mayor] Harold [Washington] became mayor was because of Dick Durham.
Story_ID: 80956
Speaker 1: This is Larry Crowe interviewing--
Speaker 2: Edward "Buzz" Palmer.
Speaker 1: Yes, and Matthew Hickey is our videographer at this juncture, and we, we left off the last time you were talking about [Richard] "Dick" Durham, the importance of Dick Durham and you said that he was the reason that [Mayor] Harold Washington won the election in 1983.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Could you elaborate on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well see Dick among the intellectual elite, among the activists was somewhat of a legend, not somewhat, he was a legend.  He had taken Mohammad Speaks and built it into the largest circulation that ever existed in the United States.  I believe at one time it was around two million copies a week, and I'm sure in your earlier days you can remember being approached by the Nation of Islam and you'd buy one copy and you'd find out that you had three other copies, some of them dated three or four months back.  There was a very simple mechanism for ensuring the distribution.  Elijah Mohammad told them that each one of you is going to buy X amount, maybe 200.  Now I don't care what you do with them, but you're gonna pay for them, so, very interested in distributing these.  Dick had also written a movie about my life.  It was called "Bird of the Iron Feather".  It's about black policemen and appeared on Channel 11.  I believe it had around 26 episodes or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, let me, let me--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --kind of put the brakes on you for a second--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and let's go back to one, one thing this is "Bird of the Iron Feather", but you said that Dick Durham was the editor of Muhammad Speaks--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and yet he was not a Muslim, some people might find that odd.  Is that--was that odd?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what had happened was Elijah Muhammad had told his lieutenants that he wanted the most brilliant black journalist in the country.  And after around six or seven months he still hadn't, they hadn't came up, so he asked them what's the delay?  And they said well everybody tells us that Dick Durham is the most brilliant journalist in the country, but unfortunately he is not a Muslim, and Elijah Muhammad said, you didn't understand me, I said I wanted the smartest black journalist in the country, and that was Dick Durham.  If you have an opportunity, he also wrote Muhammad Ali's book, "The Greatest: [My Own Story]", but--so inside of intellectual elite and the intellectual activists, Dick was a legend and when he first met me he later told me that he thought that I was too adventurous and a lot of (unclear), and then as the relationship grew he became my mentor.  He began to hone some of the rough edges off of me because at that time I was extremely militant.  I still am militant, but it's just like anything else you, you need to know when to attack and when not to attack.
Story_ID: 80957
Speaker 1: So, when [Mayor] Harold Washington decided to run, he [Richard "Dick" Durham] called Harold and told him that he wanted to do this book about the campaign, and Harold was flabbergasted and honored that Dick Durham would take time out from his schedule to write allegedly a book about the campaign.  The book was the farthest thing from Dick's mind.  Dick wanted to get inside of Harold's mind.  So, he told Harold that he had to be with him every waking moment of the day.  So, every morning at 6 a.m. Harold's limousine would pull up to Dick Durham's house, and Dick would get in the car and then he would just begin using Aristotle reasoning and logic.  He would begin asking, you know, or Socrates.  He would begin asking Harold are you going to this meeting, what are your thoughts?  And sometimes Harold would come up with some not very bright ideas, and then by the time he got there Dick had programmed him, just like he programmed me and all the other intellect, including Vernon Jarrett [HM], including [Lutrelle] "Lu" [F.] Palmer [HM], including Gus Savage [HM].  It just goes on and on.  When Dick programmed you, his genius was that you never knew that you were being programmed.  You just began to see the world in a different light, and he was very powerful in that, and so--
Speaker 2: Now when did he start these daily rides with Harold Washington?  Wa, was it when Harold was the mayor or before?
Speaker 1: No, no when he was running.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 80958
Speaker 1: And he called me up because I was more or less on the sideline.  What Harold did was he came to me and I gave Harold his first fundraiser at my house, Alice [Palmer] and I, and Reggie, Renault Robinson [HM] was his campaign manager, and Harold came to me and he said you know Reggie is not doing very good can you recommend somebody to be my campaign manager.  And I know what he was doing he was asking me did I want to be the campaign manager, and I just looked at Harold and laughed and then said Harold, you know, I'm not very good at stabbing people in the back, so that ended that.  We both laughed about it.  And around a month later he got Al Raby to run the campaign.  Then Dick asked me he said, you know, you've got to come out of your tower Buzz and get involved in the hurly-burly is his, one of his favorite terms was the hurly-burly, and he said Harold needs somebody to coordinate the whole campaign to get out the vote effort, and so when I went down to meet with Harold, Jacky Grimshaw had cut in and so he said well I'm gonna have to divide it up and so I told Harold well I'll take the South Side and Jacky could take the rest of the city.  And what I did I--I'm somewhat of a crude fellow, what I did was there was a lot of misbelief among the Harold Washington insiders about the regular machine people, people like Gene Sawyer [Mayer Eugene Sawyer], John Stroger [HM], Niles Sherman, and my feeling was that in the campaign what we needed to do is not cause more friction, but pour as much oil over the clashing interest and just let it run.  So, for example, I believe that's why I got along very well with Gene Sawyer, even though I didn't support him in his reelection effort for mayor because I was for Tim Evans, but he complained (it was either he or John Stroger, I forgot which) they said they couldn't even get campaign literature and the Harold Washington insiders they felt that they would just take the campaign literature and then just hide it or not use it.  Well, I had to take the chance that they were going to use it.  So, when I heard this and I'm coordinating with all these alderman, I went out to the warehouse and I said I needed 15,000 brochures on Harold.  And they said what's it for?  I said I'm giving it to either John, John Stroger, or Niles Sherm--or Gene Sawyer, and they said you can't do that.  I said well listen, you tell them that Buzz Palmer came down here and kicked down the door and took the 15,000, and they did use it.  They did use it because these were people that had been brought up in what I might and other people might consider something like a plantation, and for the first time they had the opportunity to do something that was ennobling.  And I had to take the chance that they were sincere about this, and they were.
Story_ID: 80959
Speaker 1: Now, [Mayor] Eugene Sawyer [HM] has said, I think, or someone has said on his behalf that he was, he urged [Mayor] Harold [Washington] to run from the very beginning.
Speaker 2: That I don't know about.  I wouldn't--Gene is--
Speaker 1: I think he claimed that when he was running in '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure.  I'm not sure.  You know the key ones were, of course, Lu [Lutrell "Lu" F. Palmer, HM], Georgia, Vernon [Jarrett, HM], and Conrad did a tremendous job on the rally that took place at the University of Illinois [Chicago, Illinois], one of the largest rallies of any campaign.
Speaker 1: Conrad [Walter] Worrill [HM].
Speaker 2: Conrad Worrill.  So, they were, but, and Dick up until this time had stayed fairly much in the background, but Vernon, Vernon, Lou Palmer, and myself were more or less clones of Dick Durham.  We never realized we were clones, but that's what we were (laughter).  He was a genius, a black genius (laughter).  And almost anyone that you talking to, you know, Tim Black [Timuel Black] or Dempsey Tra, Travis [HM] will acknowledge him, but if they weren't at his level they'd just think that he was a very smart guy.  They did not know a lot of--Vernon to a large degree and Lu to a large degree and Gus, Gus Savage they saw--although Harold moaned about me, moaned to me about Gus on redistricting.  He was trying to secure redistricting that was more favorable to him and in the process less favorable to Harold.  You know those who were in politics that's politics.
Story_ID: 80960
Speaker 1: And so [Richard] Dick [Durham] also a fascinating incident he, he got--he and Elijah Muhammad get along famously, even though he wasn't a Muslim, and Dick told the story to Jan Carew and I about he got a call from Elijah Muhammad and told him he wanted him out to his house immediately.  Well, he got out there and there were about 18, 19 ministers of the Nation of Islam and so as he came in he said I'm here honorable mess, messenger how can I, can I be of assistance.  And so Elijah Muhammad said I don't know what the issue is myself.  He said my ministers wanted, wanted me to summon you here, and then they would explain.  He said our honorable editor is here, so you can proceed know.
Speaker 2: Everybody is honorable?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, what happened was the nineteen ministers, one of them, you can imagine is very famous now, but what they told him was honorable messenger we have a viper in our midst and so Elijah Muhammad said a viper, what do you mean?  He said we've all came together and we've agreed that the editor, no longer honorable, the editor is a leftist.  And Dick said his heart went through his shoes 'cause he knew he was never going to leave this meeting alive.  So, Elijah Muhammad he said oh that's very interesting.  You met without me.  And he says the first time, Dick said for the first time he breathed (laughter), then he said have any of you spoken to Allah.  They said of course not your honorable messenger, only you speak to Allah.  And he said I have spoken to Allah, and Allah says that our honorable editor is doing a tremendous job.  He said there was almost a virtual stampede.  We don't know why we did this (laughter) because Elijah Muhammad could kill you.  He could kill you.  And so they were trampling on each other.  The devil must have made us.  He remembered Dick said one of them said the devil must have made us do it, and Elijah Muhammad said I'm sure he made you do this and from that time on Dick had no more problems.
Story_ID: 80961
Speaker 1: But, he [Richard "Dick" Durham] was--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sure, sure.
Speaker 2: --did, did he have a relationship with Malcolm X?  I know, I know there's been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of course he had a relationship.  He told me that Elijah Muhammad, you know, they'd had became friends, very close friends, and he told Dick he said Malcolm X is absolutely brilliant as a speaker, but he could not organize a storefront church.  And obviously he was very close to, I believe, the terminology, I'm never sure of this, but it just seems like Dick: Rumble in the jungle; Thrilla in Manila and stuff that Dick Durham would come up with, and somebody else would say that I came up with it.  He didn't, he wasn't interested in the Hosannas, once he did it he was completely happy, you know.  And the paper, if you remember, the center section was Elijah Muhammad, but the rest of it was a hard leftist analysis of politics, worldwide.  He would send his--at his funeral there were four people, I believe four people that gave the funeral orations, [Mayor] Harold [Washington], myself, Oscar Brown [HM], Ishmael Flores (ph.), and his brother, his brother.  If he ever knew that I can't--Earl, Earl Durham.  The five of us gave.  It was then, I think, I could see the light go on in Harold's head that who Dick was because the orations, you know.  --(Unclear)--talked about what he was.  He was a master potter.  He took lumps of clay and built them, built people into very strong pieces that could fight anywhere.  He was a master of that.  And he wasn't an imposing looking fellow.  He was--I say Dick was a former boxer, but he didn't box anymore.  He weighed around 210 pounds and sort of chubby during that period.  It was interesting that he [Richard "Dick" Durham] had went to the Bandung Conference and apparently developed such a strong relationship with the president of Indonesia and the founder of Indonesia, Sukarno, when he gave him all types of rewards (some of them I won't even mention now).
Speaker 2: Now Bandung Conference is one that has come down to a lot of people through a speech that Malcolm X made.  I know a lot of people in my generation didn't know anything about him unless they heard that speech.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a meeting of all the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--yeah.
Speaker 2: --nations--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was the start of underline--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--around '60 [1960] was it--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah somewhere around there '61 [1961] or '62 [1962], but the major--it was the three Ns, Nehru, Nkrumah, Nasser, and Sukarno of course, but this wasn't an N.  All the rest of them the three Ns.  I thought it was four, but there were probably three.  So, that's what happened with--.
Story_ID: 80962
Speaker 1: And [Richard] "Dick" [Durham] molded me, and when we decided to come up--to build a black press institute it was funny I was always coming up with organization issues.  That's why when he died his wife gave me one of the greatest compliments in my life.  She said, "Dick always said that Buzz [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz" Palmer] is a born revolutionary," and he never said that to me.  One of the greatest compliments that I ever received, and what he did was he called, called me up one day and he said this guy, Kaarle Nordenstreng, was coming in and he'd had arranged for me to meet with him.  Kaarle Nordenstreng was a professor of journalism at Tampere University [University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland] in Finland.
Speaker 2: Can, can you spell that name for us?
Speaker 1: N-O-R-D-E-N-S-T-R-E-N-G, Kaarle, K-A-A-R-L-E.  He's a good friend.  He became a good friend, and he was the president of the International Organization of Journalists [IOJ] in Prague [Czech Republic], and it was the largest organization of journalists in the world.  Because Dick we formed this relationship that lasts to this day, it's regarded as one of the three greatest media experts in the world, but I'm babbling you have to direct me in what you want me to say (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now that was, that, that relationship with that worldwide organization gave some clout to the local, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yes it did.
Speaker 2: --local black organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Let's say for example we had the Black Press Review, which was clippings of article in 220 or 202 black newspapers in the United States and what we'd do is we clip, clip lead articles out of those and they would go to black leadership and in the process because of my affiliation with the International Organization of Journalists I told Kaarle, Kaarle Nordenstreng, "You know it would be very excellent to get black journalists to visit socialist countries to see how they operate."  "It's very--it's an interesting idea."  I thought it was one of my ideas, you know, you know, that didn't go anyplace.  Two weeks later I get a fax from Prague asking me to organize a delegation of journalists to visit what was then Czechoslovakia, East Germany, the DDR, and the Soviet Union, and so I got eighteen journalists together and off we went.  And because of my experience with my relationship with IOJ I'd end up in Budapest [Hungary]; Harare, Zimbabwe; Moscow [Russia], wherever there was something of interest--journalists.
Story_ID: 80963
Speaker 1: I used to go to--I became a friend of the head of the secretary general of the union of soviet journalists and learned tremendous things from.  He took a liking to me primarily because he had a grandson and whenever I came, who he dearly loved, and I guess he was around eight or nine years old.  Whenever I came over I'd bring him some toys.  He just loved that.  So, what happened was on one occasion I told him I wanted to meet with the chairman of "Pravda", and he said he's not gonna meet with you.  He said first you're not a communist, second you're an American, and third you're black.  I said ask the guy.  The only thing he can say is no.  So, he came back and he said my God he's agreed to meet with you.  So, there we are in the board room of "Pravda" under the (unclear) bust of Lenin, the three of us, and I began talking to him, and I was asking him about [Mikhail] Gorbachev and as we talked I began to realize that this is a man that made Gorbachev.  Because Gorbachev was an obscure plant manager, and at that time the Soviet leadership were primarily old--(unclear)--, but as soon as they became chairman of the party they'd keel over and die, so he wanted younger leadership.  So, he got, he began, he found Gorbachev, a plant engineer, whose wife taught Marxism.  He thought that he had came up with the perfect solution, and so what he began doing he said I began putting them into "Pravda", which is the party paper.  And so all at once, you know, the party faithful are reading about the wonderful guy by the name of Gorbachev, and the next thing they knew he had became the chairman of the Soviet Union.  He had made him.  I asked him was he still in contact with Gorbachev.  He said I talk to him three or four times a year.  Well, I always regarded Gorbachev as an idiot.  Here's a man that takes over one of the largest states in the world and in four years he's lost everything, and I'm sure this guy's name was Ivanovsky, Ivanitsky (ph.) or something, chairman of "Pravda."  I often wondered whether he shot himself because Gorbachev was such an idiot.  Chinese on the other hand what they did was they said, you know, we need to rejuvenate the party, but the first thing we are going to do is we're gonna work on the economics.  We're gonna get the economics squared away, then we'll look at the political end of it and China is still alive.  The Soviet Union is a third world country now, and during that period the Soviet Union was a counterweight to the United States, which was very good because neither side the development--(unclear)--country could go to the United States and say we need your support and if we don't get it here we're going to Moscow [Russia].  And they can go to Moscow and they say we need your help and if you don't give it to us--and one of the reasons why South African has it's freedom is because one of the famous of Battle of Cuito Cuanavale.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: Cuito Cuanavale in Angola.
Speaker 2: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: No, I can't. Cuito, Q-U-A-T-A, Cuanavale C-A-R-V-I-A-L-E-N-E or something like that.  I'm not a speller.  I'm a thinker, but I'm not a speller.  So, what happened was this young guy had just taken over this Caribbean country called Cuba, Fidel [Castro], so he's young and feisty and the Angolans and Mozambicans had came to him and said listen you always talking a good game about how you want to support people, but you're not supporting us.  So, what Castro did he said well I'll send some troops over, all black.  They insisted that they be all black.  The only exception was when Che Guevara went to the Congo, and they were pissed off about that because they wanted blacks in the leadership.
Speaker 2: We're gonna pause here I think the tape ran out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80840
Speaker 1: And you're supposed to be a revolutionary country, but you don't fight.  We Cubans are prepared to fight, but we need transportation to get over there, and aircraft.  So [Leonid] Brezhnev was taking them back and he said okay we'll provide the transportation.  So, when the Cubans got over there, black Cubans, the white regimen in South Africa said we're gonna kick your ass up in here.  He said and we're gonna kick your ass right in your own base, and so the Cubans said come on up in here (laughter), and when they got up there they gave the South Africans the worst whooping of their lives.  And after they got their ass kicked, they knew that they could not win militarily.  So, what they had to do was they had to work out a political solution, which freed Nelson Mandela.  I believe it was around six months to a year after that victory that the world turned over.  But, I also had because of the IOJ, International Organization of Journalists I went down to Mexico to meet with Mexican journalists.  So, they kept saying you gotta meet the director of the Third World Institute.  I was sort of pushing it off.  I said I don't really have time to meet with, you know we got so much to do.  They said oh you have to.  But, what they didn't tell me it was the former president of Mexico, [Luis] Echeverria.  So, I met with Echeverria, and he gave his worldview, you know, we're gonna have lunch and so if he was gonna give his world view I thought that I should give my world view, which I did, upon which he jumped up from his table and he said, his desk, and he said this is much too important to handle in a 45 minute lunch.  If you are agreeable, I would like for you to come back and we'll continue this discussion.  The discussion started at 6:00 and went on into 2:00 in the morning.  After that, Echeverria and I developed a relationship, and he gave all of us mansions in Mexico where Alice [Palmer] and I use.  I was just talking to him and I said you know I like to know more about Mexico.  Then, he turned to his chief of staff, the guy by the name of Jorge Nuno (ph.).  And he said put all our mansions at the Palmer's disposal, so for two months we travelled through Mexico.  And I was talking to Echeverria--if Echeverria knew I was in Mexico he would send the van for me and I mean it was like an Aztec king, and he have two translators, and he and I would sit up from 6:00 to around 3:00 or 4:00 until the translators just got, get tired.  And I told him that we were having an election, a second election of [Mayor] Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois], and it would be very good for him to give his support.  I never will forget this.  He turned to his chief of staff, Colonel Nuno and said I want you to go Friday to Chicago and explain to the Mexican community why Harold Washington must be elected.  So Jorge's writing and I kept on talking about some of the different things that were going on in Chicago, and Echeverria put up his hand and he said stop.  He said instead of Friday, and this is on a Monday, instead of going in on Friday I want you on the next plane out of here (laughter).  Now what was fascinating to me was you know how we do things in our community from time to time if Harold had said that, a guy might have said well you know I gotta wash the car tomorrow or I gotta take my--Jorge hadn't stopped taking a note at all, and he was on the next plane out of there to Chicago.  And I was in--you know these--I'm just giving you some vignettes of international crap.
Story_ID: 80841
Speaker 1: I'm in the--I go out to San Francisco [California] and a friend of mine Chauncey Bailey--he's with the Oakland Tribune--so Chauncey wants to shake me up and wanna take me to lunch and want to take me to the Trident restaurant, which is a bare-breasted; waitresses don't wear bras or anything.  So, I called my secretary and said boy Chauncey is going mad he's taking me to this Trident restaurant.  So, there we are sitting down and getting ready to eat and all at once over the speaker it says is Buzz Palmer in here.  I said now how the hell would anybody--and then it dawned on me that somebody called up.  So, I go to the phone and it's Jan Carew calling from Jamaica, and he said he called the office and he told me that they told him that I was--they didn't know where I was in San Francisco, but I'll be out--
Speaker 2: Now this is Jan Carew was a professor at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: At Northwestern and before that he was the founding director of African American studies at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. He was an advisor to EnChroma.  He was an advisor to Cheddi Jagan.  He was a biggie, top of the line, and a good friend.  So, at any rate, Jan says listen Buzz you gotta come down to Jamaica.  I said why.  He said I just got finished up with Michael Manley and he says that he really wants to meet you.  I said well what did you tell him?  He said I told him you're probably the best organizer in, in the United States.  I said well that's very kind of you Jan.  So, he said when will we meet with Michael Manley.  He was the Prime Minister [of Jamaica] then.  He said day after tomorrow (laughter).  I said day after tomorrow.  Yeah you gotta get going.  So, I told Chauncey to get me out to the airport.  I flew down to Kingston.  When I got down there, Jan met me at the airport and he said--I said what are--Michael Manley was running for reelection against [Edward] Seaga.  I said what are we gonna tell him.  I said you'd be able to figure that out, so up all night trying to figure out what presentation.  So the next morning we go out to Jamaica House, a yellow building, like the White House.  The first time I meet Michael Manley I thought it was just going to be Jan, Michael Manley, and myself.  Instead he's got seven of his cabinet ministers there.  So, we sit down, Michael very quick and he said well you know I've got a very busy schedule and Jan I believe you have something to tell us.  And so Jan said yes I do and Buzz will explain it (laughter).  My introduction to international--this was I believe before--I have forgotten before or after [Mexican President Luis] Echeverria, so I explained what I thought he should be doing in America and in Jamaica and so he put up his hand again and he said listen he told his cabinet member for now on Buzz Palmer is to have carte blanche in Jamaica.  Anything he says or wants assume it's coming directly from me.  So then I began moving people in and out of Jamaica.
Story_ID: 80842
Speaker 1: So that was Michael Manley.  The other one was something funny was--let's see how did this happen--
Speaker 2: Now just to follow up one a bit--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --what, what did your advisement do.  I, I think [Edward] Seaga won the election.
Speaker 1: Yeah he did, well [President] Ronald Reagan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's was--he was being destabilized and my argument was what we had to do was we had to create a back graft, a backfire.  We had to burn some--and we needed to bring people down there.  One of the people I brought down Joseph Lawry (ph.).  I believe I brought down the guy from the Lawyer's Guild who got killed in South Africa, Haywood.  I brought down some of the great black luminaries and they began spreading the word we were coming out with--we did come out with a report on the efforts to destabilize Michael Manley.  And unfortunately he lost because there was just too much money.  But, Michael and I became very close and I became even closer to his wife, who I really liked, Beverly.  I used to always say she's twice the man that Michael is because Michael would hesitate, and Beverly was just straight ahead, just a powerful woman, and she told me this interesting story-Alice [Palmer] and I.  She said that Maurice Bishop was, he was hitting on her, and she said now Michael, not Michael, Maurice I just want you to think this through.  Said you're suggesting that you and I get into bed together, now your closest ally is my husband, Michael Manley, now why would you, would you really want to jeopardize all of that just for a roll in the hay.  And she said Maurice got very embarrassed and backed off.
Story_ID: 80843
Speaker 1: These are hidden pages of history most people never see.  You know most people when you talk about [Richard] "Dick" Durham and [Mayor] Harold Washington they scratch their head.  When you talk about Maurice Bishop and Michael Manley and some of these other--(unclear)--Michael had asked me to go to Germany to meet with the socialist party there.  I believe, I forget, I believe it was Helmut Schmidt, the chancellor then.  I just couldn't go.  I was doing too much in Jamaica and so I sent Jan [Carew].  Well that eventually, no that didn't--I just catalogue.  I wasn't active in Europe at that time, but what happened was Edward Said, the great Palestinian and Ibrahim Abu-Lughod were trapped in Beirut [Lebanon], and Ibrahim's wife Janet came to me and she said they're gonna kill him and you gotta get him out of there.  I said I don't know how the hell I'm gonna get him out, you know, but I raised such a stink at the State Department and in Congress.  I was pulling all the strings and I had, I had, then I guess I still have a lot of strings that I can pull when necessary.  So, finally they agreed for safe passage (I won't say who) to get him out of Beirut, and Ibrahim, he was chairman of political science at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  He was also on the --(unclear)--Central Committee and so was Edward Said, Said, but he wanted to say thank you for saving our lives.
Story_ID: 80844
Speaker 1: So, they went to Tangiers [Morocco], and they wanted me to meet with the leadership over there Jan [Carew] and I.  So, we go over there and you know everything's in turmoil.  So I ended up with these two Swedish guys, nice guys.  One of them was--they had the Christian Social Democrats of Sweden and the other one, he was weird.  He was going to become the most powerful churchman in Sweden, Luther.  But, he had fallen in love with Gaddafi's "Green Book", "The Green Book."  You know the Chinese had the little red book, Gaddafi had the little "Green Book" and guess they said this guy's to far out.  So, I believe his name was Brent Elksonsen (ph.).  So, he said if you're ever over in Sweden look me up, and so I went over the Demark and was doing some sailing in Demark.  So, it got so boring after a while, so I called him up on Stockholm [Sweden] and said come on up and let me introduce me to your family and spend the night, a couple of nights.  So, I go up there and we're having dinner and this guy says is there anything that you'd like to do when you're in Sweden.  I said I'd like to meet the prime minster, Olof Palme.  I meant it as a joke.  Next thing I know he gets up from the table and he's on the phone (laughter).  He said well unfortunately Olof is negotiating--there was a friction between Demark and Sweden on oil between Sweden and Demark.  I didn't even know they had oil up on Sweden.  He said he can't meet, but his best friend is a guy by the name of Burt Solderberg (ph.), and he'll see you.  So, I go in to meet with Ben, Burt, Burt Solderberg and we became friends and so I called him up.  He came into Chicago [Illinois], I introduced him to [Mayor] Harold Washington.  I said you know it'd be great to develop a sister city relationship with Sweden.  So, Ben thought that was great.  So, he goes and he calls me up.  He says he and Olof Palme had been at the jazz clubs in Boston [Massachusetts], and Olof Palme thought it was such a great idea that he wanted me to come up over the Sweden right away.  So, I caught this plane out and I'm in, I land in Stockholm, I'm late because the plane is late.  We'll in Sweden you know they're very punc, so Ben Solderberg, oh my God you're late.  I said well you know I couldn't help because the plane wouldn't go faster.  He said well Olof has been waiting for you, and I said well where is he?  This guy over there he's scribbling on a yellow pad.  I said well what's the procedure.  I assumed they were going to search me or you know do something.  He says he knows who you are, you can talk to him.  He said just go and tell him who you are.  So, I walk over there and say excuse Mr. Prime Minister I'm Buzz Palmer.  Oh, Buzz Palmer how are you?  Ben's told me all about you, blah, blah, blah, so we sit and talk.  I said well you know we need to develop this sister city with Sweden.  He said consider it done.  He said I believe it will be Gothenburg [Sweden], the second largest city, and we talked for a little while longer and he says have you ever been to a Nobel Prize ceremony.  I said no I never had.  He said well would you like to and I said yeah.  He said well I'll get you a ticket.  So, I got this damn ticket.  I always thought that the Nobel Prizes were awarded in Oslo [Sweden], but they're awarded in Oslo and Stockholm; I never knew that.  Nobel Prize for peace has stayed in Oslo, but the one for science or whatever is did in Stockholm.  So, here I am in this huge hall.  I guess Olof Palme had a perverse sense of humor.  So, he puts me over the kings and queens of Europe, this black guy (laughter).  I'm on a, not even a mezzanine, sort of jetting out looking down on all the kings and queens of Europe, and so when it's over I go over to Olof and his wife (I believe her name is Ruth [sic, Lisbet]), they're standing at the door and so I went over and I said Mr. Prime Minister I just wanted to say thanks for inviting me.  He said did you enjoy.  I said well I found it interesting.  He said I find these things tremendously boring and so we talked for a few minutes and he said well Buzz I really gotta run because getting a taxi on a Friday night in Stockholm--now here is the Prime Minister of Sweden (laughter), one of the richest countries in the world, and he's trying to get a taxi.
Story_ID: 80845
Speaker 1: But that's, and that's--I can understand when he [Prime Minister Olof Palme] was assassinated why that could happen because he did not have any bodyguards.  He did not have anybody, you know.  He was just a good person.
Speaker 2: When was he killed?
Speaker 1: I can't remember.  Let's see [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was in office '83 [1983].  It must have been around '85 [1985], '86 [1986].  They never found his killers.  They know how to kill people worldwide.
Speaker 2: We, we know so very little about--(unclear)--worldwide, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--I didn't know he was killed.
Speaker 1: He was--so what happened was--
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: What happened was he had taken his wife [Lisbet Palme] to a movie.  Now, if you're a prime minister of the country you would assume that you have your own movie show inside the palace.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--.
Speaker 1: He had taken his wife to the movie and when he was walking down the street somebody came up behind him and popped him, and right in the center of town.  Every time I go to Stockholm [Sweden] I always go back to see him because they buried him right in the middle of town.  His gravestone is just a huge rock, not super huge, maybe five feet by five feet, and the only thing it has is his signa, his signature, Olof Palme, that's all.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name for us because I hate to--
Speaker 1: O-A-L-F (Olof), maybe with an E, but I know his last name is Palme, P-A-L-M-E, Olof Palme.  He was one of the reasons--I can understand why they killed him.  He was a most dangerous man.  When the ANC [African National Congress] was trying fighting for independence, he provided the financial withal for their activity.  All the embassy came out of the Swedish.  He and [Fidel] Castro.  They didn't just talk; they acted.  And without the underpinning that he provided for the ANC I doubt whether the clerk would be getting ready to retire now and his prime minister, president of South Africa 20 years later.  He was a dangerous man.  He put his principals and his ideals right on the line.  I liked him.  I met him a couple of other times.  In fact, the day that he was assassinated I had went down to meet with the Swedish consulate.  They were having a little party.  I walk into the party of around 20 or 30 people.  I walk into the party and they said, I believe his name was Lars (ph.), Larsh Neals (ph.) or something like that.  He comes over to me and he said Buzz I'm sorry we're gonna have to cancel.  I said well that's too bad, why?  He said Olof Palme has just been assassinated.
Story_ID: 80846
Speaker 1: And see one of the phenomenals that I think happened in this world is I think, you know, in the space of five years, in the space of five years JFK [President John F. Kennedy] was assassinated, everybody knows.  [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated.  Malcolm X was assassinated.  Jimmy Hoffa is probably in a cement road, and not thought about is at the same time Whitney Young who is becoming more militant drowned in Lagos [Nigeria] and George Wiley most people can't remember had started the Welfare Rights Organization and he drowned.  And King's brother [Alfred Daniel Williams King] he drowned.
Speaker 2: That's really true--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: And then worldwide at the same time you had an overthrow, I believe in Iraq-[Mohammed] Mosaddegh, Aubenas from Venezuela and this guy by the name of Ali Harrington, who is, who I became a friend of. He's dead now.  He was Richard Wright's best friend and he had left the United States.  First he went to France and got into a fight with what later turned out to be an informant, so he was expelled from France and he went first to the Soviet Union, and then he met, I guess, a sweetie in East Germany and he married her and had one kid.  He told me that--when I met him he must have been around 60, 65 years old.  He told me that Richard Wright was his best friend and when they were in France.  Richard Wright was a hypochondriac.  Every year he would go twice a year to, for a medical checkup whether there was anything wrong with him or not and so what happened was Ali, the guy's name is Ali Harrington, he had met a Swedish cupcake and so they were on their way to Britain and on the way out he told Richard Wright you know if you need me I'm gonna be up in Britain with Swedish cupcake and so he gets up there and once he gets a telegram (they used telegrams then) return immediately in danger or something like that from Richard Wright, so Ali said he came back and he said that he went to this hospital where Richard Wright was on the address on--and he said Richard Wright would never go to that hospital because it was dirty and it wasn't clean and he was a hypochondriac.  He said he walked into--this Polish countess saw him and jumped up and ran out of the hospital.  So, he demanded to meet, to see his friend Richard Wright and they said he just died.  So, he always felt that he'd been assassinated.  You have to remember that Richard Wright was primarily a novelist, but then all at once he went to the Bandung Conference (unclear) the color, color curtain and he began writing political books.
Speaker 2: Yeah "Black Power"--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when he went to Uganda.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a--did you know the play that Joe Turner wrote on Richard Wright called the "American Expatriate."
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He speculated on why Richard Wright might have been killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'd like to get that.  I'll remember that.
Story_ID: 80847
Speaker 1: And the other one was Frantz Fanon from Martinique, French Martinique.
Speaker 2: He died a similar fashion to Richard Wright.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he died in Bethesda Naval Hospital with a CIA agent by his bedside, and you have to remember that Nelson Mandela was called the black pumpernickel or something like that and this friend, this white friend of his always would travel with him.  Well, he, when Nelson was captured he was sent to Robben Island.  It turned out this guy was a CIA agent, and I believe ABC or CBS they did an expose on him at some place up in Montana or Utah or Wyoming, and they went to his ranch and said we understand that you're the guy informed on Nelson Mandela, and he said no can, comment and--(unclear)--sort of a cattle fence slammed it and said no comment and you're on my land.  So, these type of things happened.
Speaker 2: Now, what about, you know you were talking about when Patrice Lumumba was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah the same way, yeah the same, the same thing.
Speaker 2: That would have been in the same period of time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  See Patrice Lumumba was only in for maybe six or seven months before he was assassinated, but obviously people like you and people like me still remember who Patrice Lumumba was just like you remember who Emmett Till was.  These were seminal cases that grate at our nerves, our hearts, and our minds.  We never forget.
Speaker 2: In his case, we, we also had the death of, peculiar death of Dag Hammarskjold too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Secretary General of the UN [United Nations]--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --and he died in a plane crash--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm sure that nobody would not like to look into Ralph Bunche's role during this period; I'll leave it there.
Story_ID: 80848
Speaker 1: See one of the things, Larry, that you might be interested in is the things that I'm doing now.  Two major efforts:  One is with the United--with the European Union.  I'm an idea person and I had this meeting with the ambassador to the United States from the European Union who just asked me what I was doing and I said I'm thinking about putting together a Trans-Atlantic conference on race, and he jumped up and he said listen we'd like to fund part of it.  You're asking about money, but I wasn't hassling the guy, you know, I just told him what I was doing and--in this world there, there aren't very many ideas out here.  People are re-plowing the same land that has been plowed over and over and over again, and people--I think that's why I've had such success in places like Mexico, Jamaica, Stockholm [Sweden], Germany, France, you know, on and on and on.  People are interested in people with ideas, you know, so and I'm an idea person.  So, we had probably the most massive and historical conference that has ever taken place in the United States between African American intellectuals and European intellectuals.  Now, my wife [Alice Palmer] says please don't say that, but it's true (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now when was this held?
Speaker 1: This was October.
Speaker 2: So, it's coming up?
Speaker 1: No, it's over.
Speaker 2: It was past--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We had, we had just incredible people there.  From the European Union we had Lord [Meghnad] Desai who allegedly runs the London School of Economics.  We had two members of the European parliament.  We had the former head of the German Academic Exchange Service.  People say the German--(unclear)--it's massive (laughter).  We had the head of the largest, one of the largest foundation, Sikh, Indian Sikh, the Canterbury Foundation.  It just went on and on and on.
Speaker 2: Now this was at the University of Illinois Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we did it at two places.  We did it with the University of Illinois and we did it with Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and the third leg of this will be held in Brussels [Belgium] at the European Parliament.  Can you image colored people like us having a conference at the European Parliament.  It's incredible.  Even [W.E.B.] Dubois didn't do that.  But, Dubois was in a different era.  If he was there, I'm sure he would be doing even greater things, and he wrote.  I don't write, I organize; that's what I do.
Story_ID: 80849
Speaker 1: Now, you're a confidante to Glyn Ford?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Harlem, Lord [Meghnad] Desai--Lord Desai's nickname for me when I come to the London School of Economics, well, meister tell us what we're doing now (laughter).  He's got a funny sense of humor.
Speaker 1: And Harlem Desir--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Harlem Desir is cofounder, not the cofounder, he's the founder of SOS against fren--SOS against racism [SOS Racisme] in Paris [France], and he's also a member of the European Parliament, and he's a black guy from, whose parents were from French Martinique who I brought to Abyssinia and [Reverend] Calvin [O.] Butts [HM] is the minister there.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he just went nuts.  If he said you know it's a new day when Harlem comes to Harlem (laughter). And it never dawned on me to ask Harlem why he was named Harlem.  Calvin asked, Calvin Butts asked him why are you named, why'd your parents name you Harlem?  He said well my father felt that the center of black culture was Harlem, so he named me Harlem (laughter).  You know just the simple things.  The other thing that happened that I thought was interesting I became a friend of the European Union ambassador to the United Nation, John Richardson.  So, he came to Chicago [Illinois].  I asked him to come to Champaign [Illinois], really, and he came to Champaign and I told him that I wanted him to, the Trans-Atlantic Conference [on Race and Xenophobia] I also wanted to do that at the United Nations.  He said consider it done.  He said but now I want you to do something.  He said I want you to come up and meet with the head of Hannibal Group.  I'm wondering what the hell is a--(unclear)--.  Since he was very cooperative with me, so I go up there.  So, we have lunch at his residence, Alice [Palmer], myself, David Johnson was supposed to be there. It was around five of us.  It turns out that Hannibal Group are ambassadors from the Mediterranean area and also South Africa.  So we sit them down, this guy we haven't seen in six or seven years he comes in and so glad to see him.  It's Dumisani Kumalo, and we began beating--he was with Africa Fund, and they were beating on his back because we haven't seen him in seven or either years, and so he said well what are you doing here?  I said I'm the ambassador to the UN from South Africa.  And there was one guy sitting down at the end of the table, and I--(unclear)--and said you know what the secretary general should be doing he should be developing relationships with African American journalists and should pull together some type of lunch or expose them to the works of the union.  So, you know just an idea.  The meeting ends and the dinner, the lunch ends, this guy comes up and he's--(unclear)--and he said I really like your idea, your thoughts, and he said I'm the former executive assistant to Kofi Annan, the secretary general, and I was wondering whether you and Alice could come up and meet with me.  He said I'm now the interim director for communications and public affairs.  I said sure we'll come up.  So, we come up two weeks later.  He's no longer interim director, he's the undersecretary of the United Nations for communication, and he's pulled his whole staff into this meeting and he parades me dog and pony show.  So, I explained the idea again, and he says I think we should do this.  He said let us think about it.  So, I, now that's the end of it.  So, I get back to Chicago, around three days later I get a fax from him saying can you, we would like for you to organize a delegation of African American journalists to meet with the secretary general in seven days.  In seven days; I pulled it off.  Some of the people who came were--I got Gene Scott [Eugene Scott, HM] from the Chicago Defender, Cliff Kelley of VON, [N.] Don Wycliff [HM] from the [Chicago] Tribune. It was six of them.  I forget the other three, three others.  I had three puli--
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Clarence Page.  I had three Pulitzer Prize winners there, William Raspberry [HM], Clarence Page [HM], and I guess Les Payne [HM] had won from the New York Daily News.  They were all there, forty--Ellis Cose [HM].
Story_ID: 80850
Speaker 1: And when they called me up, when Shashi, when the secretary called me up and said what we want to do is we want do is--I imagine that what you wanna do is talk about Africa and centered around Africa.  I said no, no I said we're out of the ghetto.  What we want to do is talk about the world.  We get up there and he's got the undersecretary of peacekeeping.  First half of the day they've got different undersecretaries talking to.  When I got there, it was in panic, because they had brought out all their stars and there were around six of us there.  And I said oh my God they didn't show up, and around an half an hour later it was 20, a half an hour later it was around 30, and then we went to lunch with Kofi Annan and we went, when we went to lunch with Kofi Annan usually they told us luncheon meeting lasts for around a half an hour.  He stayed for 2-1/2 hours.  And the first question was Ellis Cose [HM] from Newsweek.  He used to be with the Chicago Sun-Times.  Ellis asked tell us about why Mary Robinson was removed from human rights, head of the human rights division of the UN [United Nations].  It just spun from there and I had--they asked me to close the meeting.  I thought it might be a good way to close here too.  I told Kofi Annan that I think there are some important lessons here.  Now one of them is almost 35 years ago [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] gave a speech--this, this happened in August of 2002, 1967.  He gave a speech at Riverside Church in New York opposing the Vietnam War, and almost every Civil Rights organization opposed him because they said it was not a legitimate issue for a Civil Rights leader to broach.  Said nevertheless he broached it.  Now, what's happened since that we didn't just go into shells we also led the fight, we were in the leadership of the fight for free South Africa and Zimbabwe.  Said black leaders went in and met with [President Jimmy] Carter and demanded that he force the Rhodesian government to hold free election which was the founding of Zimbabwe.  Now, Martin Luther King when he died, before he died, he said he wanted to be remembered not as somebody that had won a Nobel Prize or somebody that had won, had met presidents and prime ministers of country.  He wanted to be remembered as a drum major for justice and freedom.  And I turned to Secretary General Annan I said now you're our drum major and we want you to step, and he said I love drums and I will step (laughter).
Story_ID: 80851
Speaker 1: Is that enough?
Speaker 2: No, I got a couple of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--questions about that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, but before I get to those, it's only three of those, I wanted to ask you about--
Speaker 1: Here I was thinking that I was closing very well (laughter).
Speaker 2: But good--
Speaker 1: No, no go ahead I'm teasing you.
Speaker 2: But, but what I--a couple of years ago I was asking you about Maria Diedrich--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --who was a professor, a German professor who wrote a book about Frederick Douglas' affair--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --with a German woman who--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: German Jewish woman.
Speaker 2: --and, and you said that knew her and--
Speaker 1: We were--
Speaker 2: --and not only that, that you, you knew her when she was a teenager--
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know her when she was a teenager, no, but I know her extremely--Alice [Palmer] and I know her extremely well.  She was at the conference obviously.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, you also talked about, you talked about you have documents, you know, a schedule of a conference held in Sardinia, Italy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --which was a conference in which European scholars studied African Americans basically and thick, thick--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Excuse me.
Speaker 2: Do you need any tissue?
Speaker 1: No, no I'll just wipe--that's why they have seams (laughter).
Speaker 2: But, I mean--
Speaker 1: She's doing just for your--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --just for your information they're doing it.  She's no longer the head of it because after eight or ten years she wanted--she's a little sick right now I gotta try and track her down because when she was here she said she had some bad operations that she had to go through.  I've been calling her.  Alice has called her.  We all called her, but they're having their biannual conference in Winchester, England, on April 20--, April 14th, 13th and 14th, and this will be one of the largest gathering for just academics in Europe and they all come now.  They've found out about black intellectuals, or black academics, intellectual, black academics.  They come en masse now.
Speaker 2: Now what's the name of it?
Speaker 1: CAAR [Colloquium for African American Research].  You can pull it up on the web.  CAAR, C-A-A-R.
Speaker 2: I know when, when you first mentioned this we discussed the importance of African Americans in the larger world, the global importance of African Americans, I mean, we--most of us would be, would draw a blank trying to figure out why, you know, we're important global, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--you thought it was i, ironic that, you know, Europe has given such attention to studying us or even the world has given this much attention to studying us and a lot of us dismiss our own--
Speaker 1: Well see what's fascinating was when she started this it was just European, it was just the European.  Now there is a Japanese group that also studies African American and a Latin American Group.  The only one that doesn't have one is Africa.
Speaker 2: This is another irony.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and see my reading is that no one can forget the horrific deeds that were did to people.  Slavery, lynching, indignities, and that went around the world and then once you have this brilliant, not one, but a number of brilliant spokespeople.  What the Latino and the Asian community lack bluntly is someone of a [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Dr.] caliber or a Malcolm X caliber.  You can go anywhere in the world and they can tell you about Martin Luther King.  Oh, I have a dream.  It res, resonated around the world.
Story_ID: 80852
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this we--
Speaker 2: Yeah sure.
Speaker 1: --we ask everybody this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what are you hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I hope that we don't be swallowed by consumerism, that we forget the struggles that brought us here this far and also the hope, one of the hopes is that we live in a very, very broad world.  Whether we like, like people or not, other people live in this world too, and we have to form coalitions and alliances with other people around the world.  We cannot just simply look at our bellybuttons and there is nothing wrong with being Afrocentric, but if that is, and I know that you're somewhat Afrocentric so I'm hitting you right between the eyes, there is nothing wrong with being Afrocentric, but I would prefer we would become world centric because we have made tremendous contribution to the world and for us to just go in a corner and play with beads I think is one of the major, would be a major tragedy.  We need to be in the world and of the world.
Story_ID: 80853
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir--
Speaker 2: Every time I say something that I think is really good and I think we're ending you come up with another questions.  Now, I gotta think again of something clever to say (laughter).  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: How would you--looking back at the work that you've been able to do, what would you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I forgot what--Willy Brandt was the prime minister--chancellor of German, and on his tombstone is just a simple I did what I could.  When [Francois] Mitterrand, the president of France did he borrowed that and put the same thing only in French, I did what I could.  And my legacy is I did what I could.  I never gave up.  I never gave up.  I'm sure that if there is someplace, an afterworld, that [Richard] "Dick" Durham would probably be proud of me.  He said Buzz is a born revolutionary.  He told his wife; never told me.  He said Buzz is a born revolutionary; that's what I am.  No excuses, no apologies.  When I see other people that have fallen by the wayside every morning I get up and take a sword out of, a sword out and go out to kill dragons, and there are real dragons out there.  I never give up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have you thought about writing your memoirs?
Speaker 2: No.  Everybody asks me that.  See the weakness here is that I'm working to change the world; I really am.  And for me to stop and go on an ego trip to admire what I did or what I didn't do, the women that I should have kissed and didn't, you know, it's, there's work to be done (laughter).
Story_ID: 80854
Speaker 1: All right now and there's two last things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean what would you parents think about what you--are you--are either one of them alive?
Speaker 2: No, they're both dead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you think--did they have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Edward Palmer], my father--my mother [Ruth Woodson Palmer] was more prescient, prescient--she knew something.  Right before she died, she told me that I had a tiger on my back, and I said no, no I'm riding the tiger and then she died.  And my father when I started the Afro-American Patrolmen's League he told me Bu, Buzz you got a good job, why are you doing this?  (Laughter).  But, I think he would be--I think both of them would be satisfied what I did.
Speaker 1: And you can, could you have imagined when you were a youngster that you would travel around the world and do some of the things and meet some of the people that you've met?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No I couldn't, but I always knew that I could fight, that I could fight and I could win.  It was so bad when I was in the Philippines there was this one bully and he just bullied everybody, weighed around 220 pounds and he was a very muscular black guy.  He was a cook, and he bragged about, so I said well I'll get in the ring with you.  I weighed around 145 pounds to his 220 pounds, and I got in the ring with him.  I wasn't gonna let anybody be a bully, and I started boxing, and this was the last time I boxed too, and I was just popping him, bang, bam, bam, bam, bam.  So finally he tied me up and he clubbed on the back of the head with 220 pounds--I fell to the deck.  I got up and walked over to the corner and said take these motherfuckers off (laughter) and that ended it.  But, you know, the same way, you know, when I was a policeman what I would always do I'd go into the police station and find out who the biggest bully was and then ask them if they could teach me how to box.  I'd been admiring you and wondering whether you could teach me a few moves.  Oh yeah and I proceeded to kick the living shit of him (laughter).
Story_ID: 80855
Speaker 1: So, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: He did what he could.  I did what I could.
Speaker 1: All right thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 80856
Speaker 1: Okay, this is me testifying before the U.S. Senate and I can't remember what I was--it might have been on Africa.  I was the chairman of the senate advisory committee on Southern Africa, and underneath it's a note from Paul Simon of the U.S. Senate head.
Speaker 2: This was off the front page of the Chicago Sun-Times.  The guy on the far left I can't remember who he is, but I think he was a mayor [Mayor Harold Washington] (laughter).  That's Bishop [Desmond] Tutu.  Conrad is standing behind him.  Hank Henry is standing behind him, David somebody, that's me in a big fur hat and Bishop Tutu is holding up the cover of a magazine we put out called New Deliberate, "New Deliberation."  And what it says is free, freeing South Africa, freeing ourselves, and it was at the Daley Plaza.
Speaker 1: This is in Potsdam, Germany, East Germany, and this was a delegation that I arranged to visit the socialist country, Czechoslovakia, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Moscow [Russia].  The guy with the belly is me.  Don Rojas there who is now the general manager at WBAI.  The guy kneeling down in front is Bob Chrisman with the hat on his head.  He's the editor of "Black, Black Scholar."  Right above him is Jan Carew, who's the founding director of Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and--(unclear)--he went to Northwestern [University, Evanston].  Later Kevin Blackistone who's the Dallas Morning Star, morning news or something like that.  Terry Johnson, I believe at the time was with NBC.  The pretty woman in the middle is my wife, Alice [Palmer].  Why she married somebody like me.  The heavyset woman is Eutrice (ph.) Lee and then to her left is Don Rojas who is the spokesman for Maurice Bishop in Granada [Spain], now the general manager of WBAI in New York, Pacifica Radio. Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduation, I guess, from grammar school.  Nothing to say about it.  Nicolas Copernicus [Elementary School] out in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  I grew up in Englewood.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Me and the Scandinavians.  That's me on the left laughing.  That's my son, son.  The tall guy is from Gothenburg [Sweden], and the guy in the middle I don't know.  The black guy in the middle I don't know who he is.  I always whenever I'm with [Mayor] Harold [Washington] I always like to stay at the side because everybody liked to get next to him.  So, I always made a point to not be next to him.  And that's the deputy mayor of, of Gothenburg, and the guy standing in the back is a Swedish cons--
Story_ID: 80857
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is me with the then highest-ranking African in the world M'Bow, M'Bow who is the secretary general of UNESCO.
Speaker 2: Can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: M'-B-O-W, M'Bow.
Speaker 2: And he was from where?
Speaker 1: He was from Senegal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This me and [Mayor] Harold [Washington] and foreign dignitary.
Speaker 2: On the right-hand side that was my mentor, Dick Durham, Richard Durham.  In the center his Chauncey Bailey who was with the Oakland Tribune, and the guy who had the short-sleeve shirt on is me.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCCUSION)
Speaker 2: This is in Riverside on the free South Africa, Riverside Church on the free South Africa movement. Okay?
Speaker 1: About what year was this?
Speaker 2: '80s [1980s]. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my father [Edward Palmer] and my daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): And who's on the left?
Speaker 1: I don't know. It was Ellis' (ph.) birthday.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): (unclear) They share the same date.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me in the [U.S.] Air Force in the Philippine Islands, eighteen, nineteen years old.
Speaker 2: This is in Moscow [Russia] and that's me with the nice jacket on, John Woodford, the Michigan Times.  He was the former editor of "Muhammad Speaks."  That's a gnome, I guess.  That's Jan Carew, another short end.  Frank Morris [HM] who is the former director of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, good friends.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was me at a very young age, five or six.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is Michael Franklin, the heavyset guy, and we're in Paris [France].  We're either in Paris or Brussels [Belgium] probably 1994 or something like that.  That's me in the middle.  That's David Johnson, the former mayor of Harvey.  Founder of the organization of African unity.  African American Latin Union.
Speaker 1: I guess we were in Berlin [Germany].  Yeah, that's Berlin.  That's Bob Ri, Bob Rich, a good friend of mine.  He is the former director of Institute of Government and Public Affairs, and that's his friend, and behind me are all the cranes rebuilding Berlin.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE:  Was this the eastern side?
Speaker 1: No, it crumbled then.
Speaker 2: This was my sweetie.  I can't remember her name then.  Josann (ph.) something and I guess it was a prom date and Ivory Hardy and myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is Prague (Czech Republic), probably around before the fall.  I was getting ready to pontificate.  You can see Rudy.  He was saying oh my God he's fixing to go off again.  This is the meeting of the IO[J], International Organization of Journalists in Prague.
Speaker 1: This is somewhere on this tour because that's Valerie Esenver (ph.), the girl that can never get up in the morning.  My function was to drag her out of bed.  We're somewhere in the socialist countries I know that, probably Moscow.  We developed an exchange program with the union of Soviet girls.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me coming out of grammar school.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay. High School. Can I go home now? Whatever you say.
Speaker 2: But we brought her anyway.  Now, everybody else took an excellent picture except me.  The one on the far left--let me just go over this.  Christopher Wambu, professor at Hunter College [New York] and city college, John Casey, the former president of the Metropolitan YMCA in Chicago and the president of the World Alliance of YMCA in Geneva, Switzerland, one of my closes friends.  That's me.  The guy in the dark suit is Dwight Ellis, the vice president over National Association of Broadcasters.  The guy with no hair is Bob Cumming, chairman of African studies, Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  John Richardson is the ambassador to the UN from the European Union.  Alice Palmer, the co-convener of the Trans-Atlantic Conference.  Over her shoulder smiling is Shashi Tharoor, Tharoor who went on to become the youngest secretary of the United Nation [UN] and public affairs, public affair.  The man standing next to her grinning widely is the ambassador to the UN from South Africa and an old friend--what's his name, what's Dumisani's name, Dumisani Kumalo, Kumalo, and final is the head of it the ambassador from Tunisia whose name will be unpronounced.
