Story_ID: 372234
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson for The HistoryMakers. Neculai Burghelea, he's the videographer for The HistoryMakers. I should have you introduce yourself. Just speak into my microphone because you're observing.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Laura Bierbaum from Behrman Communications [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And, if you can just spell your out for me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Laura, L-A-U-R-A, Bierbaum, B as in boy I-E-R-B-A-U-M.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, I will just have you introduce yourself and spell your name out for me.
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Lisa Price, L-I-S-A, P-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: The address?
Speaker 2: This is Carol's Daughter, located at 24 West 125th Street, between Fifth [Avenue] and Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] in Harlem [New York, New York], USA.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 8th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And, your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm founder and managing partner of Carol's Daughter.
Story_ID: 372235
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with your mother's [Carol Warwell Hutson] side of the family. And, I will talk to you about your mother's side of the family and then I will talk to you about your father's [Robert Hairston, Jr.] side of the family. But, before we get there, I'm gonna ask you five very basic short answer questions.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of day?
Speaker 2: Middle of the night.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pasta with sauce with ground turkey.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: This too shall pass.
Story_ID: 372236
Speaker 1: Let's start my talking about your mother and your mother's side of the family. Did I get your date of birth?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. Let me have your date of birth.
Speaker 2: May 18, 1962.
Speaker 1: And, your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York.
Speaker 1: Was that New York, New York?
Speaker 2: New York, New York. Beth Israel Hospital [Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay. And, your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Carol Frances Hutson [Carol Warwell Hutson].
Speaker 1: Your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 29, 1942.
Speaker 1: Your mother's place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York, Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Now, you mother is deceased?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, what year did she pass away?
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: And, she was young then.
Speaker 2: Sixty.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, let's talk about your mother. She was born here in New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do know about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, she's the youngest of seven. And, she was spoiled rotten (laughter), being the baby of seven. She grew up in Brooklyn, New York. My grandparents on my mom side were from Trinidad. And, they immigrated here and had all of their children here. And, my mom grew up in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]. I don't remember her first house, but they lived on Van Buren Street where I live now when she was older. And, she had a great childhood as far as I know 'cause she really was spoiled by all her brothers and sisters being the baby (laughter).
Speaker 1: You said that her parents were from Trinidad.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names and their dates of birth?
Speaker 2: My grandmother is--her name was Marguerite Georgina [Marguerite King Warwell], and she was born on October 25th. I don't remember the year but, if someone wants to do math, when she passed away in 1975, I think she was seventy-four or just tu-, no, she had just turned seventy-five in 1976. That's when she passed away. And, my grandfather is a couple of years older than her and his birthday was December 17th.
Speaker 1: What's your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, he passed away the day before she did. He died October 30th, 1976, and then she died October 31st. Oh, his name is Michael Francis Warwell [Francis Warwell].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, just spell both their names for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that we have the correct--
Speaker 2: Nanna was Marguerite Georgina, M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E, Georgina, G-E-O-R-G-I-N-A, Warwell, W-A-R-W-E-L-L. And, then he's Michael Francis Warwell, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, and then again Warwell, W-A-R-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother's mother. Do you know much about your grandmother's life in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: All I know about her life in Trinidad is that she, when she married my grandfather, I think she might have been about nineteen or twenty which was considered a little old for her to have just gotten married. And, while they lived in Trinidad, she didn't have any children. So, they decided that she was barren. And, she changed all of that when she came to the states and had seven children (laughter), one after the other (laughter). But, I don't know too much about her life in Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Do you know what she did for a living in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: I don't think she had a job that I know of. And, I know when she came here she was a housewife and mother.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her mother; your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather? What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: I remember my grandfather being like a fix it kind of person. He always had plans in this workshop. Any television in the family that broken, he'd take it apart and fix it; toaster, radios. But, honestly, I don't know exactly what it was that he did for a job. But, I knew that anybody that had something broken they would come and get Mr. Warwell so that he could go and fix it; and he could fix it.
Speaker 1: Do you know the origin of the name? Your last name; his last name?
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: So, and, when you were growing up, he was a fix it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --kind of guy?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, everyone would bring their toasters, TV, whatever needed to be fixed to him?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did they pay him?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did--was the shop in his home?
Speaker 2: Yes. He actually had like a workshop out in the backyard underneath the grapevine that he grew. And, then he had another one down in the basement.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year they migrated to the states? When did they come to New York?
Speaker 2: It was, oh boy, no. I don't know exactly. I could find out. My aunt I'm sure knows. But, I don't know exactly.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they came?
Speaker 2: I think they came for work. I think he wanted to come here to work. To, you know, it was something that that was being done in Trinidad at that time. And, I think that was the main reason that they came.
Speaker 1: So, do you know what happened to, obviously you do, but can you tell me briefly what happened to the other six siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother's brothers and sisters. Aunt Ruby [Ruby Warwell] is the eldest; she's still alive. She lives in New Jersey. And, after her was Uncle Sonny [Sonny Warwell]. And, Uncle Sonny passed away a few months after my mom. He died of cancer. And, then after Uncle Sonny, I think is Uncle Hugh [Hugh Warwell]. And, Uncle Hugh passed away about a year and a half after my mom. He died of a stroke. Then after Uncle Hugh is Aunt Sylvia [Sylvia Warwell], and she lives in Georgia. And, then it's Uncle Ronnie [Ronnie Warwell], and Uncle Ronnie also lives in Georgia. Then Aunt Joan [Joan Warwell]. She lives in South Carolina, and then would've been my mom.
Story_ID: 372237
Speaker 1: Did they [Price's maternal aunts and uncles] ever talk about the family stories of having grown up in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] at the time?
Speaker 2: What I remember them telling us was that they, they were very close knit. Apparently, at that time, you were kind of teased if people knew that your parents were not American. And, their parents [Marguerite King Warwell and Francis Warwell] weren't. So, they got called different names, you know, in the neighborhood. So, they, they stayed with themselves. And, then they had other friends who were also children of immigrants that they stayed with. Everybody spoke American, you know, no one spoke with an accent. Even my grandmother, you know, would cover up her accent and speak more proper. And, she would say, she always said tomato, and potato, and comfortable, instead of comfortable. And, they--because they were close knit, all of my cousins and I were very close knit as well. They raise us the way that they were raise. And, our--my cousins were like brothers and sisters to me because we were always with each other, extended family was the norm.
Speaker 1: Well, how far back can you trace your ancestors? Is it just your mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] and your grandmother that you know about, or were there legends in the family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, on, on my father's [Robert Hairston, Jr.] side--
Speaker 1: Before we get to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, no--
Speaker 1: Anything on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, that's as far back as, as I know, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, do--were there any jewels? Any stories that you can tell me that you remember that were passed on to you from your mother's side of the family that may have been a family legend or was there a family heirloom or anything that was handed down through the family, on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, the bangles that I wear were from my grandmother. One of them, my grandmother had given my mother and then my mother gave it to me when I was thirteen. And, then the other two were always on my grandmother's arm. And, they were given to me when she passed away when I was fourteen. So, I, I'm one of the only grandchildren that actually has her bangles. And, I have some twenty-four carat gold earrings that were my grandmother's as well.
Speaker 1: The significance of the bangles, do you know?
Speaker 2: It--well, I don't know where it started but in, in Trinidad and in other Caribbean countries, little girls get bangles when their born. That's just what happens, you (laughter), before you're one, you get bangles. And, I had little baby ones when I was little and they didn't replace them and give me the, you know, more mature version until I was about thirteen. And, I remember sitting in the kitchen with my mother and Aunt Ruby [Ruby Warwell] and Aunt Sylvia [Warwell], and they were wrapped in tissue. And, I remember Aunt Sylvia threatening me that if she ever saw me without the bangle on my arm (laughter), I'd have a lot of explaining to do. And, they've never come off. I've only taken them off when I've had to have surgery and you can't go into an operating room with them. And, I forget that they're there.
Speaker 1: What do they mean to you?
Speaker 2: To me, they're, they're my grandmother, you know. I never, ever, ever forget her. And, to me they're history and tradition and, you know, I don't, I really don't know where it started with giving little girls bangles but it's just what we do.
Story_ID: 372238
Speaker 1: Can you remember what your [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite King Warwell] smelled like?
Speaker 2: Like Pond's cold cream. And, on Sunday's like Chanel No. 5 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, do, was there any history in the family of making their own oils or scents--
Speaker 2: My grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because they are from Trinidad?
Speaker 2: --made a hair pomade, and it's very strange because I actually didn't connect the fact that I was making products to her, until someone said, "Oh, you're making things just like Nana used to." And, I don't know why I didn't make that connection because I would watch her make her hair pomade. But, it just didn't, it didn't click until someone else said it. And, she also use to make a massage oil that she would massage on all of the babies in the family. She believed in massaging their legs every day with olive oil. But, there was always something in the olive oil 'cause it didn't just smell like olive oil. And, she never told you what was in it, you know, so the--
Speaker 1: What did it smell like?
Speaker 2: It sort of smelled like, like bay rum a little bit, kind of spicy. And, you know, you'll say, "Nana, what's in there, that's not just olive oil?" "Oh, hush child, hush," you know, (laughter), she, she didn't tell you. But, she would massage all, all of the babies in the family would get oil from her and you had to warm it up a little bit and you had to massage their legs every day. And, that was supposed to make them straight and strong.
Speaker 1: What was Nana's hair like to use to pomade on?
Speaker 2: She made it for anyone whose hair was thinning. Or, if someone's hair had come out from like a perm or something. And, she used it on her hair 'cause on of the, the traits that go throughout the family unfortunately, is as the women get older, their hair thins. So, she made it for herself but then she would, she would give it to her neighbors and friends and all of us in the family had it.
Speaker 1: So, you said you watched her make it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did she make it?
Speaker 2: She cooked it on the stove--
Speaker 1: What was it though? What were the ingredients?
Speaker 2: I don't know them all 'cause she was very secretive about it. But, her base was petroleum jelly and I, I believe that that was her base because that's was what she could get. I think if she could've gotten wax, she would've used it 'cause that's just how she was. But, she used petroleum jelly as a base with olive oil, and she also put Vitalis in the pomade. And, when I was older and started making products, I went to a drugstore and bought a bottle of Vitalis just out of curiosity. And, I could see that it was made with bay leaf. And, bay leaf is an essential, there's an essential oil made from bay leaf that promotes hair growth. So, I think that she must have known that but just being here, you know, she couldn't go out in the bush and pick bay leaf so she used Vitalis. And, there was something else that was in there, but I don't know what it is. She never showed it to me.
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother was the person in the family who looking back may have introduced you to the idea of making body products, hair products?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she package them to sel- how would she give someone pomade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She put it in a baby food jar which is how I started as well.
Speaker 1: So, anything else you can tell me about her and her connection to you as you look back on, on your life?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she taught me how to be in the kitchen. I don't wanna say that she taught me how to cook 'cause I did learn some cooking from her. But, I think I learned more cooking from my mom [Carol Warwell Hutson]. But, Nana had an etiquette that she followed in the kitchen. There was no running around in the kitchen. Like if we came in from outside ripping and running, we had to stop if she in the kitchen cooking. There was no fussing and arguing in the kitchen because she would say that that energy would get into the food. And, she didn't want any craziness in her kitchen. And, she would always clean as she was working and she would call it clean as you go. So, you spill something you wipe it up. You use a cup, you rinse it out. So, that when you're finished, you're not looking at a big mess in the kitchen. And, she said that it just made things go more organized and it was more peaceful for her. And, I just spent a lot of time in the kitchen with her, learning that etiquette and just learning how to be.
Speaker 1: So, when you look back, is there anything that your mother told you about what her mother was like that you remember?
Speaker 2: Um.
Speaker 1: Because she was a grandmother to you, but she had been, she's a mother to your mother. So what were the lessons she may have taught your mother, some of them?
Speaker 2: I'm to think of something specific that she would, that my mother would've said me and I really, it, it was almost just the way that she was, you know. Like we all knew that they were from Nana and Gramps [Francis Warwell] and that's how they learned to be. And, being that, you know, I was fourteen my brother [Philip Hairston] was eleven, you know, different cousins were either a little older than me or younger than me when they passed away. We grew up with, you know, the memory of Nana and Gramps because their children kept that alive. I remember my mother saying that she was very proper, very private, and I, oh, I do remember my mother telling my brother and I about not eating food in someone else's house if she doesn't know them. And, she told me the story about her and her sister going to someone else's house and the person offered them food and they ate it. And, then someone got sick and, you know, they, you know, got this lecture from Nana, you know, "I don't know her, I don't know how she cooks, you can't eat food in a stranger's house." And, you know, "This is why you're sick now," and, you know.
Story_ID: 372239
Speaker 1: So, moving to your father's side of the family. Your father's name, his date of birth, and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay. May 14, 1934, I hope, I think it's '34 [1934]. Robert Powell Hairston, Jr. [Robert Hairston, Jr.] and as far as I know he's born in New York, in New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Were you close to your father?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are you close, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still am, he's still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about your father's childhood. He grew up in New York, New York.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He was American?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, his mom was originally from Trinidad. But, her mother was from Jamaica and I vaguely remember her. She, she was another Nana. And, she passed away when I was about five. And, I remember she had really, really, deep dimples and my Aunt Judith [Judith Hairston], my father's sister has those dimples. She was kind of stern. She wasn't really like a warm and fuzzy kind of person. And, when my father told me she passed away, I always feel guilty about this, but I was only five. But, when he said Nana passed away, I thought it was my mom's mom [Marguerite King Warwell] and I got really upset. And, then I realized when he was talking to me about it, that it was the other Nana, and I was actually a little relieved. And, and I've always felt guilty about that but I was only five, so I couldn't help it. But, she just wasn't, you know, that type of personality. Like my mom's mom was very affectionate and you know, cuddly and she was just more stern. My grandfather [Robert Hairston, Sr.], my dad's dad is American and he's still alive. My grandmother, my mom's mom passed--my dad's mom passed away. But, my grandfather is still alive at ninety-seven.
Speaker 1: So, your father was first generation Jamaican because he's, because his mother had come over from Jamaica you said--
Speaker 2: His--
Speaker 1: Or, Trinidad?
Speaker 2: His mother's mother--
Speaker 1: His mother's mother.
Speaker 2: Was Jamaican--
Speaker 1: Jamaican.
Speaker 2: But her father was Trinidadian. And, she came here from Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, when your father was born, he was the first of that side of the family to be American?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about what it was like to grow up with the son of immigrants?
Speaker 2: No. And, Grandma Hilda [Hilda Hairston], which is my, my dad's mom, she even more so than my [maternal] grandmother, did not have an accent. She worked really hard to not have that and she was of the mindset of assimilate and blend in. And, she had an American husband and I don't even know if they even discussed it. I don't even remember Grandma Hilda making West Indian food. My mother's mother did and Grandma Hilda would like to get food from my, my grandmother; my mother's mother, but she cooked American food. I never remember her making peas and rice, or curry, or plantain. And, she loved it. But, she didn't cook it. She cooked for her American husband.
Speaker 1: So, just going back a little bit.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, going back a little bit, you talked, you said, that your mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] cooked West Indian. Can you, you named a few dishes, can you give me others that may have been specifically West Indian dishes that you grew up with?
Speaker 2: Cassava pone, rice pudding made a different, you know, it's not made the same way that, you know, you get in a deli here, it's different; bread pudding, plantains, coconut turnovers, curry chicken, channa, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I, sounds good--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It all sounds good.
Story_ID: 372240
Speaker 1: Back to your father's [Robert Hairston, Jr.] side of the family. What did your father do for a living when you were young?
Speaker 2: My father, I--he worked at Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] and I think he was security or he might have been retail. I, I just remember he worked at Macy's and then he also worked in a group home. And, he worked for an agency called Youth in Action and it was, in the '70s [1970s] it was where you went to get your summer job. And, he, I know he worked in an office. I don't know what his title was. He's a law professor now [at Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]. When he was in his forties, he went back to school, and went to law school.
Speaker 1: So, what, do you know why he decided to go back to school and become a lawyer after forty years?
Speaker 2: He, I think it was something that he always wanted to do but, you know, having a family and supporting them and all that kind of got in the way. So, when we were old enough and he was in a position that he could fulfil his dream, he did it. He just had a second life at, you know, forty-two.
Speaker 1: So, did your father ever talk about his ancestors, people beyond? Were there any legends in his family? Were they all free people? Had there been any slaves in Trinidad?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's mother, I think was a slave. But, I don't know the full history on it, but I'm pretty sure on, on his side. And, then my grandfather's grandfather was a gentleman named McDuffie [ph.] and I remember seeing a picture of him and he just looked white. Apparently, he wasn't. But, if you look at this picture you wouldn't know that was anything but white. And, my grandfather's [Robert Hairston, Sr.] very, very fair and his sister was as well. His sister worked, my Aunt Liz [ph.], she worked at the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith and she was the executive assistant to the director. And, she didn't pass, but because of how she looked, most people assumed that she was not black and it just made her position more comfortable. And, then when they found out, they were always shocked (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, what, how, have you connected to who the white side of the family possibly may have been?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, you have no idea (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm feeling very lazy right now, like I really need to do some history work (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You're raising all these questions, and I'm like, I don't know, this isn't good (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, obviously, someone was white at some point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, no one ever talked about it?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 372241
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your childhood? Do you remember the first house you lived in?
Speaker 2: I rem- you know, it's funny because you're, you're not sure what you actually remember. Or, do you remember it because your father [Robert Hairston, Jr.] tells such vivid stories and, and gives you like imagery to do with it. But, he told me this story about a, this sounds gross, but a rat being in the apartment when I was very, very young. And, my mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] being terrified and calling him. And, he had to go up the block to get his brother-in-law, my Uncle Hugh [Hugh Warwell], to help him. Apparently, there was some sewer work going on and, and it was just a problem in the neighborhood and when he describes that and he describes the kitchen and, you know, how they caught it and what happened, I can remember that kitchen a little bit. I can see it. But, I--and I, I'm assuming that I can see it because I lived there. But, I was much too young to really have a memory of that kitchen. But, that was our first apartment.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: When that happened I was two, two in a half. So, you know, I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You could possibly remember that kitchen.
Speaker 2: I guess so, I guess so. But, I remember things when I was five. I remember sitting on the stoop at the house that I now live in. But, ne- at that time, there was an Irish couple that lived there, Mr. and Mrs. Tierney [ph.]. And, Mrs. Tierney asked me to sit on the stoop with her and talk and she gave me peach ice cream in a little porcelain tea cup. And, I remember sitting on the stoop with her. And, I remember the hot sun, and the cold ice cream, and the flowers in the bottom of the tea cup as I finished the ice cream (laughter).
Speaker 1: Go ahead, these--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. I remember my [maternal] grandmother's [Marguerite King Warwell] dresser and her perfume bottles, and--
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the perfume bottles.
Speaker 2: She, well, she wore Chanel No. 5 when she went to church. So, I would, I would take that off of her dresser and smell it. I remember going to church with her. There, there's this picture of the two of us sitting on the piano bench and she, she always got dressed up to go to church. And, she had a turban on her head and this really pretty dress and she would put her jewelry on, on Sunday. And, she's sitting and smiling into the camera and I'm supposed to be smiling into the camera but, I'm look up at her and just giving her this little, this little grin. But, I was just so excited to be dressed up with her and in the picture with her, you know, you feel like you're grown up even though you're only five. And, she would sometimes let me wear Chanel No. 5 with her, so, you know, you couldn't tell me anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, is this the grandmother who also made the pomade and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, the oils?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, did she make them in that kitchen or her own kitchen? Did you live, did she live with you?
Speaker 2: No. She didn't live with--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With us. But, we--she lived at number 280 Van Buren [Street] and when I first came home from the hospital [Beth Israel Hospital; Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New York, New York], I lived at number 270, so we were close. And, even when we moved to Bushwick Avenue [Brooklyn, New York], Nana's house was, that was, everybody was there, you know, so you were always at Nana's house at one point or another.
Story_ID: 372242
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what the family life surround--your family life, and holidays, your daily routine. What was your family life when you were growing up in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, when my mom [Carol Warwell Hutson] and dad [Robert Hairston, Jr.] were married, they had me and then three years later they had my brother Philip [Philip Hairston]. So, I had a little brother. I remember our apartment on Bushwick Avenue. I don't really remember too much of the one before that. I had my own room. Philip had his own room. But, Philip would play in my room. I was very neat. Philip wasn't (laughter). So, when I came home from school, my room would be trashed (laughter). And, I'd walk in screaming from school and my mother would calm me down. My dad worked two jobs so sometimes he wasn't home in the evening. He would be at his second job. And, I remember being in the kitchen with my mother in the evening. I like to watch television, always have. When I was two years old my mother said I sat in the playpen and watched 'I Love Lucy' religiously. And, I would point at the TV and tell her, "Lucy, Lucy, Lucy, Lucy (laughter)." I still love Lucille Ball 'til this day. And, I wanted to watch 'Bewitched.' But, 'Bewitched' came on at like 7:30 or something and we had to be in bed then. And, I remember the first time my mother let me stay up and watch 'Bewitched.' And, she put my brother to bed and then she stood by the bedroom door and kind of waved her hand so that I could go by. And, I snuck out of my bedroom and went in the kitchen. And, she was doing ironing or something and I sat at the kitchen table watching 'Bewitched' and just being so excited that I was staying up past bedtime. I remember my mom cooking in that apartment. I remember Christmas, many Christmases in that apartment. My father, my mother was too, but my father was really like the Santa Claus guy at Christmastime. And, my mother would do all of the, the practical things that needed to be done; the cooking and, you know, getting ready for family to come over. And, my father would wait until Christmas Eve to paint the bathroom before all the guest got there and, you know, wrap last minute gifts. And, he hid presents all over the house. So, like you'd be cleaning up from wrapping up gifts and you'd find more behind the sofa. He always put the toys under the tree and then the practical things like the pajamas and socks (laughter), they would be hidden (laughter) in other places--
Story_ID: 371918
Speaker 1: You were talking about Christmases and your father [Robert Hairston, Jr.] hiding presents. So, just go ahead and flush out Christmas for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The traditional Christmas in your household.
Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was big on Santa. So, big in fact, that one Christmas when I was about six, I woke up in the middle of the night and he was in the living room doing his holiday thing that, you know, would miraculously take place every Christmas Eve. And, I guess he didn't want to get caught and, you know, ruin the, the whole illusion. So, he saw me coming out of my room and he's like, "What are doing?" And, I said, "Oh, I need a tissue, my nose is running." So, he tears off some toilet tissue and shoves it through the door. And, it wasn't enough, you know, so I, I tried to come back, and I was like, "Daddy, I need, more, I need more." So, I ended up getting like the whole roll shoved through the door in my room. And, then he stands in the living room and he goes, "Ho, Ho, Ho, good evening Mr. Hairston."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. "Ho, ho, ho, good evening Mr. Hairston. Have your children been good today?" (Laughter) And I'm in my room and I go, "Santa's here, I've gotta go to sleep."  And, I jumped into the bed and closed my eyes and went back to sleep. And, it wasn't until years later that I realized, my father's a fool (laughter). He made believe Santa Claus was in the living room (laughter).
Speaker 1: When did you realize that there was not a Santa Claus?
Speaker 2: Someone at school told me, you know. And, they start making you think logically. Like, how is he gotta get to all those houses, you know. And I, and, I asked my father and he had to admit it. I think I might have been about eight though, eight or nine. I held on to it for a while.
Story_ID: 371919
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in 1962?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In the 1970s a lot of stuff had happened in the '60s [1960s]. Like, you were very young but do you remember your parents [Carol Warwell Hutson and Robert Hairston, Jr.] even talking about King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination or Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] or Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy]?
Speaker 2: I don't remember them talking about it 'cause I grew up in a family that didn't let children hear a lot of things that they felt were inappropriate for them. I remember not being in school because different people were killed. I remember the television, you know, not being about to see the cartoon or whatever, that you'd usually watch because there was news coverage or there was a funeral that was on television. And, I remember people being upset and not understanding why they were upset.
Speaker 1: Did you know--you knew that people had been killed. But, did you know why people were being killed? Did you understand racism at that time?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: What did you understand about race relations?
Speaker 2: Not, not really that much at that time. Because I was so sheltered within my family. I remember my father explaining that some people, you know, don't like us because of the color of our skin. But, that's not how, you know, we live and it's not right to judge people. But, I didn't really get it because I wasn't a victim of it. You know, I hadn't been called, you know, anything negative and I grew up in an African American neighborhood [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] and, you know, no one ever said anything to me that was inappropriate.
Story_ID: 371920
Speaker 1: What did you mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] use on your hair to comb it, to style it? Do you remember what products she used? How did you wear did you hair as a child?
Speaker 2: It was in pigtails and braids. My hair was, was kind of thick so I couldn't really wear it out. If it was out, it was because someone was getting married or, you know, there were school pictures being take. I remember DuSharme. It was a product that my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite King Warwell] used that my mom would use. It was this white cream in a white jar with a pink lid. And, there was another one called Vitapointe. It wasn't until I was about thirteen that, you know, we used things like Ultra Sheen. Like eleven, thirteen that's when Ultra Sheen came into the house.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what your mother used on her hair? What did her hair look like? Did she straighten it? Did she wear it natural?
Speaker 2: She didn't straighten it, well, no, I shouldn't say that. She did straighten it sometimes with, there, there's a product called Curl Free which was actual a relaxer that Jewish women used that had very thick hair. So, it was a bit milder than, you know, like a Revlon relaxer which would tend to make our hair a bit too straight. So, my family would use Curl Free. So, you could really tell when someone put one in their hair or not because their hair wasn't as kinky. But, that was, that was what they used. So, whenever my mom use, used it, I'm not sure. But, then she went through a period in the '70s [1970s] when she and my dad [Robert Hairston, Jr.] separate where she was wearing her fro, her curly fro and she didn't use the Curl Free anymore.
Speaker 1: So, do you remember what your mother smelled like? What, what did she--or, did she inspire you in anyway?
Speaker 2: No. She really wasn't a perfume person. I think my mom wore more fragrances when I act- when I started to make them then she did before that. Again, she kind of smelled like Pond's cold cream. She wasn't a makeup person. She put makeup on when she was going out, not when she was going to work, you know, she was going out. So, you know, the same bottle of foundation and the same lipstick were in the medicine cabinet, just to give you a clue, the makeup was in the medicine cabinet (laughter), and it fit (laughter). That, that's all that she used--
Story_ID: 371921
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you to briefly describe three things for me. Describe the block that you lived on.
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: When you were a child. The still--when you were talking about the early years, five, six, seven.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you really went to school.
Speaker 2: Okay. We lived on Bushwick Avenue [Brooklyn, New York] and we played more in the courtyard than out on the street itself 'cause Bushwick is a pretty busy street. And, the only street that I really played on when I was young was Van Buren Street where my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite King Warwell] lived. I'm more of a homebody person. I'm not an outside person. I didn't like outside that much unless my cousins were with me. And, I liked to play in the backyard more than I did in the front yard. I just didn't like the kids on the block. But, it, the courtyard on Bushwick Avenue we had more fun 'cause you didn't have to worry about traffic and, you know, things like that and you could just run around the courtyard and have a good time.
Speaker 1: Described some of your neighbors. You talked about the one woman who gave you the ice cream in the tea cup. Who were some of the other neighbors? And, she was Irish American?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Mrs. Millen [ph.] lived across the street from my grandmother. I think Mrs. Millen is still alive, she's just not in that house, but her daughter is. I live on that block now, where my grandmother lived. And, Mrs. Millen was like my grandmother's friend.
Speaker 1: What race was she? What nationality was she (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she was West Indian. I think she was. I think she was. Or, her husband was. I'm not su- I think it might be her husband that was from Barbados and Mrs. Millen was actually American. But, she was just funny. Just really, really funny. And, and told stories and would always engage my grandmother in conversation. And, she was, she was different from my grandmother 'cause my grandmother was more soft spoken and Mrs. Millen was loud and, "Hey girl, how you doing? And, what's going on?" And, you know, my grandmother just wasn't like that.
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother give Miss Millen or the Irish women any of her products? The pomade or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know she gave it to Mrs. Millen. I'm sure about Mrs. Tierney [ph.]. Mrs. Tierney passed away and I don't remember her being on that block for very long. That house stayed empty for many years, 'til my aunt and uncle moved into it.
Speaker 1: So, described for me the community in which you lived during that time? How would you describe the community?
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody on the block pretty much knew my grandmother. There was another women, Mrs. Little [ph.], very petite, fair skinned woman, very sweet, and she would come and have tea with my grandmother and talk to her. There was another woman. I don't remember her name. But, she, she was from Barbados and she spoke in a very sing songy kind of accent and whenever she came to talk to my grandmother, I just loved to listen to her talk 'cause she sounded like she was singing even though she was speaking. And, I just don't remember her name. I wanna say Mrs. Smalls [ph.]. I'm not sure. And, she had really deep dimples and brown skin and just so sweet. There was a numbers guy that would come, come by for my grandmother to play her numbers. And, he was really sweet too.
Speaker 1: Was he American, or?
Speaker 2: He was American. Yeah, yeah. And, he came to her funeral in a red pimp suit (laughter). But, we didn't say one word (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause for him, he was dressed up (laughter). He was appropriate. There was a corner store that we would go for Italian ices and, and the people there were always very nice. It's not the same as the block is now. It's, it's--there are still some people on the block that were there then but it, you know, it's not the same. It was more homey and you had more people looking out for you, you know. Nana might not have been outside, but her friends were outside watching you.
Story_ID: 371922
Speaker 1: So, just to round out this whole section about your early childhood. What sights, tell me what sights, remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: In, in what, what do you mean?
Speaker 1: I mean, when you see something, you know, oh that reminds me of--maybe it's the Italian ice guy. I mean, what sort of sights, visual sights do you see, takes you back to your childhood? Or, what smells, or what sounds, you know. Is it the smell of bay rum? Do you remember your [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite King Warwell]? Is it the sight of--
Speaker 2: Vanilla. The scent of vanilla will always--I'm comforted by vanilla. It just makes me think of her kitchen and baking and warmth and peace and just comfortable. Yeah, I think with me it's more smells. When I pass by my old public school [P.S. 262; P.S. 262, El Hajj Malik El Shabazz Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York], you know, I, I flash back to my childhood 'cause my grandfather [Francis Warwell] picked me up from school and would take me home. And, he always had colorful conversation for me and he always had a treat in his pocket for me. And, you know, we just had these great talks, you know, going, going home in the afternoon, so whenever I pass by that school, I think about him.
Story_ID: 371923
Speaker 1: So, speaking of school, where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Calvary St. Cyprian's [Calvary and St. Cyprian's School, Brooklyn, New York] at first. And, that, that was Nazi kindergarten; that's how I refer to it (laughter). Sorry, Calvary St. Cyprian's, but yeah, they were a bit much. And, then after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they German?
Speaker 2: No. No (laughter). No, West Indian. But, just very strict.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Very strict (laughter).
Speaker 1: For example. Give me an example of how strict they were.
Speaker 2: We were told to have our pencils in pencil cases in our book bags. And, I did not have a pencil case. So, we were asked to take out our pencils and I turned around and reached into my book bag and I had to dig to the bottom of the book bag for the pencil. So, I didn't get my pencil out quick enough. So, I got a lash with a, an, a piece of like elastic cord that the teacher would call her spaghetti. It was a lot sharper than spaghetti and I had this big welt on my arm from getting the lash (laughter). Because I didn't get my pencil out quick enough. So, yeah, Nazis (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, how long did you go to that school? From what grades?
Speaker 2: I was there for kindergarten and first grade. And, then I went to P.S. 262, which I think is now Malik El Shabazz School [P.S. 262, El Hajj Malik El Shabazz Elementary School] on MacDonough [Street] in, in Brooklyn [New York]. And, I was there for second grade, third grade, and fourth grade. And, then I think my parents [Carol Warwell Hutson and Robert Hairston, Jr.] started to realize that public school was not the best place for their child to be and I--
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: I just wasn't learning and I remember second grade and third grade being more involved in school work and fourth grade not being that way. There was more playing and goofing around. And, I think it had to do with the teacher that I had for fourth grade. So, then I went back--
Speaker 1: Name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her name, honestly. And, then I went back to parochial school. I went to St. Augustine's [St. Augustine School, Bronx, New York] for fifth grade, sixth grade, and seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Who inspired you at St. Augustine?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Jackman [ph.]. She was my fifth and sixth grade teacher and she was phenomenal, just amazing.
Speaker 1: What made her phenomenal and amazing?
Speaker 2: She really cared about her students and she pushed you and she made you work hard. But, she loved you, and she rewarded you, and she punished you. But, when she punished you, you knew she was doing it with love. She would separate the class. I don't think educators would do this now, but it worked in, in her setting. She separated the class and she would say she was separating the wheat from the chaff. And, she would have the kids on one side who were smart and the kids on the other side who were not as smart. And, she separated us because she wanted the not so smart to know where they needed to be and who they needed to emulate in order to be as, as smart as everyone else. So, you sort of felt funny when she separated you if you were on that other side. But, she helped you to transition over.
Speaker 1: Were you ever on the wrong side of the classroom (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I wasn't, thankfully.
Speaker 1: What did feel like to be on the side that you were on?
Speaker 2: It felt comfortable in that, that was where I knew my father wanted me to be. My father was always, you know, you come home with a 90 [percent] and it's, "Oh, what happened you didn't get a 95 [percent] this time," you know. And, if he heard that, he would be so upset, 'cause he's like, "Aren't you ever gonna forget that I did that, I'm sorry, I'm sorry," (laughter). But, he always, he always pushed, he always pushed for the best.
Speaker 1: You said you [maternal] grandfather [Francis Warwell] picked you up from school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. He would, he picked me up when I was at 262. When I was in the public school for second grade, third grade, and fourth grade. And, he would walk me home to my mom.
Story_ID: 371924
Speaker 1: So, when you look back on those years, let's say first through sixth grade, is there anyone outside of Mrs. Jackson, was it?
Speaker 2: Jackman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Jackman, that stands out?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well, at that time, what did you wanna do with your life? You said, I want to be, what, when you grow up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A singer. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good voice? Do you have a good voice?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you sing then?
Speaker 2: I, well, I would only, we went to a religious school. So, you would sing hymns 'cause you had mass twice a week. And, you had to sing the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] in the auditorium and--
Speaker 1: Every morning?
Speaker 2: I always sounded, sounded better than the other kids. I didn't really think of myself as a singer but when it came time to go to high school--my, my school St. Augustine's [St. Augustine School, Bronx, New York] was struggling. They, they didn't have the best reputation and there was financial issues going on. So, when I was in junior high school, they separated the class and they taught you at the level that you could handle. So, even though I was technically supposed to be in the seventh grade, I had classes that were ninth grade level and classes that were eighth grade level. And, I ended up skipping. And, when it was time to apply for high schools, they wanted us to place in the specialized high schools. So, because, whatever scores we got, made the school look better. So, they had to decide what specialized high school I was going to apply for. And, my father [Robert Hairston, Jr.] didn't want me to go to Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, New York, New York] 'cause he didn't want me to be in downtown Brooklyn [New York]. He didn't like the neighborhood. He didn't want me to go to Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] 'cause Stuyvesant previously had been an all-boy school so they're were gonna be too many boys there and that wasn't a good plan. So, he agreed that I could test for Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]. And, then there was a teacher at my junior high school, at St. Augustine's that had gone to Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. So, the school felt that because she had gone to Music and Art and she was a music teacher and she knew the test that she could coach me to get me in. And, that's when it was decided that I was a singer. Because up until that point, I thought that I could paint because I would paint flowers in a vase. So, I thought I'll go for art (laughter), ha (laughter). So, she taught me how to sing. And, she taught me how to take the test 'cause apparently the test was the same as it was in 1950 something. So, she taught me rhythm and she taught me repeating a melody because that was part of the test. So, you had to tap out rhythms. And, they would play something and they would tell you to sing it back and then you had to do a performance. So, in going to Music and Art for my audition, I decided that this was where I had to go to school because the building was just so beautiful and it was this castle up on a hill and there were murals in hallways and it just magical. And, I had to go there. But, my father really wanted me to go to Bronx High School of Science. Nobody wanted me to go to Music and Art. My mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] actually hid my acceptance letter in her dresser. And, I found it (laughter). So, I went to Music and Art (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, was that the same Music and Art that's in 'Fame'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is it that school? Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, 'Fame' is actually based on Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and Music and Art, which at the time were two separate schools. And, after I graduated, they became one school. And, they're now LaGuardia School of the Arts [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So, during that time, you saw yourself pursuing a life, a career as a singer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who inspired you as a singer?
Speaker 2: Diana Ross (laughter). 'Cause she was in 'Lady Sings the Blues.' So, she could act, she could sing, and she could dance. And, that's what I was going to be. I going to be Diana Ross.
Speaker 1: An actor, singer, dance--
Speaker 2: Yes. And, I was going to get the Academy Award because she was cheated when she didn't win it for 'Lady Sings the Blues.' So, I was going to grow up and win it for her. That was my plan (laughter).
Story_ID: 371925
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, did you ever see any other, well, obviously you did, what did you watch on TV during that time?
Speaker 1: When I was in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: So, now you're in high school. You've left Mrs. Jackson [sic. Mrs. Jackman (ph.)] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, it's funny because I watched things like 'Good Times,' and 'The Jeffersons.' But, at the same time, I watched them I hated them because I just didn't like that no one ever worked in an office, you know, the black people always cleaned someone's (cough), excuse me, they cleaned someone's home, or, you know, and it just wasn't real to me. Not that I lived in, in a household where my parents [Carol Warwell Hutson and Robert Hairston, Jr.] were, you know, doctors or lawyers, or executives, but my father did put a suit to go to work, you know. And, my mother became a bookkeeper, you know, at that point, when I was a teenagers. She was working as a bookkeeper. So, it just bothered me that, you know, no one, other than 'Julia,' you know, had a job that didn't involve cleaning.
Speaker 2: But, you're too young for 'Julia.' Correct?
Speaker 1: I remember 'Julia.'
Speaker 2: You remember. Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I remember 'Julia.' Not--I can't tell you storylines but there was a black woman on television, we knew about it (laughter). The TV was on (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, do you remember because it was about that same time that Alex Haley's 'Roots'--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, we watched 'Roots,' yes (laughter). That--you didn't do anything else. The phone didn't ring because 'Roots' was on. Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 371926
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about that time in New York [New York] in your, your teen, your teen years?
Speaker 2: I, everything that I remember has to do with school and everything was wonderful to me. To have been, you know, growing up from twelve to sixteen and to be in that environment at Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] was just like the best place to go through that at that age.
Speaker 1: Well, who influenced you at the time? As a young person, who were your influences? Diana Ross, who else?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow. Some of the older kids in the school that were really talented and just amazing performers. Earth, Wind and Fire, I mean, I loved their music; Barbra Streisand, that's a big one. I, I could sing her songs 'cause I wasn't, I didn't grow up in, you know, like a Baptist church singing gospel and so I, I couldn't stand up and sing like that, with that type of feeling. So, it was hard for me to like sing R&B when I was first learning how to sing 'cause I, I just didn't know how to do that. So, I would sing ballads and standards and you know, things that other people thought were boring. And, I liked opera a lot. I had an aunt, my father's [Robert Hairston, Jr.] aunt who introduced me to opera and would take me to the opera.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know much about black history at the time? I mean, you like opera did you know, let's say, Leontyne Price?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you did. Were you, was the family big on black history? Or, were you big on black history as a teen?
Speaker 2: My family, my--it was big on it in that you knew who different people were that were black that were doing something positive and good. If they were doing something negative, you kind of knew that, you knew that too and you didn't talk about it. Like, at that time, Malcolm X was not somebody that everybody in the family thought was great. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was better, you know, Malcolm was a little radical. So, you didn't hear about him, you know. It wasn't uncommon to go into people's homes and see pictures of Jesus and see pictures of Martin up on the walls. My father loved Richard Pryor, but we would hear more about Bill Cosby because that was a better role model for us. It wasn't until later when he felt more comfortable sharing his love for Richard with us (laughter). But, it was okay to, you know, to talk about Mr. Cosby.
Story_ID: 371927
Speaker 1: So, you grew up in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As a teenager, did you realize that, were--was race relations an issue in New York City [New York, New York]? Had you ever been called out of your name? Had you ever been made to feel second class in New York, let's say the way I may have in growing up in the South?
Speaker 2: It didn't happen early on. I was visiting my friend Laurie [ph.] in the Hamptons [New York] for the summer. And, it was the first time that I had taken the Long Island Rail Road. I think I might have been fifteen, maybe sixteen. And, I got my ticket and I got onto the train, and I sat down. And, a man looked at me and then he went back to this newspaper. And, then he looked at me again, and he said, "I think you may be sitting in the wrong car." And, I immediately, you know, felt like, "Oh, my God," you know. Like this is the first time that I'm on this train and my mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] already told me to behave and, you know, and I've already messed up. I'm in the wrong car. So, you know, I said, "Oh, I'm, I'm sorry." I said, "Where am I supposed to go?" So, he says, "Well, let me see your ticket." So, he looks at my ticket and he said, "You have to go two cars back." So, I got up, so I was sitting in the first class car on the Long Island Rail Road. I didn't, you know, I didn't, I just got on the train. So, I went back to my car and then I'm sitting there and I'm saying, "Why did he know that I was sitting in the, like, how did he know I was sitting in the wrong car? Like, what made him ask me that question?" And, the only thing that I could come up with was that I didn't belong in the first class car, 'cause he couldn't see my ticket. So, what would prompt him to ask me? And, when the, you know, the conductor came through, he would've corrected me and, you know, pointed me in the right direction. So, that kind of bothered me, you know, 'cause it's like why, why did it disturb you that I was there. Like, why did you figure that out? And, then when I was seventeen, I remember shopping in stores and being followed. That would happen all the time. 'Cause I was always in stores in Manhattan [New York]. I worked near the UN [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] and I've always liked nice things. My, my father [Robert Hairston, Jr.] is a, we're famous for champagne taste and beer pockets. And, I would always browse in stores that, you know, maybe I couldn't afford the stuff but I would go into the store to see what was there. And, then I would go to stores that I could afford and kind of try to match the fashion. But, just match it to my pocketbook. So, I was a big browser. And, I was always followed, always. And, that was annoying.
Story_ID: 371928
Speaker 1: What did you smell like at the time?
Speaker 2: What did I wear in the, in the '70s [1970s] it was like, there was a Bonne Bell perfume, Love's Baby Soft, there was a green apple perfume, Jean Nate, that kind of stuff. There was this girl in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] though named Flame [ph.] who wore oils. And, I thought Flame was really cool because she wore oils. And, she was wearing like frankincense, and strawberry, and I didn't know where to buy those things so I, I wanted to smell like that, but I just didn't know where to get those things (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did you think about Flame? What did you thing about her as a person? I mean, did you--describe your feelings about how you felt about Flame.
Speaker 2: Well, Flame, Flame was, I think she was a senior when I was a freshman. So, she, she was, you know, seventeen and I was twelve. I was young in high school. So, I'm twelve as a freshman. And, she had a big red afro and freckles and just big eyes and she was very, she was very Erykah Badu back then. And, I just thought she was cool. And, whenever she walked down the halls it was just this wonderful smell and her wake, and she would sing down the halls and she was a singer. I think she's a jazz singer now. But, she, she was just who I wanted to be when I grew up, just different, and exciting.
Story_ID: 371929
Speaker 1: You were just talking about Flame [ph.] and how she influenced you and she wore oils. And, you only at the time you were only wearing what cosmetics?
Speaker 2: Just--
Speaker 1: Bailey's you said? Or, what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Love's Baby Soft was the fragrance that you could get, you know, at the drugstore, and a green apple scent, I don't remember who made it.
Speaker 1: Now, you chose not to wear your [maternal] grandmother's [Marguerite King Warwell]?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't make fragrance. She made the pomade, and I would have the pomade in my hair from time to time. But, she didn't make a fragrance. Her fragrance was Chanel No. 5 that she wore when she went to church. And, I couldn't afford to buy Chanel No. 5, so.
Speaker 1: So, how did you wear your hair then?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]. I wore ponytails. I wore buns. I got to wear it out sometimes because now I was combing it myself. And, there was a period where a friend of mine and I, we wore braids together. When braids and beads were okay because of Bo Derek. Yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 371930
Speaker 1: So, what did you do with your extra time, your extracurricular activities? Were you in the student government? Were you, at the art and music school [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], or did you perform on the weekends, like what did you do with the time you were not doing academic studies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I wasn't in school, I was at home. I--because I was in high school so young, I wasn't allow to be out passed a certain time. And, my school was an hour and a half trip on the train from home. So, when I got out of school at 3:30, I had to go home and do my homework. And, my time on the weekends was spent with my family and studying and being a straight A student.
Speaker 1: And, you, I'm assuming you were in high school so young because you were so smart?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. And, because of what the junior high school [St. Augustine School, Bronx, New York] was doing to try and boost its records. It pushed us past where we were grade level and let us do whatever we could do. So, I entered Music and Art at age twelve. But, I was actually taking tenth grade math and tenth grade French.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate Music and Art?
Speaker 2: In 1978, just after turning sixteen.
Story_ID: 371931
Speaker 1: --Nineteen seventy-eight [1978] you graduated Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you start to think about college then? Had college ever been spoken about in the family before?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. My, my dad [Robert Hairston, Jr.], the one who pushes, was trying to get me to graduate a year early and start college even sooner than sixteen. And, I had to put my foot down and say, "No," (laughter). I was not going to start college at fifteen. I felt like I was young enough. And, he wanted me to study law because he had wanted, wanted to study law and he hadn't done that yet. And, I wanted to go to the University of Miami in Coral Gables [Florida] because my friend Dawnn was going there, and I wanted to be with her. And, she was going to major in drama and minor in music. And, I wanted to major in music and minor in drama. And, Dawnn did go and I ended up going to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] and studying pre-law. And, Dawnn is now Dawnn Lewis, actress, singer, writer, all around entertainer type person. And, I flunked out of college, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why did you flunk out, because you'd been a straight A student in high school?
Speaker 2: I, I think I flunked out because I really didn't wanna do what I was doing and it was really hard. And, it was different from high school. I remember running into a former Music and Art student on the train that had gone on to college. And, I, you know, said to her, I said, "So, how is it?" You know, "How is school?" And, she said, "It's hell." And, I was like, "What? You, you're really smart, what are you talking about?" And, she said that she hated it, that she was just a number where she was. It wasn't like high school. Nobody knew who she was, and she just, she hated college. She just hated it. And, I was terrified when she said that. But, then when I went to college I kind of understood what she was saying. And, I think I would have done better, if I had gone away. And, especially gone away to a smaller school where people would have known me. At a city university when there's sixty people in a lecture hall, your teacher doesn't even know that you don't show up. So, when it just got to be too much and I didn't show up and then I didn't get in trouble for not showing up, I just didn't show up.
Speaker 1: What, when you left City College, what did you do with yourself? You're a teenager. You've decided that you're not gonna pursue college. What do you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was, I was working. I had worked that summer for American Express [American Express Company] and I was able to turn it into a permanent job. I also left home because I wanted to not go back to school and that was something that my mom [Carol Warwell Hutson] didn't accept from me. And, I also had my first boyfriend then and I moved in with him. So, those, those are the years my family refers to as when Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa Price] lost her mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: Let me just pause for a moment. You leave school. You move in with your boyfriend. What were your aspirations at the time?
Speaker 2: I, I think I just wanted to know what it was like just to be, to not--I felt so much pressure of having to excel in school and that was all that I knew; was going to school and studying and getting great grades. And, you know, you drop out of college and your family's upset with you because they don't understand what you're doing and, you know, they don't understand why 'cause you've always been perfect. So, it's, you know, it's like why aren't you perfect now? And, I think I just liked the idea of just living and not having to measure up to anything in particular and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Where did you move? You moved out of your parents' house, you moved in with your boyfriend. Where did you guys live?
Speaker 2: We lived in Brooklyn [New York] on Marion Street off of like Rockaway [Avenue] or something. Sort of borderline between Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] and East New York [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: So, you, did you think about what would be, what would become of you? Did you think you'd retire from American Express?
Speaker 2: No. I mean, I was filing. I knew I didn't wanna file forever (laughter). I didn't know and at the time, I didn't care. It was just nice to just be. And, not strive and push and excel and, you know, to just be.
Speaker 1: What was motivating you then to--at the time? Did you have any motivation? Or, you just lived to be with your boyfriend?
Speaker 2: I was learning a lot about being a vegetarian. I was, I was a vegetarian at the time. And, just, just seeing what it was like to be on my own. And, just learning about life. We took a trip and we went to Africa and that, you know, that was interesting. I'd like to do that again, now that I'm older and smarter 'cause it was a lot of culture shock at the time. But, it was a great experience. And, I was just trying to learn more about life outside of school and just who I was. It wasn't so much about him as it was just learning about life.
Story_ID: 371932
Speaker 1: What friends did you have? Who were your friends then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we, we ended up joining an organization that I--that still exists now, it's call Ausar Auset [Ausar Auset Society] and it was, it's, for lack of a better term, a cult. But, not in the Jim Jones Kool-Aid sense of the word. You know, I was never in danger or jeopardy or anything like that. But, at the time--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for me though?
Speaker 2: A-U-S-A-R, and then A-U-S-E-T. At the time it was not called that. It--there was just a place on 135th Street [New York, New York] where you would go and have classes and learn about health and vegetarianism and meditation and it just sort of grew into a church type setting. And, that's where I spent eighteen to like twenty-three there. Which again, to my family and parents [Carol Warwell Hutson and Robert Hairston, Jr.] was, what is Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa Price] doing, you know, strange and where is she going? But, when I look back on it, I think it was the best place for me to be at that time because I was living this very clean life, you know. I wasn't out clubbing, I, you know, there were no drugs. There was meditation, you know, spring water, organic food, you know, when no one else was doing that. And, herbal remedies and, you know, that kind of stuff. And, I think for those years when you're sort of figuring out who you are, it was a pretty safe environment for me to be in and gave me a good base for my adult life.
Speaker 1: So, let's just talk about those years in that particular group. How did you find them?
Speaker 2: Raphael [ph.], my, well actually, can I say who he is, if we're gonna talk about him and we don't have his permission? Like should I call him something else, or? 'Cause I know in the book ['Success Never Smelled So Sweet: How I Followed My Nose and Found My Passion,' Lisa Price and Hilary Beard] I couldn't use his, his actual name.
Speaker 1: (OF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Using his last name, so.
Speaker 1: And, you're friendly with him? I'm assuming. No?
Speaker 2: I haven't spoken to him in a long time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: The last time I spoke to him we were fine.
Speaker 1: We can just call him his first name.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ralph or Raphael. Okay. So--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Or, John.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He (laughter), he introduced you to--and, what was the practice called? I mean, were you called something, or?
Speaker 1: No, 'cause even at that time it wasn't called Ausar Auset. It was just a place where--
Speaker 2: I mean, but were you a Buddhist? Or, were you a Kabbalah, or like--
Speaker 1: The, the--
Speaker 2: What brought you guys together?
Speaker 1: The teachings were based in Ancient Egyptian philosophy and religion. But, at the time that we started to go there, it was a place to learn about vegetarianism and meditation. You know, you couldn't go to a community center and take a tai chi class. It just, it just didn't exist.
Speaker 2: What year are we talking about?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980]. 'Cause I met Raphael in '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. And, we started going like '79 [1979], '80 [1980]. And, you know, I mean people did take yoga but you were strange when you did things like that. Now, that's very, you know, mainstream. But, at that time, if you took a yoga class, you were on the fringe of society, you know. You know, you had to be watched. Like, what do you mean, you do yoga? What is that? What is that crazy stuff, you know?
Speaker 2: So, is it considered religious, or religion, or a cult?
Speaker 1: It was at, at that time, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, tell me about other aspects of you being--what else did they teach you?
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: They taught you about vegetarianism--
Speaker 1: You learned about the planets that govern different days. Like each day has a certain energy and you ate and dressed to go with the energy of the day.
Speaker 2: Give me an example.
Speaker 1: Monday is governed by the moon. Monday's colors are blue. The foods are, are foods that are more yen, more cool, like lettuces, watermelon, I can't think of anything right now. Lettuces I know, watermelon, cantaloupe, those were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Any watery products--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fruits with a lot of water?
Speaker 1: Right. That was something that you, you would eat on Monday. And, Tuesday is marshal, red, fiery, pepper, corn, oranges, cayenne, you know, just more fiery energy. Wednesday's, mercurial it was yellow. So, there were, you know, energy and colors for each days. So, you ate according to the energy of the day, you wore the color for the day, you know, which is not what most people do (laughter).
Story_ID: 371933
Speaker 1: So, you married Raphael [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: During the time you were a part of?
Speaker 2: Ausar Auset [Ausar Auset Society], yes.
Speaker 1: Ausar Auset?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, so, continue with the story; you marry him. Do you have a family with him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. We never had any children. We got married in 1982. Was it '82 [1982]? Yeah, '82 [1982]. And, we were separated by '83 [1983] before our first anniversary. He just didn't know who he was. And, he didn't, he, he could not admit to himself that he may not have been heterosexual. It was just something that within his family and his culture, he's was from a Panamanian background, that was not acceptable for him to be that way. So, instead of admitting who he was to himself and saying that, you know, this relationship is not working because I really don't wanna be with a woman. His path to deal with it was to be mean. And, to push me away. So, that I would leave him and I would, he would be able to blame me for him not being in the relationship so that he wouldn't have to take responsibility for it. And, you know, I'm a very committed and loyal person so, it took a lot of him being mean for me to finally leave. Not being mean in that I was physically abused, that never happened, thank God. 'Cause he'd be dead and I'd be in jail.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But, mentally abusive. He was, he was very critical and just harsh and, you know, and it just got worse, and worse, and worse and eventually I just couldn't do it anymore. I just didn't have the patience.
Story_ID: 371934
Speaker 1: What was the turning point from all of that to you to start to even discover your own, to discover Flame [ph.] was burning inside of you and you wanted to be like Flame? Wear oils, make oils?
Speaker 2: Well, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the turning point?
Speaker 2: The turning point of just getting out of the relationship?
Speaker 1: Well, well, just, I guess just take me along. So, you're with him [Price's first husband], he's being abusive to you. You're still working at American Express [American Express Company]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No. Okay.
Speaker 2: No. No. I lost my job at American Express. I did a lot of different things. I, I taught. I worked as an assistant teacher at a daycare center. And, then I ended up taking care of my brother. My mom [Carol Warwell Hutson] adopted a baby when I was eighteen and he did not do well with babysitters. He would get very uncomfortable and cry and just, you know, wasn't happy. And, I took care of him for about eighteen months. That was my job. So, instead of paying a babysitter, my mom paid me. He knew me. He wasn't upset. He wasn't sad. And, she knew that he was safe. And, I took care of him 'til he went to daycare. And, when he went to daycare, I ended up going to the United Nations [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] to work as a messenger. So, at the time that we were, when we first got married, I had just started working at the UN, and when we separated, I was still there.
Speaker 1: After you separated, did, is that when you started to, when did you start to play in the kitchen with different chemicals and oils, and--
Speaker 2: It wasn't until six years later. I--we separated in '83 [1983] and I started making fragrances in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Now, well, how did that come about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-eight [1988], '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: What did you do in those six years?
Speaker 2: Well, I eventually left Ausar Auset [Ausar Auset Society] because I realized that, you know, it had been enough--
Speaker 1: Now, did Jim Jones have anything to do with that?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Because that happened--
Speaker 2: No, no. I--
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you never felt in danger?
Speaker 2: Never. Never. I wouldn't put myself in that situation. I mean, even though there were things that I did as far as my diet and clothing and things like that that weren't what everybody did. But, I was not brainwashed or, you know, I didn't believe that the person who was, you know, kind of the head of the whole thing, I didn't think he was a god or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Well, if you look back on that experience, do you qualify it as something that you're proud of or ashamed of?
Speaker 2: I definitely cannot say ashamed because like I said, the things that I learned there, I think were good things. And, I think I could have been in a lot of worse situations. I think I learned just ways of dealing with difficult things and stress and just a way of looking at life, I guess in a more Buddhist kind of way. Even though it wasn't Buddhism but just kind of accepting the moment for what it is. So, I don't feel ashamed of it. I'm not going to bring it up in conversation with just anybody because there's a lot of people who don't understand it. And, I don't want someone to then judge everything about me based on what they think they know about my past. But, I wouldn't go backwards and change it. Because just the way that everything else has unfolded in my life, I'd felt like that was necessary for that time.
Speaker 1: So, do you think it was that that made you, I mean, I was, I talked to people about you, read about you and people said early on, you, everything felt like Mother Earth, earthy, crunchy. You felt, you know, that these products were like vegans. People were--do you think that had, was that one of the causes for you later on being perceived as--?
Speaker 2: No. I think, I think people's perception just is what it is because I actually hate when someone refers to me as Mother Earth because I'm really not like that. I mean, I am a more natural person I guess but, I'm not Mother Earth, you know. I'm not a vegan, I'm--you know, I'm not anymore. I was but, you know, I'm not somebody that's gonna fuss with you because you're eating a Twinkie. You know, (laughter), it just, I'm just not that person, you know. I think I'm spicier than that. And, that Mother Earth just sounds sort of dull and boring to me.
Story_ID: 371935
Speaker 1: We were talking about perceptions people have. So, you may as well said, you, when I was saying that person said to me, one of the people, that Mother Earth was the highest compliment because, because of you know she was natural. She didn't straighten her hair. She didn't wear perfume that she bought someplace. She wore all these natural oils and you, and you were saying to me that--
Speaker 2: I don't really like the comment that I'm Mother Earth 'cause I, I just don't think of myself that way.
Speaker 1: And, you also said that you never wrote to not--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I, I never, I, in writing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Endorsed in any way.
Speaker 2: --the brochures, I never said that people shouldn't relax their hair and, you know, they should only wear it natural. I think that my products provided a way for them to do that. So, then they credit me with being the one's for, being the one to be responsible for them doing that. But, I never had anything against it. I, you know, you have to do what works for you. Depending on where you work, and how you live, and what time you have to deal with your hair, relaxing may be what you need to do, and it's okay. But, I, I think what I would have more of a problem with is you relaxing your hair because you think that its natural curl is ugly. And, that you have to relax it because you are not going to be beautiful if you don't relax it. That would bother me, if someone said that. Because I don't think that you're beautiful or ugly based on whether or not you have straight hair or kinky hair, you know. That, that has nothing to do with it.
Story_ID: 371936
Speaker 1: The six year gap that you were divorced to starting to make products in your kitchen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What transpired to get you into the kitchen to even, how did you know that you could even do this?
Speaker 2: Well, not that this had anything to do with me making products but I tried to be that, that singer. I kind of, I went backwards, you know, the whole vegan, meditating, tai chi, yoga, boring, never went out. So, I had to club. I had to hangout. (Laughter) I tried to be a singer, you know. Went to bed at six o'clock in the morning, and came home and drank coffee and then went back to work. And, you know, did all the things at twenty-four that I guess people did at nineteen and twenty. And, I, I was out with the girls that were in the group, we had a girls group that no one ever heard of.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the name of the girls group?
Speaker 2: Tuxedo Gold [ph.].
Speaker 1: Did you ever make any CDs [compact discs], any music?
Speaker 2: No. We didn't even have CDs at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: There were still albums then (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tuxedo Gold.
Speaker 2: Tuxedo Gold. Yes. And, we never, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, it was a girl group (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had, we had a demo tape. Yes. It was a girl group. And, I was out with them in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] one night.
Speaker 1: In what year would this have been?
Speaker 2: Like '87 [1987]. And, there was a guy with, with oils at a table, this Muslim man, and I started smelling the oils at the table and I asked him, I said, "Would you mix them for me?" And, he says, "Well, what do you mean?" I said, "Well, if I want like half of this, and half of this, will you mix it?" So, he said, "Yeah, I'll mix it." I'll just charge you a couple extra bucks for, you know, having to mix the bottles." So, I was like, "Okay, great." So, he mixed the oil for me and that was my first experience of creating my own fragrance. And, I sort of went back in my mind to Flame [ph.] and, you know, the strawberry and the gardenia, and the frankincense. And, I just picked up the bottle and smelled them and had him blend it. And, then when I took it home and wore it, you know, you wear it to work and people: "Oh, you smell so good. What is that?" You know. And, I couldn't find him again, you know, to, to get another bottle, and, you know. Or, you find somebody and their pineapple is different from the other one that you bought. So, I knew that I needed to find these oils. I just didn't know where to get them. And, then in '88 [1988], yeah, in 1988 a friend of mine named Demone [ph.], he knew that I had this, you know, desire to mix these oils. And, he called me when I came home from work and he said, "I found a place for you to buy your oils." And, it was on 96th Street off of Lexington [Avenue]. It's a place called Exotic Fragrances. They're now on East 104th [Street]. But, at that time, they were on 96th Street. And, I was living in Manhattan [New York] on 109th Street. And, I left my apartment and got on the bus and went cross town and downtown to 96th Street. And, you had to spend forty dollars in order to, you know, get, 'cause they were wholesale. So, that was their only requirement, you had to spend at least forty dollars. So, I bought oils and I brought them home and I mixed my first fragrance. And, wrote it down, thank God (laughter). Because it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you mix? Or, can you tell me? Is it a secret or?
Speaker 2: Ye--no, it's not a secret. It was, it was designer knockoffs. There was Design [by Paul Sebastian], Jessica McClintock, Prescriptives, and Halston. No, no, no, no, Halston, Lauren [Ralph Lauren], Prescriptive and Design. That's what it was. And, I mixed them and made this fragrance and it was called, I called it Number One [ph.], 'cause it was the first. I didn't know it was gonna be the first in a long line. But, it was just very clean smelling and you know. It was like lettuce and osmanthus, and just, you know, clean, fresh, crisp kind of smells.
Story_ID: 371937
Speaker 1: You had been inspired to do that only because you couldn't get the oils of, you couldn't get the fragrance you wanted for yourself? Or, you decided at this point, you could possible give them to other people as gifts? What, what made you wanna mix your own?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it actually started from buying designer fragrances. And, then not liking the fact that I would have them and then I'd be on the train and the person next to me would smell the same way, you know, it wasn't unique enough. And, I read this article about Prince, 'cause I, I love Prince. And, he, in this article they said that he has this fragrance bar in his bedroom and he blends different fragrances to create a unique scent every day. And, that he uses different fragrances on different parts of his body. So, apparently, at the time, if this was true, I don't know, Chanel No. 5 was in his boots, you know. And, you know, if you were around him, he would just have this great smell. And, I actually was around him in Nell's [New York, New York] one night. I don't know if Nell's still exist on 14th Street, but that's the place where I used to hang out. And, I was in the basement of Nell's and I was standing next to him and there was just this amazing smell. So, you're in the basement of this club where there's smoke and sweat and, you know, and then he just smelled like this green meadow with flowers and, you know, like you could close your eyes and just be outside somewhere. And, I didn't realize that it was coming from him until he walked away. And, then it was, you know, it was like just his wake was there but it wasn't as intense. And, I said to his security guard, I was like, "Does he smell like that all the time?" And, they guy's like, "Yeah, yeah, he likes, you know, a lot of stuff. And, yeah, he, yeah he does pretty much." And, I just, I just thought it was remarkable. And, that, so that was one inspiration. And, I started to blend the--are you pausing?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Continuing. You, I began to blend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, right, right.
Speaker 2: --because Prince walked away and he left a scent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he left his--
Speaker 2: Does he always smell this way?
Speaker 1: So, I started to blend some of the designer fragrances that, that I had. So, I would spray on two or three to create a difference fragrance, and that is really expensive, you know, you can't do that. And, then you can't layer it, you know, 'cause if you layer your fragrance where you, you're washing something and then you moisturize and then you spray it on, it last longer. So, it was hard to do it that way. And, that was the beginning of the quest for the, the oils to just create this unique scent. So, when I made that Number One [ph.], I was trying to recreate that moment in Nell's with that fresh, clean, green smell that he had that night.
Speaker 2: So, Prince was an inspiration for Number One?
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely.
Story_ID: 371938
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you mix the first fragrance, you called it Number One [ph.]. What happened next?
Speaker 2: After that I started to mix a lot of different fragrances because now I knew where to go and I could just play around. If I picked up a bottle of tea or something and read the ingredients in it, it might make me think, "Oh, gee, what would pineapple and peppermint smell like together." And, I just started to create. And, then people would ask me, you know, what I was wearing, like people at work. And, I would make things for people at work. Again, I needed to layer. So, at that time, I went to the drug store and I would buy, you know, Lubriderm lotion or an unscented cold cream and stir the oils into those things so that I could have a lotion or a shower gel; wasn't really stable and it didn't always work. But, that's what I did for a couple of years. And, I was out one Saturday with, my now husband [Gordon Price], he was my husband then, but I was out with him in Park Slope [Brooklyn, New York] one day and came across a book on essential oils. And, that's when I started to make product. And, that was probably like 1991, 1992.
Story_ID: 371939
Speaker 1: Well, before you came across that book and started to make oils, you shared these with other people. People at your job?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was told you were an assistant writer or I read maybe that you were a writer, or assistant to a writer on 'The Cosby Show.'
Speaker 2: Well, in--
Speaker 1: Was this about the same time?
Speaker 2: In 19-, from 1987 until 1990, I was a secretary. I was executive assistant to a director of a nursing agency. And then in 1990, I went to work on 'The Cosby Show' as a writer's assistant; not an assistant writer. So, I took notes when they were writing the scripts and I did research, and I typed.
Speaker 1: And, that was a writer's assistant--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: On 'The Cosby Show,' and--
Speaker 2: Yes, for the last two seasons of the show.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: My friend who was in the girls group [Tuxedo Gold (ph.)] with me, Delia [ph.], she ended up getting a job there as an intern and then she ended up being assistant to the producer. And, there were originally three writers on 'The Cosby Show' and this was the season that they were all kind of let go. And, there was a new team of writers and the writing staff went from three to seven. But, they still had the same assistant staff, and there were long hours and re-writes and they needed help. And, Delia called me, and she just happened to call on the day that I updated my resume. Like, literally my resume was coming out of the printer and she called and said, "Fax me your resume right now, they're hiring writer's assistants." And, I was like, "I don't know what that is. I can't do that." She said, "You take notes at meetings, right?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "You can type, right?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "You type fast, right?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "You can be a writer's assistant." (Laughter) So, I sent my resume in. I went for the interview. Two women interviewed me. One woman was of the traditional television mindset, you know, you come into television because it's going to be your career, you studied it in school, and you, you know, you're coming in at an entry level position to advance to be a director, whatever. The other woman was like, "We need to get the job done. I need somebody with some damn skills that's gonna come in here and type." So, they ended up having an argument after I left but decided that they should hire me because I had really good secretarial skills. So, I got the job, even though I wasn't of a television background. And, I loved it. It was the best; the greatest. The, what I thought I was gonna do for the rest of my life. It was exciting, I mean, I love TV, I mentioned that before. And, so, to work there, and then I loved 'The Cosby Show' because, you know, before when I was talking about 'Good Times' and 'Jeffersons' ['The Jeffersons'], 'Cosby' was antithetical to that, you know. 'Cosby' made me happy, made me smile, you know, it was positive. It was, you know, nice, wholesome black people for everybody to see and love. And, I just loved it. My first day there, I remember standing in the kitchen and saying, you--like I had to pinch myself; was like, "I'm in the Huxtable kitchen," and this is my job (laughter). So, it was wonderful. It was really great.
Speaker 1: Now, were you able to share any of what you were doing on the outside with the people at 'The Cosby Show'?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I, I made a fragrance for Mrs. Rashad [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad] before I left as a, as a gift to her. And, then Erika Alexander had started on the show during the last season and I made products for her that she took to her hair dresser when she got her hair done. I use--
Speaker 1: Well, you had started to make hair products by this time?
Speaker 2: Well, I made a hair oil and she would, she would take it with her to the salon because she liked the way that it smelled. I tried to make things for Malcolm [HistoryMaker Malcolm-Jamal Warner], but Malcom was very particular about his fragrance. And, he wears one fragrance. I don't know what it is. It smells like Egyptian musk. But, he does not wear anything else. So, he always encouraged me but he never wore anything because he wore this one fragrance. But, I did, I did share with people on the show.
Story_ID: 371940
Speaker 1: So, you're building, at least at this time, your skills--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as far as mixing oils. Have you started to think about it as a business?
Speaker 2: No. It, I didn't think about it as a business until 1993. And, that was when I was not working. Because television and film is very, you know, you don't work in it steady unless you're lucky to get a job on 'The View' or something, and then you could work there for years. So, in May of '93 [1993], I'd finished working on a Mother's Day special with Kathie Lee Gifford, and I didn't have another job lined up. So, I did a flea market at my mother's [Carol Warwell Hutson] encouragement, at church. And, I sold my first body butter product. And, I sold out. And, at that flea market I got a flyer for another craft fair type event and ended up spending the entire summer selling at craft fairs and flea markets. So, in August of '93 [1993], I'm in my bedroom and I'm working, and I have all these boxes all over the back--'cause my bedroom had a little alcove area that was tucked away from the rest of the room and that was my little workshop. But, all of my stuff was sort of spilling out into the bedroom. So, I have all these boxes and things. But, it was hobby, you know. And, 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] was on and she had a show on entrepreneurs who had started businesses with little or no money. And, I'm, you know, working and like listening to these people talk and, you know, they're saying things like, "Do you know your demographic? Do you have repeat customers? Do you love what you do?" You know, and one women described that you have to really be passionate about what you do because it takes so long for you to make money. And, her litmus test was, if someone woke you up in the middle of the night and said go do this thing, would you get up out of your bed and go do it. And, I realized that I would get up out of my bed to go make perfume or cream, like, that that was okay. So, in listening to that show and listening to those women speak, I had what would now be called the ah ha moment. That phrase wasn't coined back then, but that was my ah ha moment that this was not just a hobby, it could be a business.
Speaker 1: And, how did you go about transforming it from a hobby into a business?
Speaker 2: Well, initially some of the changes that took place were more the universe revealing things to me. I met a person who helped me design my first label; just happened to meet her in my neighborhood at a coffee shop. And, she's like, "Oh, I'm a graphic artist. I can help you," you know. "Wow, really," (laughter). You know, I would find catalogs for, you know, some of the raw materials that I would need. But, I did, you know, talk to an accountant and I set up a sole proprietorship. So, I did like the technical things that I needed to do. But, once I changed my mind about it, then all of the things started to come to me that I needed to make it a business. But, at that time, my biggest dream for it would be that whenever I became a mom, I'd be able to stay at home and I'd probably have a business that I operated out of a garage or something, even though I had an apartment then, I didn't have a garage. But, that's as big as I thought it would be, at that time.
Story_ID: 371941
Speaker 1: Back to that first flea market and making and the body butter, where did the concept of body butter come from?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been trying to make a moisturizer when I had first gotten that book on essential oils. There were basic recipes in that book for lotions and pomades and things. And, I was trying to follow this recipe but wasn't able to get it to come out right. Every time I tried to make it, it would separate. But I would write down what I did each time so that I could tweak it and try to get it right. And, I was watching television one night and there was a commercial for Duncan Hines and the person was whipping the batter with the hand mixer, and I looked at the mixer and looked at the batter and I thought, what if I whip it until it cools, then maybe it won't separate because I was putting it in the refrigerator as per the instructions for it to cool and that's where the whole thing would fall apart. So, I did that, and it worked. And, I ran up and down my apartment like yelling and screaming, "I figured out how to make the butter, I figured out how to make the butter." And, I called it body butter because it looked like the batter from my [maternal] grandmother's [Marguerite King Warwell] butter cake. And, you know, I thought of it as food for your skin. So, I didn't realize at the time that The Body Shop was calling their stuff body butter 'cause I didn't go to The Body Shop because it was so new, you know. So, you know, I didn't do anything original. I thought it was original at the time, but, that's, that's where I got the name from.
Speaker 1: So you made up this bod- the body butter. What containers did you put it in to take to the first flea market?
Speaker 2: Baby food jars--
Speaker 1: So, you--
Speaker 2: --like my grandmother did. My, my, it was my mother's [Carol Warwell Hutson] suggestion because I was like, "What am I gonna put it in?" And she said, "Well, why don't you use baby food jars?" And, my mom had just adopted one of my sisters at that time, and she was a baby. And, New York City [New York, New York] had just started the recycling thing. So, she had all of these jars in her recycling bin that, you know, she had already washed and, you know. So, she said, "I won't throw 'em out. You know, you can take them and sterilize them like Nana did and put your creams in there." So, I did that, and I handmade the labels with magic markers and like white file folder labels and I drew flowers on them and wrote the name on it.
Speaker 1: Are any of those still around?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Had I known then (laughter), that it could be, you know, in a museum somewhere, I would've saved one (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you said you, so the first one you sold out, you sold out of all of the body butters?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that was, inspired you to get all the boxes and you--. How did you go from just that to having a room full of boxes (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I kept finding out more things and I kept being more fascinated by it. And, then I would, I would read. Like, I would find a product that I liked and then I would turn it around and read the ingredients and pick out all the things that I knew I could get my hands on. So, then I'd go get them and sort of figure out, okay, how do I, how do I make this work? When I tried to make shampoo, I knew all of the herbs and oils that would be good in a shampoo but I didn't know how to make shampoo, and how to get the herbs into the shampoo. And, reading a bottle of Dr. Bronner's Castile Soap [Dr. Bronner's Pure-Castile Liquid Soap] with, you know, you have like one bottle of soap can do forty-seven things. So, I'm reading about diluting it and it can be a shampoo, and it can be a floor cleaner, and it can be this, and it can be that. So, instead of just diluting it with water I thought, well, why don't I make a tea with all of the herbs that I know are good for hair, and dilute it with that tea. And, I did that but it was very runny. It didn't have viscosity that people are accustomed to with shampoo. So I tried to make it thick and that never worked. And, the shampoo worked so I just said, "Forget it, it'll be runny. I don't care," (laughter), "I'm making shampoo." But, just, just experimenting like that, you know. I read about some bath salts. I looked at the ingredients. I knew I could get all of those and I just started to mix them.
Story_ID: 371942
Speaker 1: So, the ah ha moment, the Oprah Winfrey moment that you had and you decided, okay, I'm going to make at least, at the very least, a garage business of making these fragrances. Did you have any idea how you'd advertise? How you'd get people to know about them? Had you at this moment figured out what the, your, who your demographic, who you were going to sell it to? Had any of that stuff been figured out?
Speaker 2: No. In listening to the women who were on that show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] talking, they gave you like really like basic grassroots things that you could do. And, one of the things that they mentioned was that if you are selling some place, bring a notebook. Ask people if they'd like to get information from you, you know. They said, "You may not have a brochure, but start to collect names and addresses." I still worked in television production. My husband [Gordon Price] worked in television production. You get contact sheets when you work on a show 'cause everybody has to know how to get in touch with everyone. You don't always work in an office. You work at different locations. So, these contact sheets would have people's addresses in them. Those became my first mailing lists. And, you know, people would like get my cards, you know. Like there was a makeup artist who three years after me mailing her stuff calls me one day and she says, "Are you the women that worked with me on such and such and such?" And, I said, "Yes." And, she said, "Oh, my God, I've been getting your stuff in the mail for three years. I didn't know that that was you." And, and she was calling because an actor that she was working with sat down in her chair and handed her a jar and he says, "This is what you have to get for my hair 'cause you can't put anything else in it." And, she looked at it and she was like, "Carol's Daughter. Why do I know that name?" And, he's like, "Here's the phone number." And, then she realized she's been getting my material for three years.
Speaker 1: How did the name come about?
Speaker 2: The name came about from me making a list of things that I was and things I wanted to become. And, I was brainstorming from those lists. And, one of the things that I was, was Carol's [Carol Warwell Hutson] daughter. I was Robert's [Robert Hairston, Jr.] daughter, I was Gordon's girlfriend, you know. But, that just stuck. Just when I said it, it got like goose bumps, you know, so, I knew that was the right choice.
Speaker 1: So, you, this, we're now up to 1993 and you've started at least a business of it, making stuff in your kitchen. Was it only mail order at this time and going to street fairs to sell the product?
Speaker 2: In '93 [1993] it wasn't mail order. It was just street fairs. I didn't do any mail order until late '94 [1994], early '95 [1995], the first time I was written up in a magazine and--
Speaker 1: Which magazine was the first write-up?
Speaker 2: Well, the first, first write-up was a vegetarian times kind of magazine newsletter. But, it didn't generate any sales. The first that generated sales was a write-up in Essence's magazine about our Loc Butter. And, I got a lot of--
Speaker 1: About which one?
Speaker 2: Loc Butter. And, I got a lot of phone calls from that with people wanting a catalog and wanting to try the product.
Story_ID: 371943
Speaker 1: So, at this point, do you decide, I'm just interested in how it grew. So, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. It grew basically from word of mouth. You know, people, people would tell people. First it started out with the street fairs, craft fairs and I'm collecting addresses every time that I go out. Then, you know, the weather started to get cold. It wasn't summer. I also needed to go back to work and I found a job in October of '93 [1993]. And, when I went back to work, I had people call and say, "Well, you know, I bought cream from you, where are you gonna be selling this weekend 'cause I need to get more?" And, I wasn't doing a street fair 'cause it was cold. So, I said, "Well, you could come to my apartment. I'll be home on Saturday. I don't have to work on Saturday." And, that sort of started this shopping in my house with people on the weekend. And, I would make cream on Friday night when I got in from work for whoever would come by to buy it on Saturday. By '94 [1994], I needed a bigger apartment, and we moved in July of '94 [1994]. And, then it really became a shopping day on Saturday where people were--because in this apart-, in the other apartment, you felt like you were coming to my home because I didn't have space to have products set up. So, you just sat in my living room and I would bring things out from the kitchen. And, it was very, like, by appointment. And, I knew who the people were that were coming. When I got into the other space, I had a whole room that could be a showroom, a workroom, an office. So, there was displays permanently setup in that room. So, people, even though they knew they were coming to someone's apartment, there was a feeling that it was an unofficial store. So, they just told their friends, "Oh, you go to this, you know, this address and you ring the bell, and she's gonna throw the key out the window and then you go inside and she's got shampoo and she's got this, and everything smells good." So, then I started having strangers show up without an appointment and I couldn't go anywhere on Saturdays 'cause I didn't know who was gonna ring the bell.
Speaker 1: And, then so Saturday's become--became a big shopping day for Carol's Daughter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: People would come, patronize, buy stuff.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I, I would have holiday like events where there would be two Saturdays, like right before Christmas, where you would get a postcard to let you know that, you know, the holiday, you know, sale event is taking place on December 12th, and December 19th, and, and my house would just get turned into a store. And, initially, it was my family coming over and having tea and doing a little Christmas shopping. And, most of my customers were my family and then after a while it was not family. It was strangers and my family stop coming 'cause it was so crowded (laughter) with other people.
Story_ID: 371944
Speaker 1: When did it, so from that point, when did you say, okay, I've outgrown Saturdays, I need to quit my job and do it more than just one day a week?
Speaker 2: When I became pregnant with my first child.
Speaker 1: And, that was what year?
Speaker 2: That was 1995. He was born in March of '96 [1996]. But, while I was pregnant with him, I knew that I was going to have to quit when he was born because I wouldn't've been able to keep up with him and, you know, the business and a job. I would just basically pay a babysitter and never see him. So, when I left work it was February of '96 [1996] and I've haven't worked at a job since other than this.
Speaker 1: So, you--'96 [1996], he's born in '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 2: March of '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: What happens with you getting--okay, because now you're a new mom. How do you get the business [Carol's Daughter] off the ground and running to become what would later be a store in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was fortunate to have good people to help me. My, my husband [Gordon Price] helped me when he could, when he wasn't at work. He never complained about having to come home on the weekend and do a vending event.
Speaker 1: Who were the vendors?
Speaker 2: We, well, we could do like, Kwanzaa Expo [Kwanzaa Holiday Expo] at the Jacob Javits Center [Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, New York, New York]. At that point, we were doing larger vending events, not just--
Speaker 1: Street fair (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Flea markets and street fairs. They were, they were bigger. Where we knew that there would be a crowd and it would be, you know, worth the while to go out for the day and do all of that. But, Forrest [Forrest Price] was born in March of '96 [1996] and prior to him being born, I had a woman named Nellie [ph.] who used to help me make product. Because, you know, being pregnant and having to do all that work was really hard. And, Nellie used to clean my apartment for me every Friday. And, then I started having her come on like Mondays and Wednesdays and, you know, she would come by on a Sunday during Christmas and help, you know, put labels on things, you know. So, I did a lot of the cooking and creating but she would help with assembly. And, when Forrest was born, I really needed her a lot and she donated time to me just to be able to help because she had been an entrepreneur when she was younger and she knew what I was trying to do. So, for a long time when Forrest was a baby, she just helped. And, then eventually when I could afford to, she had a job. And, Nellie worked with me for about eleven years before she retired. But, we had to move 'cause we needed more space. And, we ended up buying my aunt's house on Van Buren Street. And, that's where we live now. But, we just, you know, with baby stuff and strollers and playpens and, you know, and then all of this business stuff, it was just too crowded. So, when I moved into, you know, our home it was a little bit easier to have people come by and shop on days other than Saturday. Because it was just more space to spread out. And, it wasn't so intrusive on family life. And, that's what I did at first. And, then it did become (laughter) intrusive on family life after a while.
Story_ID: 371945
Speaker 1: In 1997, I, I got pregnant when Forrest [Forrest Price] was about ten months old with my second son. And, before he was born Essence had contacted me and they wanted to do an article. And, they said, "We want to feature you on our People to Know page." And, I made the assumption that there were several people to know on the page. So, I figured, you know, I'll be mixed in there with some other folks. And, they came and they did a photo shoot and, you know, there was a separate interview on another day. And, you know, I thought, wow, this is a really big production for a little mention on the People to Know, you know. And, I went into the hospital to have Ennis [Ennis Price]. While I'm in the hospital having Ennis, the magazine article comes out. And, my husband [Gordon Price] comes to visit me the day after the baby is born and he's like, "You know, the phone is ringing a lot. You know, the Carol's Daughter line is just ringing a lot." And, I said, "Well, you know, the voicemail will get it, you know, don't worry about it." He's like, "Okay." And, then I got home with the baby and, you know, like you're sitting there and you hear, bling, bling, you know the three rings and it goes to voicemail. And, like two minutes would go by and it would ring again. And, I'm like, "Has it been ringing like that for like a couple of days?" (Laughter) He's, "Yeah. You know that's what I'm talking about. It's ringing a lot." So, I said, "You think it's that, that article?" Now, the People to Know, I was the people to know. I'm a half a page, with a big picture and, you know, this whole article about this company and these products that I make in my home. And, I picked up the phone to check to voicemail, "Your mailbox is full." I didn't know it could be full (laughter). It had never been full before. I had like, I don't know, seventy something messages or something. And, then it was filling up every two hours. So, we had like a schedule between taking care of a nineteen month old, feeding the new baby, we had to keep checking the voicemail because it was filling up. And, the phone would just ring and ring and ring, all day long. And, you know, I, I would like look at the clock and say, "It's one o'clock, when was the last time you checked the messages?" "At eleven." "Eleven, oh, God it's full again, get the phone, get the phone," (laughter). So, at that point, we needed to get some help because we couldn't answer the calls. We had thousands of catalog request. Our mailing list went from about nineteen hundred to forty-five in ten days. And, we, you know, it was--we had a new baby (laughter), you know. So, my cousin came and helped me; my cousin Michael [ph.], who's now our operations officer, our COO. And, we got another young lady that had worked with my husband on another job, and she came to work with us. And, we got the catalogs out. We had to mail out almost five thousand of them by the time we were printing them. And, then it was not the same anymore. There were just people coming and shopping like it was a store. People I never saw before. People I, you know, I had no connection to them at all. And, I would, I would walk, you--'cause the showroom was on the first floor of my house. My bedroom and nursery were up on the second floor, but the kitchen was on the first floor. So, I had to walk past the showroom to get to the kitchen. And, I would come down, you know, like on a Saturday with one or both of the boys and I often was sleeping when people would arrive. Because I would be up in the middle of the night. You know, I'd get up at four o'clock to feed someone and then I would just stay up and work. And, then when they ate again, I would fall back asleep at eight or something. So, I might be waking up at ten or eleven when there's a, you know, shop full of people. So, I'm walking past them in pajamas and, you know, looking haggard. And, they're going, "That's, that's her, that's, that's her," (laughter). And, I'm like, "Hi" (laughter), sitting in the kitchen feeding the kids oatmeal and people are like looking through the French doors, "Hi," and I'm like "Hello," (laughter). Why are they looking at me? (Laughter) But that was, that was a big turning point. That, that article was--I, I haven't experienced anything like that since. Even though we've had growth, but it's--we've had growth and I've had people around to help manage it. That was very, like, okay, there's two of us working here, oh, my God, you know, where are we gonna get help. And, you're like scrambling to get help to keep up with this new demand.
Story_ID: 371946
Speaker 1: So, you, that was considered the Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York] store?
Speaker 2: No. That, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, that was your home?
Speaker 2: --still a store in home.
Speaker 1: Okay. How did the Fort Greene store develop out of that?
Speaker 2: Well, we started out in the, in the brownstone on the first floor. And, then we had to move to the second floor because it was just too small on the first floor.
Speaker 1: So, then you had the first floor and the second floor?
Speaker 2: So, the first floor was like the customer service office [for Carol's Daughter] and a place where products got made and orders were taken and invoices are filed. The kitchen is a production kitchen. When we first moved into the house, we had tenants on the third floor, and then I had to let them know that I needed them to leave because we had to move to the third floor. So, my husband [Gordon Price] and two boys [Forrest Price and Ennis Price] and I, we moved up to the third floor and lived in the apartment like it was an apartment for us. And, then the rest of the house was the business [Carol's Daughter]. So, the store went to the parlor floor, basket making was on the back end of the polar floor. My office was right off the basket room. The first floor was customer service, order taking, production. The basement was shipping. So, there's no place else to go in, in the house now. So, I gotta do something. And, I had a bio, and my bio mentioned where I'd like to open my first store. And, I wanted to open it in Clinton Hill [Brooklyn, New York] at Fort Greene because that's where I had started the business. And, someone read that and called me and said that they had a shop in Clinton Hill and, you know, they read in my bio that that's where I'd like to have my dream store. So, I'm like, "Yeah, where in Clinton Hill? What's the address?" You know. So, he gives me the address, I'm like, "Oh, that really is Clinton Hill, okay." (Laughter) So, we went and looked at it and it was basically a no brainer. It was like the size of our living room and, you know, just a straight space and you could just move everything into it and the rent was affordable and, you know, seemed like a good idea. And, I had this dream where I was having a conversation with the realtor and the realtor called me and he said, "You know, that space is really too small, you're gonna outgrow it in like a year, if not less. You should really look at a bigger space."
Story_ID: 371947
Speaker 1: You have the dream.
Speaker 2: I had, I had a dream where the realtor called me--
Speaker 1: And, this is before you even move into the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The store--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You dream? Okay.
Speaker 2: And, he calls me to tell me that the space is too small and that I'm gonna need a larger space and I'm going to outgrow it. Now, separate from the dream, in reality, the same realty company is showing the property that I currently have, which used to be Spike Lee's Joint [Spike's Joint, Brooklyn, New York]. And, just because it was Spike Lee's Joint, I'm like, "I can't afford it, it's gonna be too expensive," I, you know, I can't even look at it. But, in the dream when he's telling me that the space is too small, he says, "I wanna show you another location that, that we have. I wanna show you the old Spike Lee's Joint. I think that's more appropriate," in the dream. So, I have a conversation with a friend of mine the next day and I'm like, you know, "I had this dream where the realtor called me and he said that the space was too small. And, that I was gonna outgrow it too quickly and he suggested Spike Lee's Joint." So, we drove over there just to stand outside and look at it. And, it really looked like where I should be. But, it just looked so big. I'm like, "How am I--I'm not gonna be able to pay this rent. I know it's gonna be a lot more than the other space." So, I get back home, the realtor calls me and the beginning part of his conversation was exactly the same as the dream. So, he wasn't, I knew that he was not gonna come out and say, I think the space that you're looking at is too small. Because in reality he would not have known that. But, because everything that he said prior to that point was verbatim with the dream and the, and the way that I picked up the phone it was very deja vu. I felt like that was my clue to bring that up. And, I knew that I was just not saying it because of fear and I just needed to overcome the fear and ask about it. So, I said, "What's going on with Spike's Joint, with that space? Because, I think the space that I'm looking at is too small." And, he said, "Wow, that's an interesting idea, you know, I actually don't know, I think that's supposed to be a restaurant. But, let me find out from the landlord if I can show it to you." So, he finds out from the landlord that he can show it to me 'cause whoever the restaurant is, is dragging their feet. So, he wants somebody to look at this space and rent it. The minute I walk through the door, I knew that was it. There was something very familiar about it. And, as I went down into the basement, I, I remembered having a dream of being in that basement with workers, working on something. But, at the time that I had the dream, I just didn't know where I was. And, when I went upstairs, there's a back office off of the store and there was a G5G [ph.] brick holding the door open from, from 'School Daze,' you know, a prop from 'School Daze' and I just felt like the door was being held open for me. And, I walked through the door of the office, there was a time clock there, there were shelves there. The basement had cabinets for storage because they stored like their clothes down there. So, there was all of this kind of like built in stuff that I didn't have to do. And, I could see that shipping could be downstairs and there was a back office for customer service. And, there was a room for basket assembly. So, I start doing all this like adding in my head of all of these things that I can move out of my house that would now fit in this space. And, I didn't know how I was gonna pay for it and where the money was gonna come from but I knew that I had to get that space. So, my next task was to convince the landlord that he didn't wanna have a restaurant there, he wanted to have me there. So, they tell me, "Well, send over a copy of your business plan [for Carol's Daughter] and, you know, let him look at it." And, I didn't have one. So, I had to write one. And, I did that one night from about one o'clock in the morning to six o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: How did you know how to write a business, business plan (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know. But, my accountant had one for another company that she had done the financials for. So, I followed their format but basically put my story into it. And, I added by bio. I added my press clippings, and then she did the financial part for me. So, you know, was it the most professional business plan? No. Did it get me the store? Yes. So, he got the plan and I, you know, made a huge basket, 'cause I heard his wife was into bath products, so, huge, huge, huge basket and the plan and the press clippings and everything. And, so, he wanted to meet with me. So, he sat there and said, "Okay, I want you to have the store. I think you're a genius. I can't believe all the press that you've gotten being in your house. I can only image what's gonna happen when you have an actual store. The rent is $3,500 a month, and I'm gonna need four months security up front." And, I sat there and said, "That's $14,000 (laughter). Where am I gonna get $14,000 (laughter)?" And, I'm sitting there smiling like, "Okay," (laughter). But, inside I'm like, "Oh, God." And, I knew nothing about commercial realty so I'm finding out at this meeting that's it's a ten year lease. So, then I'm thinking backwards now to this other space that I thought, "Well, if I outgrow it, I'll move in a year." Not knowing that I would've been locked into it for a long time. So, I'm grateful that I'm not in this small space. But, know I have to figure out where I'm gonna get $14,000 from. But, I, I got it and you know.
Speaker 1: But, no, we just can't skip over that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I know. I know.
Speaker 1: That's a big part of the story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, it is.
Story_ID: 371948
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But tell me initially, you go home and you say to, to your husband, whom--but, before we get to this, just quickly tell me how you met your husband, and he's your husband by now, because he was your boyfriend.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. We--
Speaker 1: So, just quickly, to--
Speaker 2: We met at a place that at the time was called the 308 bar, at 308 West 40th Street [New York, New York]. I was there doing backup singing for his brother's band and he came to see his brother's show. And, his brother did matchmaking and hooked us up and we, you know, got along great. And, first phone conversation was seven hours long.
Speaker 1: So, not only were you Tuxedo's Gold [Tuxedo Gold (ph.)], but you were a backup singer as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you didn't mention that. So, you were pursuing music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In all aspects.
Speaker 2: When Tuxedo Gold fell apart, I still wanted to do music. But, I didn't make it my primary focus because I had to work, and I had to pay bills, and I had to be responsible. So, I didn't have the desire to make music a career. But, I didn't want it to not be a part of my life.
Speaker 1: So, what, what year did you marry?
Speaker 2: We got married in 1991.
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991]. And, what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Gordon.
Speaker 1: Gordon.
Speaker 2: Gordon Robert Price [Gordon Price].
Speaker 1: Gordon Robert Price?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 371949
Speaker 1: So, you go home, you say Gordon [Gordon Price] I found--Spike Lee's Joint [Spike's Joint, Brooklyn, New York] is no more, but it could be Carol's Daughter, but we need roughly--
Speaker 2: Four, four (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifteen thousand dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, you know, he's like, "Okay," (laughter), as Gordon would say, "Okay." And, I told him my initial idea. I had two customers that I felt that I could speak to about finding someone to loan me the money to move into the space because I knew they knew people that had money. They both worked in the music business. And, I had those conversations and I ended up having a meeting with one of them. But, it really didn't go in the direction that I wanted it to go in. They wanted to come into the business as part owners, which is totally understandable. It, you know, you don't just loan people money that you don't know. But, it just wasn't what I wanted to do at the time. I felt like it was a little too soon for me to have an investor. And, then they pointed out a lot of things to me that I hadn't thought about. So, then I kind of started to doubt whether or not I was making the right decision. And, I was a little concerned about having other people involved and possibly losing their money. You know, like--I really, I had always been successful with Carol's Daughter so the prospect of losing never entered my mind until I had this conversation. When I then relayed the conversation to my mother [Carol Warwell Hutson], my mother became angry because she felt like they were trying to take advantage. And, she didn't like it. And, she says, "Don't doubt yourself. You'll figure out how to do it. It's a great space. You've always been successful, you know, I don't wanna hear, you think you can't. Because you know you can." And, in my mother having a conversation with her girlfriend, she, she's my Aunt Marilyn [ph.], but she's my mom's best friend since junior high school. So, she's not actually her sister. But, in having the conversation with her like, "You wouldn't believe what these people told her, and they got her doubting herself, you know, so she just gotta figure out how to come up with this money," blah, blah, blah. Aunt Marilyn and her brother, my Uncle Larry [ph.], tell me that they're gonna loan me what I need to get that store, and don't go to anybody else, and don't sell anything to anybody, and you pay us back when you can. But, I had to meet with the owner and sign the lease because his wife was about to give birth and he needed to get everything wrapped up. So, he calls on like a Tuesday, let's my attorney know we need to all meet on Friday. No, sorry, he called on Wednesday. We need to all meet on Friday. I can't get the money that quickly from my aunt and my uncle. I know they're giving it to me and my uncle actually dropped off the check the night before. But, I had to have a cashier's check for $14,000. So, my husband had some money in the bank that he had gotten from a court settlement and that was almost 5,000 [dollars], I think. So, he was like, you know, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's yours. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Use that, it's yours.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We emptied out the kids' piggy banks, we emptied out our savings account. We got out our credit cards to see what cash advances we could get. We went through pockets, and sofa cushions (laughter), and found whatever we could found, find, rolled up the change. I mean, it was like Lucy and Ethel [Lucille Ricardo and Ethel Mertz] when they were trying to raise that money to go to Europe, (laughter) that was us. And, walked into the bank, 'cause we had to go to several banks, we had to like empty out, you know, like one savings account. And, then we had to go to another bank with the credit card and get the cash advances. And, then we had to go to his bank to get his money, and I had some money in my business account that I could use. So, that was one part of the, it was like maybe two thousand of the fourteen [fourteen thousand dollars]. And, we got the whole, you know, fourteen, together but had to like go into the, the bank's office 'cause I was like, I've got change and you (laughter), I mean, I had rolls of quarters and all this (laughter) stuff and I said, "And, we need a cashier's check." And, I don't know what we must've looked like to them. But, we got the cashier's check. We drove to the lawyer's office, meet, signed the lease. We were not in the car ten minutes, 'cause we drove the landlord to the train station, we weren't in the car ten minutes when that restaurant called and said, we're ready to, you know, to sign. And, he was like, "Sorry, the property's gone." So, you know, and we had the keys that day. And, we went to our store.
Story_ID: 371950
Speaker 1: What did the first day feel like when you walked into it? Now, it's yours, before it was just the possible (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first day that we walked into it--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --or, the first day we opened?
Speaker 1: No, not even, just walked into it. I mean, because the first time you walked into it, you felt like, this is it, I've gotta have this space. But, now you go back, it's yours, you have the keys.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was--
Speaker 1: Tell me about opening day.
Speaker 2: The, well, opening day, we had the night before like a champagne toast and, you know, invited friends and family and, you know, the kickoff, the start of the store [in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York]. We sent out flyers and things to customers. We let the first fifty customers know that they were gonna get a special gift. And, we had t-shirts, and products and just special like grand opening day stuff for the first fifty people. The person who was working with me at the time got to the store. He calls me at 9:15, "There's a line outside the store." And, I was like, "What?" And, he said, "There's a line outside." Now, I'm accustomed to people coming up and knocking on my door. So, I'm panicking about the first day like, who's gonna show up, you know. Is anybody gonna be there? And, there was a line outside at 9:15. So, he asked me if I wanted him to open the door early. So, I said, I said, "No." I said, "I'm still making some stuff. I'm still like rushing there, you know, you can't." So, then he, he, you know, calls us back again at like 9:45, "The line is kind of down the block. Like, (laughter) should I open up the store?" And, I'm like, "Okay, okay, you can open it up, you know, open it up early." 'Cause at this point, you know, I don't know how much longer it's gonna get in the next fifteen minutes. So, we hurry up and we get in the car, and we, you know, rush there. We get there like 10 after 10:00. The first fifty people are in the store already 'cause the store is full. So, we, we entered from the back, my husband [Gordon Price] and I. So, we're standing in like the back office, looking out onto the store. And, we can't see the front door because there's so many people in there. So, that, that was amazing. I mean, I had, and it stayed like that until we closed. So, it was, it was great. It was good first day.
Speaker 1: And, that store opened, the date? What's the date the store opened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) August 21, 1999.
Speaker 1: And, it was the old Spike Lee Joint [Spike's Joint, Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you, so you had, you took the sign down or the Spike Lee sign down, now it looks like Carol's Daughter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the sign was actually down already. There was a realty sign up there for the realty company, and then they took their sign down, so. Yeah, there, there was nothing about it that, you know, said it was Spike Lee's Joint anymore (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 371951
Speaker 1: I'm assuming the business [Carol's Daughter] as with any business it grows at a, at the pace which a business grows. What were some of the highlights in having it do so, or jump as far as people coming in? Like, Oprah Winfrey, or--
Speaker 2: Well, initially it was getting that space. Because now we're out on the street. So, it's not a secret anymore.
Speaker 1: Right. So, people are coming in. Now, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they're just coming--
Speaker 1: You have storefront, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have a store.
Speaker 2: And, then people like the Post [New York Post] and the Daily News [New York Daily News] writing a piece about it because it's this real thing that someone can see and it's different and it's new to the neighborhood [Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York] and, you know. So--
Speaker 1: So, when you find that people are writing about it, how much did being African American play into what you had accomplished?
Speaker 2: In people writing about it or just--
Speaker 1: No. In, in--no, in their writing about it, did they mention that you were African American?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Did they say these were African American products? How much did being black have to do with the success of what you'd created?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it had a lot to do with it, in that it's, it's a clientele within the beauty industry that's underserved. So, here was someone who is African American making products and you can identify with the person because she looks like you. And, she's making these things so they must be good for you to use. The fact that there was so much moisture in the products and people were able to do that transition from wearing a perm to wearing natural hair and finding products that worked. I think that's why the word of mouth was, was what it was because there wasn't anything else out there. I didn't realize at the time, that I was filling a niche. I didn't know that. I didn't even start out with hair care. I started out with body. I didn't have the same issues with my hair so the products that I used, you know, were okay for me. It wasn't until I started to learn and talk to other people that I realized how much they needed hair care. When I would sell at a flea market and I'd have all these body butters and somebody would come over and say, "Well, what do you have for hair?" And, I would say, "Oh, I don't have any hair care products." "Oh, okay, thank you." And, then they'd walk away. And, I'm like, "Well, I want her to come back," you know, "I guess I better make some hair products." So, I started to learn about it and, and make it. And, I met a student who used me as a, a case study for a report that she was doing. And, she told me that in doing her research, she found out that I was, you know, this, this mover and shaker in, you know, ethnic hair care. I like, "I am?" And, I said, "Where did you read this?" She said, "Oh, on the Internet. Because you're, you're like one of the only companies that caters to African American women and makes natural products and, you know. So, how do you feel being, you know, being this, you know, person who's this trailblazer?" And, I didn't even know that's what I was. I said, "Well, you know, I don't know. I make butters. I don't, I don't, I don't know what it feels like to be a trailblazer (laughter). I didn't know 'til you told me," (laughter). So, it, I mean, it had a lot, a lot to do with it. 'Cause it just did--no one was talking to that, that women, and I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, just as you are sitting, I mean, I'm sure you're looking, I was (unclear). But, I was just thinking about, about my friend, Tobi [ph.], who's Jewish who has curly hair like yourself. And, she always talks about not being able to find the right products for her curly hair. I'm gonna take Tobi some of this stuff (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you may have a whole new market in Jewish women or, you know, or just curly haired women (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we, we already do. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 371952
Speaker 1: So, how do you get to the Manhattan [New York] store then, 125th Street? Which is the pride of any black, black business to be, I mean, I always refer to 125th Street as sort of the main street. Like, you know, every town has a main street with all the shops, this and that. And, so 125th Street is that for, you know, for black community.
Speaker 2: Well, from 1999 until 2002, we were, you know, in our, our store in Brooklyn [New York]. I eventually moved the business out of my house because up until 2002, everything was still being made in our home. And, 2002 is when I did 'Oprah.'
Speaker 1: How did that come about? How did you get to 'The Oprah Winfrey Show'?
Speaker 2: I had met a producer at an event maybe about two or three years before I was doing a party for B. Smith. And, she--this producer was at this party and she called me to do 'The View.' That producer then went to Oprah Winfrey to audition, not audition, but interview for a position as a producer on that show. And, at her interview she went out to lunch with the producers and they were talking about projects that they were working on and they were doing a show about women who had started businesses in their homes and those business have made a million or more dollars. And, she said, "Well, have you spoken to Carol's Daughter, to [HistoryMaker] Lisa Price?" And, they were like, "Who's she?" So, she told them who I was and they called. And, that's how I ended up on that show. And, that was fantastic.
Speaker 1: Is it as life changing as a lot of people say to have a small business and then to end up on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show'?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or in O Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine]?
Speaker 2: Yes and no. Because it was not life changing in what people said to me. You know, they told me that I was going to be, you know, rich overnight and you know, we're gonna get ten thousand orders and, you know, it wasn't life changing in that way. But, that's how it should have been. Because if we did get ten thousand orders in one day, we wouldn't've been able to handle it. So, we could have imploded if something like that happened. But, what it did was to give us kind of like a seal of approval. It was almost as if anybody who doubted it before, it was now okay because Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] said it was okay. We got an article in People magazine from having been on her show. So, we were on her show in July--
Speaker 1: Of?
Speaker 2: Of, 2002, sorry, June 25th of 2002, and then the People magazine piece was something that was in discussion at that point. When they found out that I had just taped her show, they gave the approval for the piece to be done. Her show re-aired with us in October of 2002. And, then November of 2002 the People magazine article came out. So, that whole fourth quarter of 20--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Two [2002].
Speaker 2: I'm--yes. Yes, 2002. I'm sorry, lost my dates for a second. That whole--
Speaker 1: Let's just hold off for that siren to pass by.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, that whole fourth quarter? Okay.
Speaker 2: That whole fourth quarter was fantastic for us. And, it started off with being on her show, then being on her show again, and then the People magazine article. So, there was definite growth and a definite spike and we sold more product in the month June and July then we had ever sold before. Those are usually slow months for us. But, it wasn't this overnight success, I'm now a millionaire type thing (laughter). It was very controllable.
Story_ID: 371953
Speaker 1: Talk to me about how this store [Carol's Daughter] developed and came about on 125th Street. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in 2003, I had gotten a book deal, 'cause that was another thing that came out of having been on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], my book deal was cinched.
Speaker 1: With Random House [Random House Publishing Group]?
Speaker 2: Yes. And, so, I was writing, I was writing my book ['Success Never Smelled So Sweet: How I Followed My Nose and Found My Passion,' Lisa Price and Hilary Beard] in 2003, and I felt like, I had done all that I could do for the company on my own. I didn't know who an investor was going to be. How it was going to work. Where I was going to find them. But, I knew that it was okay to think that way because I couldn't make any more money by myself. And, I couldn't raise money to do things that I needed to do. Everything I needed to do to make things better was just so expensive. And, I just didn't have enough of a track record for a bank to say, "Oh, yeah, here's, here's some money." So, I got a phone call from a friend of mine in October of 2003. She said, that a friend of hers named Steve Stoute wanted to have lunch with me. And, did I know who he was? And, I told her, "No. I don't know who he is." So, she says, "Well, he's a marketing guy. He used to be in the music business. He's been in advertising lately." And, she said, "Are you familiar with the S-dot-Carter line with Reebok?" And, I'm, "No. Sorry." And, she says, "Well, it's a sneaker line that Jay-Z has and is doing very well with Reebok." And, she says, "And, then there's the G-unit line." And, I'm like, "Okay. Sorry, no I don't know." And, she say, "Well, that's 50 Cents' sneaker line also with Reebok. And, you know, this guy just does a lot of stuff and you know people on Madison Avenue, they listen to him, and you know, he's, he's serious. And, he wants to talk to you, you know." She said, "He just called me on my cell phone. I'm driving back home from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and, you know, he's like please, please, please, I have to meet this woman for lunch." So, I'm like, "Okay. Well, Monday's no good. How about Tuesday 'cause Monday I've got to do payroll, you know, I could go to lunch with him on Tuesday." And, I'm agreeing to this lunch because Rhonda's [ph.] a serious businesswoman and I know she's not gonna have me talk to somebody that's not about business. But, I'm trying to figure out like, what does he want, you know. So, the most I can think is, Jay-Z, or 50 Cent want a cologne. That, that's as far as I can think with it. And, I'm, and I'm thinking, okay, if I make a cologne for them, should I do it with Carol's Daughter because does Carol's Daughter really go with Jay-Z or 50 Cent. Like, Jay-Z was okay, but 50 Cent kind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're thinking about your branding. Or, how you wanna be--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes. 'Cause it was like, how am I gonna, you know, but, I said, maybe I can do it as Lisa [HistoryMaker Lisa Price] and you know, just create it and, you know, 'cause they're not gonna want it to be called Carol's Daughter. So, you know, so, I have like a game plan in my head. So, I go to have lunch and this, you know, Rhonda and I get to the restaurant first and then, you know, Steve comes in a few minutes later. And, then I like see how young he is, you know. I'm like, wow. He's like, you know, if he's thirty, you know, is he, you know. And, he was, I think at time, he was about thirty-three, thirty-four. And, he's like, "I'm so excited to meet you. I'm just so glad you, you know, you decided to take this meeting with me. I brought you a gift." You know, so he hands me a gift.
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: And, it was a book, 'I Know Why the Cage Bird Sings,' by [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou. Now, prior to me ever meeting him, I had a dream where Maya Angelou gave me an extremely important message in the dream and I've, I was kind of living out this dream for the past two, three months. And, then he hands me this book written by her. So, I felt like that was like a sign that I should really listen to what he has to say. Because how on earth would he know about this book. Like, the universe had to tell him, give her a Maya Angelou book. I didn't notice at the time that it was a first edition signed copy. I noticed that about two hours later and then went into shock (laughter). But, you know, so he's sitting there and he's talking to be about the business and he's telling me about how amazed he is by it. He doesn't even understand how, you know, someone with a business my size, like, "How did you get on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']," you know. "Who's your PR [public relations] firm?" "Oh, I don't have one." "What do you mean, you don't have one? How did you get on 'Oprah'? Like, I don't understand." And, he was the first person who talked to me about investing in the company, that didn't talk down to me and that recognized what I had done and what I had built on my own. So, I felt like this is the right person. In addition to him giving me the Maya Angelou book, 'cause there's no way that he would have known about that. And, then I found out later that he had asked Rhonda, you know, I wanna get her a gift, like, you know, what does she like? You know, what, what can I get her? And, she's like, "Hey, be easy because you buy her something fabulous and you're gonna lose her. She's not like that. You know, you can't, you can't walk in there with, you know, something crazy, you know." So, she said, "Really think about it." And, you know, so for him to come up with that book was just, that, that was just amazing--
Story_ID: 371954
Speaker 1: So, I knew from that first meeting that he [Steve Stoute] was gonna be the person that I worked with. I just didn't know how, and you know, it took time for it to all be worked out. But, I knew from that first meeting that I had found my partner. And, he met with my husband [Gordon Price]. He met with my cousin [Michael (ph.)]. He met with my brother [Philip Hairston]. You know, so that everybody, you know, felt comfortable about this new person coming into the family, so-to-speak. And, we starting working as partners December of 2003 going into the new year for '04 [2004]. We didn't actually have everything signed and worked out until 2004, August. But, we functioned as partners from the beginning. And, looked for this space. He, he felt a Harlem [New York, New York] store was the natural progression. I wanted a store in Harlem. I just hadn't found one yet. I was look on side streets. He as looking on 125th Street. And, working, you know, working with him and being able to have capital in the company [Carol's Daughter] looking at 125th Street was an option that it had not been before. And, we found this space, and unfortunately it took us a year and half to get into it because we found little surprises in the walls and floors (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Termites?
Speaker 1: In doing construction. Well, rotted out floor joists and weak concrete footings and so forth, so.
Story_ID: 371955
Speaker 1: You got the store [Carol's Daughter] on 125th Street [New York, New York]. It's a gorgeous store. I won't go into the details of this or that but, the store happened and the opening day of the store. Tell me about opening day here, because this is considered your flagship store.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, we actually had two openings. There was one opening that was for the press on a Thursday evening and then there was an opening for the consumers on Saturday.
Speaker 1: And, what was the date? What do you consider the date it opened?
Speaker 2: Well, I consider the opening for the press because it was such a public event.
Speaker 1: And, what was that date?
Speaker 2: That was September 15, 2005. And, we, we, the investors that we have in the company are very high profile, you know, wonderful people. And, for that event we had Jay-Z in attendance, and Jada Pinkett Smith, Tommy Mottola, and his wife Thalia.
Speaker 1: So, now don't tell me you're gonna get a singing contract out of this?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You and Tommy Mottola making music.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. But, we had a Winnebago parked over on Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] between 125th [Street] and 124th [Street], and that basically where talent was located. And, we were there, we had an interview with Vogue magazine prior to coming in here for the opening. And, we were supposed to get out of the Winnebago, get into cars, and ride around to the front. In here, you know, have the big red carpet thing, you know. All the paparazzi were here and we decided to walk 'cause it was crowded, it was nice weather, and you know, we said, okay, we'll, you know, "Let's just walk." So, we start walking through the street and it was just this amazing parade that unfortunately wasn't captured on camera but the energy of it was quite remarkable. Steve [Steve Stoute] and I were kind of at the front of the line and our PR [public relations] person was there with us, Nancy Behrman. And, there was like, you know, a body guard behind us, and; then behind us I think was Beyonce and there's a bodyguard next to her; and then Jay-Z, and then there's another bodyguard; and Tommy and Thalia, and this, just line of people and you just see people coming out of stores and homes and hanging their heads out the window. And, they're like, "That's Jay-Z. Oh, my God. That's Beyonce," you know, and, and, it was just this, this well of energy and noise and sound and it just started to get louder as we approached the store. And, my brother [Philip Hairston] was here at the store and he's hearing this sound and he's like, "What is that?" And, he looks up the street and he's like, "Oh, my God, they're walking." And, he tried to get like some of it on camera but he said it just looked like we were leading this parade with the neighborhood coming up to the store. And, I can't even describe that feeling, you know. And, it, it didn't matter that everybody was coming out because it was Jay-Z and Beyonce, like, I didn't care. They're all coming to the store, you know. But, it was just such a great way to enter the community because it was so natural and it wasn't, you know, getting out of the car, and stand and pose, you know, we just walked through the streets. And, just seeing people's faces light up and, it was, it was great. So, we had a great party and event in here that, that night, cut the ribbon and came in and played music and drank champagne and you know, had a great time. And, then that Saturday, the following Saturday on the 17th was when we opened to the public. And, it was very must like it was in Brooklyn [New York], the store was crowded from the moment we opened it. We served strawberries and Mimosa, and sparkling cider and you know, the music was playing all day and we did humongous sales and we, it was just, it was remarkable. It was just great.
Speaker 1: How did you feel?
Speaker 2: Tired but proud, (laughter). Very proud, very, and very happy that it was finally open 'cause it was a long, you know, a long haul to get it there.
Story_ID: 371956
Speaker 1: You kind of mentioned some of the celebrities that came on board. Did they come about because of Steve [Steve Stoute] or did they come about because they liked the products?
Speaker 2: It was a combination. Will [Will Smith] and Jada [Jada Pinkett Smith] have been customers since about 1997, '98 [1998]. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, let me just read what Will said, since you missed him. One of his quotes, he said--
Speaker 2: Since I missed him?
Speaker 1: No. Since I missed, no, since you mentioned him.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Or, should I say--I, he said, "I plan not to, I plan not to stop until there's a case of Love Butter in every home."
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How does that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Amazing (laughter). He said that at our press conference in May of 2005. And, it was funny when he said it because he's not aware that Love Butter was made because of him and his wife. And, it came about by them requesting Christmas fragrances for their hotel room. They were coming to New York [New York] to do some work behind 'Ali' when he made 'Ali' and they just wanted the hotel room filled with Christmas smells. So, I went through all of my products and picked out whatever was vanilla, and cinnamon, and frankincense and, you know, just made you think of Christmas. And, because I pulled all those fragrance together I thought about making a butter with those scents. And, I called it Love Butter because, you know, they're just such a lovey-dovey couple. And, that was my Christmas gift that year and then it ended up being a product for Valentine's Day and has been a product ever since. So, to hear him say that was just very, it was wonderful, it was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: My last celebrity sort of tidbit of gossip. What was the bit with Brad Pitt and he--was it his daughter that they used, that whatever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in, it was in--
Speaker 1: --the statement was that it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --became controversial.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't controversial to us. We found out that in October Esquire, Brad Pitt was asked to write a list of fifteen things that he feels everyone should know in life. And, on his list of fifteen things, number three was Carol's Daughter hair products. And, his quote was, "Being a white person who has to deal with black people hair, you know, Carol's Daughter products are great. We got them for Z [Zahara Jolie-Pitt], and now her hair has so much luster and shine." I'm paraphrasing a little bit, but that was pretty much it. And, what people felt was controversial was, controversial was the fact that he said, "A white person dealing with black people hair," because it's kind of generalizing black people hair. What is black people hair? It's all different types of hair. So, that was the, the controversy behind it. We didn't mind and we, and I'm not saying that we didn't mind just because he's Brad Pitt. We just felt like it was a very real comment. There are a lot of people adopting children of other ethnicities and they're not familiar with what to do with them. So, I felt it was honest, you know. I have this daughter. I really don't know how to take care of her hair. It's different from mine, and I'm really glad I found these products. So, we, we were thrilled. I mean, when I heard that he said that, I couldn't believe it.
Speaker 1: I agree. I told Neculai [Neculai Burghelea], I'm like, well, anyone who gets upset having dealt with a kid's hair (laughter), a black kid's hair. So, my suggestion for you is to take that quote, send a nice little package to Dav- to Madonna and David [David Banda].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause she'll (laughter), she'll need the same thing. I saw that little--I saw her with him in a magazine and he's a beautiful little boy. But, you know, his hair is cropped so low. I'm like come 'on, he's African. He probably has the most beautiful little coarse hair, let it grow out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Put some product on it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I'll send Madonna some (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 371957
Speaker 1: Something else I wanna talk about to wrap this all up. How did, how does it feel for you to be creating a product that has been identified as a black product?
Speaker 2: It's wonderful. I mean, you know, I, I don't feel like it's limited just to African American people. I mean, you know, there's so many, we have so many different customers of different ethnicities and, you know, you want it to be accepted by all. But, that fact that in the beauty industry, for the most part, African American women have not been spoken to in the way that we speak to them. It, it fills me with great pride to be one of the first companies to do that. And, hope that there are many, many more to follow and that the, the way of doing things changes.
Speaker 1: So, do you know of people that have come before you, like Madam C.J. Walker? Not that they were doing exactly what you're doing, but some of the people who were pioneers in like black hair care. Like Madam C.J. Walker, Johnson and Johnson [sic. Johnson Products Company], any of--do you ever think about whose shoulders you're standing on, if anyone's?
Speaker 2: I, I feel the most, I guess, kinship to Madam C.J. Walker just because of how she started. And, because in a way she was still like a small home based business, even though she was very, very, very successful. So, I feel the most like I'm standing on her shoulders. That because she did what she did, I can do what I do. And, then someone like Iman [Iman Mohamed Abdulmajid], you know, with her cosmetic line, you know. Even though it hasn't been, you know, a huge, huge success just the, the impetus behind creating it, and her philosophy, and then the type of person that she is, and what she had to deal with when she was a model. You know, she ended up making foundation because she went to her first photo shoot and the photographer said, "Well, I know you brought your own foundation." And, at the time, they called it base. And, he says, "I know you brought your own base." And, she realized that there was something wrong because he didn't say that to the white model that was there modeling with her. He only directed that questions to her. And, so, she realized, okay, I, I have to do something. And, he, she didn't have it because she didn't know and he put something on her and she was gray. So, she started making her own base right then and there. Because no one knew how to do her makeup.
Story_ID: 371958
Speaker 1: So, when you look at what you've started, you have a store, the Brooklyn [New York] store; you have this store, what are your hopes for Carol's Daughter? As if you're not talking about yourself (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I, I, in a lot of ways, I've kind of detached myself from it in, in that, I don't let what I feel and what I want to do influence what the company does because the company is actually its own energy and entity. And, it needs to be what it is going to be in the world. And, I'm just there to guide it and make sure that, that it achieves its goals. Kind of the way we guide our children. So, I don't put limits on what it's going to be.
Speaker 1: Do you have expectations for it?
Speaker 2: Yes. I, I, want it to be something that is still in existence when my sons [Forrest Price and Ennis Price] are in their forties, and it's still there. It's not that thing that they talk about that their mom used to do. It's still there.
Speaker 1: Do you think at some point it will move beyond just an African Ame- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, it has done that already, but even in a broader sense. I mean, to be perfectly honest, I look around, I'm like, "Oh, this is, this is the new Kiehl's, Kiehl's is gonna be passe before long and this will be the new Kiehl's," you know, it as a staying power.
Speaker 2: No. I definitely see it doing that. It's always gonna have its roots where it has its roots. And, its core customer will probably will always be its core customer. But, I don't see it being exclusively an African American thing forever. Especially, with the browning of America, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, I love the color of the products, the brown tops, the brown--I mean, it's all so perfectly packaged and I mean, you've done a terrific job.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 371959
Speaker 1: When you think about, looking back over what you've been able, what, what has surprised you about what you've done?
Speaker 2: It surp-, it surprises me that by accident I've made history. Like, just you calling and saying do you what to be a part of HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]? (Background noise) It's like, wow, you know. And, it's, it's, it's not intentional, you just sort of feel like you stumbled into it, you know. And, then you just feel very blessed that this is what your life gets to be, you know. That you get to make change and, and influence lives.
Speaker 1: Well, one question that--are we pausing for the noise?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, one of the questions that came out of the office and one of the women who, actually, she's a very young woman. But, she's like, "Oh, I've been using it since she was dropping the key out the window." You know, the products and scents. She's like, and, "I would like to know if she ever worries about the integrity of the product changing?" Because she feels now, she's like, "Oh, it's so commercial now, everyone uses it." You know, "As opposed to me, when I was special, you know, my friends took me, we went up to her house," and do you ever worry about it becoming too big?
Speaker 2: No. Because to me that's not really real. Companies, like anything, you're gonna start small. And, in reality the integrity of the product is better now than it was then because it's produced better, you know. It's produced in sterile environments and, you know, with precision measuring versus me in my kitchen, you know, maybe not putting in five ounces this time, putting in six, you know, because I poured a little bit more in, you know. That's the, the beauty of being involved with it in the beginning; being one of those first people, you know, in the beginning, being able to tell that story. But, the reality of business and for it to have history and longevity and, and still be around, it has to change from that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It has to grow beyond your kitchen, yeah.
Speaker 2: It, it can't stay that way. So, that's the thing that makes it special. That's where it has its roots. That's where the stories come from. That's the thing that you feel. But, if that's why you buy it, then you've gotta go find the next Carol's Daughter that's coming up behind me and catch them while they're still in their infancy, and it's special, and if that's what moves you to it. But, it can't stay there and be what it is now. And, it's more important for it to be what it is, than to stay in my kitchen. It's more important for it to, to blaze that trail and to speak to black women and be a beauty company that's for us by us. That, that's more important than the hominess in the kitchen. And, so, it doesn't lose its integrity. It just touches more hands.
Speaker 1: And, more hairs.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, one other thing that, do you ever sort of, if there were a timeline for African American hair, and hair products, do you think about where you may fit in? I mean, I was just thinking about, Well, there is the perm with Madam C.J. Walker, perhaps the afro, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, and of course, the jheri curl, and all the S-curl products that we've come up with and where you say you are in that timeline of African--?
Speaker 2: I think the, the, you know, the '90s [1990s], when people were locking and, you know, going natural, you know, a lot, a lot of people just starting locking their hair in, you know, '94 [1994], '95 [1995], '96 [1996], I think I'm, I'm in there 'cause that's when my product started to be available and, and there weren't a lot out there when people first started to lock.
Story_ID: 371960
Speaker 1: What year did your mother [Carol Warwell Hutson] pass away and did, was she able to see some of your success?
Speaker 2: She did see some of it. She passed away on Valentine's Day 2003. So, she passed away before I met Steve [Steve Stoute] and did that partnership. But, she was here when I was on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. So, we, we got to share that together.
Speaker 1: And, she felt that then it was, you had received the seal of approval and the business was solidified?
Speaker 2: She felt that beforehand. But, to, I remember when she called me to tell me that she was proud of me. She was crying on the phone and like, couldn't, couldn't even say all the words 'cause she had just watched the show. And, you know, just for, for us, you know, Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] very important to black women. And, so, for her to watch her daughter, there's no words.
Story_ID: 371961
Speaker 1: And I was thinking about Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and sort of, and what it is about her. And, she really has branded herself. She's a brand now. So, she's a, she's a lifestyle so, you know, so everything, there's several different people under that umbrella that, that's a part of her lifestyle. Do you see yourself as a lifestyle? As, how do you see these products in people's lives?
Speaker 2: I see it as a lifestyle because when you're entrepreneur, you kind of live your business. So, I definitely see it that way. And, I see it as the way that I live. I think there are some people who do look at it that way and maybe the longer that we're around that's what will happen. You know, it's very interesting to talk to someone who's entering college and you knew their mother when she was pregnant and she was rubbing the oil on their--on her stomach, you know. And, then rub the oil on her kids and like now her kids can come here and shop on their own, you know, so yeah, it definitely is something that carries someone through their life. But, for me, it's always been that way because I live my business and I live the brand [Carol's Daughter]. Whether or not I'll have the influence Oprah has on people, I don't know. But, she's special that's why she's got that way (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you're part of the Oprah family now--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, that's the way it works. You're under that, you know, one--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that brand.
Story_ID: 371962
Speaker 1: So, what is it you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Being a good person; being a loving wife, and a great mom. And, not being afraid to pursue my passions and my dreams.
Speaker 1: You do a lot of public speaking now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is it you say to people about what you've accomplished?
Speaker 2: I try to let people know that I'm not special in any way. That I'm a regular person. And, that what I've done, they can do. But, also, what I've done may not be what they should do. You know, 'cause they are some people that think that they wanna follow in your footsteps and do exactly what you did, but that might not be their path. So, they need to find what they're path is and pursue that. But, when you listen to that inner voice, it guides you and it helps you and you learn what to do. And, that's how I got to where I am. Not because I'm, I'm special or different or I have some secret or something. I just listened.
Speaker 1: So, what was it your inner voice was telling you? Do what you love? I mean, if there is a message, if there is a mission statement, or a running inner thought, what is it?
Speaker 2: To do, to do what I love but also that--I, I think of my, my partnership with, with Steve [Steve Stoute] as the, it gives the ability for the company to live both of its lives. Because he can, he can guide the marketing, business, plan, driving force kind of side of it. And, I can guide the creative, spiritual, roots side of it. While we each have respect for what the other one does, one, each person is better at than the other. And, it, that, it has both of those lives. It can't just be a product company [Carol's Daughter]. But, it can't just be a great story. It's gotta be both in order to survive.
Story_ID: 371963
Speaker 1: Why do you feel history is important? Why did you agree to be a part of The HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: Because, you, when, when people talk about Madam C.J. Walker, you have to piece together what happened because we didn't have this kind of technology back then. And, you know, you're not going to be able to walk into a museum and pull out a tape and put it in and watch her talk about what it was like getting women to sell and, you know, what the first days of making it were like. And, I'm sure there's millions of people that would love, you know, to hear that kind of information. So, you know, I just feel like, I don't know where Carol's Daughter's gonna be twenty years, thirty years, fifty years, a hundred years from now, but to know that it's documented and that it's told my way. Not someone else's version of what I might have thought or felt, you know. I can say it myself. And, you can listen to me and you don't have to speculate why she made, you know, you don't have say, "Well, we think her impetus may have been," you know, I'm telling you what it is. I love perfume. I love to smell good (laughter). And, that's why I did it (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, you've always been, I read, people have said, you always smelled good.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank God (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 371964
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: If you look back, what is it you're most proud of?
Speaker 1: My boys [Forrest Price and Ennis Price]. They're great. They're great, great, great guys. And, nothing matters if they're not healthy and well, and smiling, and learning, and, you know, as much as Carol's Daughter means to me, my boys mean a lot more.
Speaker 2: Have you ever been referred to as Carol's daughter in the real world? I mean, literally Carol's daughter?
Speaker 1: Yes. Yes. When I first started to make things if my mom's [Carol Warwell Hutson] friends had them and somebody would say, "Oh, what are you using on your face, it looks so good?" "Oh, that stuff that Carol's daughter makes," yeah (laughter). And, then I have people who call me Carol, and I--there's actually a vendor that I work with that sell us our shea butter, and he calls me Sister Lisa Carol's daughter (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's my full title.
Story_ID: 371965
Speaker 1: We just have a couple more minutes, but you mentioned B. Smith.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there, can you just list off some of the other people that you've worked with that have been a part of what you're doing that may have inspired you? Prince, B. Smith, what role did Will [Will Smith] and Jada [Jada Pinkett Smith] play in, in helping or inspiring you?
Speaker 2: Well, Will and Jada became investors in the company so that's, that's a huge role that they're not just spokespeople but they've actually, you know, put their money into the business. But, prior to becoming investors, they were great spokespeople for me; great supporters of the brand; were always willing to give a quote to someone who was writing an article. And, you know, separate from their association with, with Carol's Daughter, I'm also extremely proud of them because of what they've done. And, you know, I mean Will's career is just amazing and Jada's is as well. And, they're great parents and, you know, they're a loving couple, you know. So, I mean, they're just inspirations all around in addition to, you know, being my business partners, which is still a very strange thing for me to say. I know it's real. I have the contracts. I signed them. But, it's still surreal. It real--when I read it somewhere, it's still, Wow. Wow. Can't believe that. Mary J. Blige is our spokes beauty. Another amazing talented, wonderful woman. And, you know, I look at her face and it's in an ad with Carol's Daughter on it, and I'm, wow (laughter). I say wow a lot.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you, I read also that, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, that one of the first celebrity spokespersons or endorsements came from Erykah Badu.
Speaker 2: Yeah. She wasn't a spokesperson, you know, in that, you know, we didn't pay her any money or photograph her and put her in ads or anything. But, she did talk about the brand in Essence magazine. I was very fortunate to get connected to her prior to her first album coming out. And, she loved the brand. Her first phone call to me, she was in tub using the cotton candy sea salt scrub. And, I'm listening to this message and she's like, "I am in the tub right now," and, I could hear the water. I'm like, "Oh, my God," you know.  And, she's telling me how wonderful she feels and, you know, and then her album came out like a month later and she was this huge, you know, success. And, everybody's on and on with Erykah Badu. So, I'm just, I'm just happy that I was able to connect with her beforehand and that we've had that association ever since. She still uses the products.
Story_ID: 371966
Speaker 1: We talked about the book ['Success Never Smelled So Sweet: How I Followed My Nose and Found My Passion,' Lisa Price and Hilary Beard] coming out or your writing the book but we should mention who helped, who you wrote the book with.
Speaker 2: I'm wrote the book with Hilary Beard. She's a writer out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; amazing person. She's since written a book with Venus [Venus Williams] and Serena Williams. And, she has a new book ['Friends: A Love Story,' Angela Bassett, Courtney B. Vance and Hilary Beard] coming out with Courtney B. Vance and Angela Bassett.
Speaker 1: Well, we thank you very much. If--we have thirty seconds left. Can you just leave me with something? And, if you have thirty seconds to wrap it up, what would you say about the experience and your life experience and, as being the founder of Carol's Daughter?
Speaker 2: I can't image my life without it, without having done this because I've just become such a different person from who I was thirteen and a half years ago. And, I'm looking forward to seeing who I'll be thirteen and a half years from now.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
