Story_ID: 432068
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you sta- please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Julia Brogdon Purnell, Julia, capital J-U-L-I-A, Brogdon, capital B-R-O-G-D-O-N, Purnell, capital P-U-R-N-E-L-L [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is March 19th, 1916, Belton, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are a doctor of educational psychology, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And okay, you're also the sixteenth supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixteenth supreme basileus--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and seventh national president of The Links, Incorporated.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date? You got me--March the 28th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 2772 79th Avenue.
Story_ID: 432069
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna start with AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] questions first, and then we'll do our regular interview.  So, there's some questions that were chosen by AKA and we're gonna go over those first.  And the first one is, is about your election as supreme basileus.  What influenced your decision to seek the position of supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: What influenced me was the quality of their organization.  My leadership ability and to think that I could improve the quality of life through services done in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.
Speaker 1: Okay, how would you describe your ascension to supreme basileus?  I'm sorry, how would you describe your ascension to supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Going up the ladder, starting with the local chapter [Gamma Eta Omega Chapter], becoming the regional director, and from the regional director to the supreme basileus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what propelled your candidacy for supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: What propelled it was the feeling that I could do the job.  Members of the sorority asking me to run for the office.  And my leadership skills at the local, regional and then national level.
Speaker 1: Okay, now these questions are on your leadership.  What was your vision for AKA Sorority, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: My vision was to improve the quality of life, to deal with services, supreme services to all mankind in the organization.  And to take the organization in the years that I was the supreme basileus to higher heights in services, to all mankind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what or who influenced your vision for AKA, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: Local sorors of the chapter, of the region, my parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon], national officers and friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, in what ways was your vision designed to ensure the survival of Alpha Kappa Alpha?
Speaker 2: To first evaluate where I was when I was elected supreme basileus, that is evaluate the organization, the pros, the cons, and then to decide where we ought to go at the period in which I was elected.
Story_ID: 432070
Speaker 1: How was your vision communicated and carried out through the sorority's program during your administration?
Speaker 2: My vision was carried out through--to capture a vision fair, the evaluation that Dr. Marjorie Parker did when she was in office as fifteenth national president.  I was commissioned to carry out all of the areas that had, that needed work on.  And I did that, I did that, I carried out all of the positive areas of that evaluation in my administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, ma'am, what kinds of things did you specifically do to successfully communicate your vision and effectively institutionalize it as a guiding principle?
Speaker 2: My whole perspective was spiritual in nature.  Prayer, reading of the Bible, living by the golden rule, communication, one-to-one personalization in dealing individually with the soror so that she felt a part of the sorority.  And that I was a sister, a sister-to-sister relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now these are about leadership style.  Which leadership style, or, or what was your leadership style, and, and how did you bring it, bring your vision to fruition?
Speaker 2: My leadership style was one-on-one individual communication, soror-to-soror, and it goes back to my philosophy, a spiritual relationship, always living by the golden rule.  Communicating particularly and specifically with each individual through what we refer to as a monthly newsletter.  Bringing each soror up to date on what was going on in the sorority.  And explaining any new areas to them so that they'd be better prepared to work in that particular area.
Speaker 1: Okay, now ma'am as the individual with the ultimate responsibility for making decisions which would shape AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], what was the fundamental test you applied?
Evaluation: evaluation of the organization, evaluation one-to-one with the individual.  And leadership conferences one-to-one with sorors, especially with undergraduates.
Speaker 1: Which former supreme's leadership style if any did yours parallel most?
Speaker 2: None. Each did what I call an A plus job during the era of her administration because she followed what was the key thing during the decade in which she served.  And as I think of it, each of these ladies before me and after me did an excellent job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now ma'am what did you learn about leadership while serving as supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: I learned to listen, I learned to study, I learned to read and to read carefully.  I learned to communicate, I learned to depend upon God more, and to depend upon my parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon], who trained me well as I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what lessons--I'm sorry, what was the greatest challenge or controversy that you faced, and how did you respond to it?
Speaker 2: My greatest controversies were through the Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps] because we were dealing racially, a racial group of students who had never come in contact with a black executive group--that was a problem.  But, we faced the problem squarely, worked on it meticulously, prayed over it, wrote over it, and came out very well.
Story_ID: 432071
Speaker 1: On whom did you rely for counsel and guidance when responding to challenges or controversy?
Speaker 2: My parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon].
Speaker 1: Okay, now describe an irritation that spurred you to action.  Okay, I said describe an irritation that spurred you to action.
Speaker 2: Any irritation I had that caused me to act was with Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps].  A racial act--for example, one morning at two o'clock they sent us a new group of girls from Charleston, West Virginia who had never seen black people at all.  And all had lice in their hair.  We had to ostracize these girls and treat them before we could allow them to interact with the other girls.  We studied that problem, worked on it.  And after two weeks we came out in good shape.
Speaker 1: Okay, by what standards would you measure the success of your administration?
Speaker 2: Evaluation, and what as they say in my church and what they say about the administration and what they said about me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what I said about my own evaluation of the self.
Speaker 1: Okay, what one thing would you like have done that you weren't, you were unable to accomplish?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Okay. It is said that we do not remember days, we remember moments.  As supreme basileus what was your greatest moment, your proudest moment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my proudest moment was that we had won the contract for the Job Corps.  After working so hard on the project.  When it was announced that we had won it I was most happy because it was the first for Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and a first for black women.
Speaker 1: Okay, now compare the Alpha Kappa Alpha you inherited from your predecessor [Marjorie Parker] to the one you left for your successor [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson]?
Speaker 2: I tried to sort of answer that a while ago, there is no comparison as such because we worked in different decades, and we worked with a different set of goals and objectives.  And each looked at her goals and objectives and worked arduously with those goals and objectives and came out very, very well.  I think they all got an A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now which of your contributions had the most impact?
Speaker 2: I think Job Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what accomplishments of your administration do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Job Corps, and the twelve or fifteen documents that we produced.
Speaker 1: Okay, now these were actually manuals on how to operate the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --project.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 432072
Speaker 1: What key elements of the sorority's heritage or legacy have been powerful enough to keep AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] vibrant through the test of time?
Speaker 2: The constitution bylaws, Alpha Kappa Alpha's mission and all of its documents.
Speaker 1: Okay, ma'am what one thing is essential to ensure that we quote walk rather than back into unquote the next hundred years?
Speaker 2: The constitution bylaws and the mission of Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Speaker 1: Okay, so ma'am has the sisterhood dimension taken a backseat to our pledge to be of service to all mankind?
Speaker 2: Slightly, but not really, we're working on that.  Hazing is an area that has caused us great concern amongst our undergraduates as well as graduates.  We've written manuals on that, had workshops and leadership conferences on it.  But it's a sign of the time, and the decade in which we live.  Society and what's going on now, is a parallelism to what is going on in the sorority because people are people.
Speaker 1: So the hazing whatever level, just reflects what's going on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the present?  Okay, what do you perceive as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority?  I'm sorry.  What do you perceive as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority?
Speaker 2: Hazing.
Speaker 1: Okay. What elements of the sorority must be maintained to change, or changed to ensure a perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Sisterhood--an understanding of our documents, all of the documents we ought to understand especially the constitution bylaws.
Speaker 1: I think, I don't know if they, when, when they wrote these questions, I've heard a number people mention hazing as a problem.  Do you have a recommendation for how people should be brought into the organization that would be, you know--
Speaker 2: In Alpha Kappa Alpha, I think we need more time. Now we are in the process of making a soror for three days only.  I don't think that is quite enough time.  I know I'm from the old school, but to learn all you need to learn to be stronger in the doctrine of Alpha Kappa Alpha, I think we need to increase the number of days for making a member.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ma'am what is your vision of the perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Following the mission of our founders.  Remembering their mission and what they say a sorority is and following the constitution bylaws, and sisterliness.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and what is the mission of AKA as, as founded by the--
Speaker 2: Our mission for training girls and women in services to all mankind, and in love, fellowship and sisterliness.
Story_ID: 432073
Speaker 1: Who did you rely on for guidance when you had problems, I know you said before it was your parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon] but could you kind of expand?
Speaker 2: I should have said first God because my spiritual nature guides me to prayer and reading the Bible for guidance.  And my parents with their homespun training while I was in office.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when I asked you about the, the contribution that you've made that's had the biggest impact, you mentioned Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps].  And can you maybe just tell us why Job Corps meant so much?
Speaker 2: Job Corps because it has had the greatest impact in programming for the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] for more than thirty-two years.  And that's the longest any program has had that's influence on the sorority because it touched every area of service and improving the quality of life for girls and women.
Speaker 1: Okay, and oh wait a minute I think there's one more here.  Let's see, yeah, she did expound on hazing, yeah, she kind of expounded on hazing.  So I think in terms of the, I think that what your trying to say, when you keep mentioning the constitution and bylaws, is that people need to focus on what the foundation and the meaning of the organization is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you want to kind of talk about (unclear)?
Speaker 2: All right, I said the constitution and bylaws, bylaws because here we have the goals, objectives of the entire organization of the sorority.  And the manual standard procedures, which holds the mission of the entire soci- sorority, these are the reasons I say these documents are important and the most important.
Story_ID: 435577
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they compel me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is ma'am do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, black.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No.
Story_ID: 435578
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Sarah Louise Christie [Sarah Christie Brogdon] and she married a Brogdon [Richard E. Brogdon].
Speaker 1: Okay, now how does she spell her name?
Speaker 2: C-H-R-I-S-T-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay and her first name is it spelled with an H or--?
Speaker 2: H.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You ask me a question that I really don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know about the year, that she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother died--I oughta be able to figure out--my mother died in 1978 (background noise).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so we figured out that your mother's probably born around 1892?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess. Okay and so, well and where was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, Orangeburg.  And so what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Can you trace them all the way back to slavery and Reconstruction or can you go that far?
Speaker 1: No, I was never interested in going that far back.  I know that her mother was white.
Speaker 2: Okay, now is there a story behind that?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Is there a story associated with that?
Speaker 1: Not that I know of, we were taught not to ask questions like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But that is unusual for those days, for--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: Any time a white woman has a black baby in those days--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --somebody's in trouble--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in South Carolina, I know that.
Speaker 1: It's true, yes.
Speaker 2: So there's no story of any conflict or anything?
Speaker 1: I'm sure there may be, but that I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Only, I only know that her mother died at an early age--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in her forties.
Speaker 2: And was she raised by her father's people then?
Speaker 1: As far as I know, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On a plantation.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now did you, did you know your, your grandfather?  On that, on your mother's side?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) No.
Speaker 2: Okay, did your mother talk about him, or did she know him?
Speaker 1: No, she didn't.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so, okay.  So is that why you didn't want to try to trace it back any further?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Is that why you didn't want to trace it back any further, on that side?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Might find something that wasn't healthy.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so as far as you know though, your relatives on that side are from around Orangeburg--
Speaker 1: That's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You do know that much.
Story_ID: 435579
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Sarah Christie Brogdon] talk about growing up and what it was like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: No, only about her school days because she graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's significant, so but she did get a chance to--does she talk about how she got a chance to go to college or who helped her or--?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, in those days you were not that talkative.
Speaker 1: Now, where did she go to college?
Speaker 2: Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, she went to Allen University--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --named after the great Richard Allen--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --founder of the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See you know your history.
Speaker 1: Okay, a little (laughter). All right.  Do you have any idea when Allen was founded?  'Cause it plays such a significant role in your family life?
Speaker 2: I ought to, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but named after Richard Allen.  So, what did your mother major in, in college?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What, what was your mother's major in college?
Speaker 2: Home economics.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she become a home economics teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did she teach in the local area there, in--
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, well did she teach high school or college or--?
Speaker 2: She taught high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Every girl had to take home economics then.
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: But they've cut it out now.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the high school she taught at--
Speaker 2: Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, Howard High School.  Okay, so from what you gathered from your--I know she didn't a lot, but did you, did you, do you think that she had a easy upbringing or was it difficult or what do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Easy.
Speaker 1: Easy, pretty easy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did her, did her people own property in--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did your mother have any other talents or anything that besides--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did, did, did, did your mother have any other, any other talents, did she play an instrument, or did she--?
Speaker 2: She was a seamstress.
Story_ID: 435580
Speaker 1: Well let me ask about your father's side of the family now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Richard Edward Brogdon [Richard E. Brogdon].
Speaker 1: Brogdon, B-R-O-G--
Speaker 2: D-O-N.
Speaker 1: D-O-N.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is the first Brogdon I've ever heard of in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You should go where he was born, he was born in Sumter, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in Sumter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, South Carolina.  That's a famous area.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Very famous during Reconstruction.  I think the, the black people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now he died when he was eighty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay and when was that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, oh when he died?
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 2: He died in 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: He was very brilliant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He finished valedictorian of his high school class and his college class. Finished (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he was born in, actually born in 1870s, 1876 or so.  He goes back (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, whatever it was, and he took courses at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Now, now wait a minute, let's, let's slow down a little bit here.  Do, are there any stories about his ancestors?  They go way back to Reconstruction, or--?
Speaker 2: I don't--they go so far that it's confusing because he was born in Sumter, but outside of Sumter there is a town called Brogdon [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that town is made up of the lighter skinned Brogdons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure about the ethnenticity [ph.] of all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if they're lighter--there are lighter Brogdons and there are some darker ones too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we would have to assume that the lighter ones were mixed with more whites or Indians [Native American] or somebody else--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --rather than black people.
Speaker 2: And that town is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is it a town or an area of, of a town or--?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, outside of Sumter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, outside of Sumter.
Speaker 2: A little town, a little community, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Populated by a lot of the people named Brogdon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that name associated with a big plantation or a big estate?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, I'm not sure of that.  Now my father was a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us again about where he went to school now.  Did--these Brogdon owned property I take it and--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: --were--okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of country property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's likely that they're associated with some big estate, or, or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --plantation or some white Brogdons I would think.
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, you don't know exactly, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever know of any white Brogdons when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, just, just black ones.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so your father had--his people had some means I guess.
Story_ID: 435581
Speaker 1: So he [Purnell's father, Richard E. Brogdon] was able to go through grade school and through--
Speaker 2: All the way up (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all the way through to college.  And where did he go to college?
Speaker 2: Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Allen okay, Allen University, okay.  And what was his course of study, his focus?
Speaker 2: English, theology.
Speaker 1: Okay, theology.  Now you say he went Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did he go there for a master's degree, is that it or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he went to Yale University, now this is significant, I'm sure, this is before the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: He's at Yale--there weren't many black people at Yale.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I can't think, I can think of only one I've heard of that was part of the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement, and I can't think of, think of his name right now, but Yale University, okay.  Was he the only black student there at the time do you know or--?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and black people going to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there were very few.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: William Ferris [William Henry Ferris], Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] you got Richard T. Greener, people like that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, he was amongst an elite few.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was extremely smart--
Speaker 1: Okay, and so--
Speaker 2: --academically.
Speaker 1: So, so did he mo- go on to get a Ph.D., or--?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he get that from Yale, as well?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, or did he get a D.D., a Doctor of Divinity?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did he get his Doctor of Divinity?
Speaker 2: Our oldest A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] college, you named it, when we were talking, Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Oh, Payne Theological Seminary [Wilberforce, Ohio] probably that's where he would have, to get it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's a part of Wilberforce (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's right
Speaker 1: Payne, yeah, Payne named after Daniel Payne.  Payne Theological Seminary.  Okay, we're getting someplace now (laughter).  All right, so do you know the years of, you know, when he got his, his D.D. at all?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: And if I had thought of it, I have his college program, a copy of it.
Speaker 1: Is it, is it here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe we can shoot it after we finish the interview we can shoot a picture of it.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd have to look through the papers, I saw it recently too.  But, I have a copy of it.
Speaker 1: Okay and probably some information about him is online--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in, in archives I would think and more than likely at Payne Theological Seminary.  Believe I'm gonna look him up when I get back to Ohio.  'Cause I live in Dayton [Ohio] so.  Now is there--did he talk about growing up and what it was like for him to grow up?
Speaker 2: Not much, see in those days, they stress that you must be something, must go to school, you must finish school and you must have a profession.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay, so the conversations you had with him weren't about what he did, but what you were gonna do--
Speaker 2: That's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) basically.
Story_ID: 435582
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon] met?  'Cause she was considerably younger than he.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, there's not any major story except he taught at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother went to Allen, they met that way and had a wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived happily ever after.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother was a student of Dr. Brogdon, at, at Allen?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay, now then okay now, when you think about their personalities, and talents and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Okay, why?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Well, he was the more dominant of the personalities in the making of life.  We started the day off with prayer together.  We ended the day with prayer together.  We ate every meal together.  We had to say the blessing.  We had to discuss bible verses.  We went to church not only on Sunday, but on Monday, Wednesdays and Fridays.  And we heard him preach, and he was an excellent preacher.  He was sort of the indoctrinator of morals, of ethics.  My mother dealt with the cultures that were artistic.  The growing up of a girl, manners, culture, very important during my day.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you were taught a lot of etiquette and that sort of thing, and then, then of course it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We called it courtesy.
Story_ID: 435583
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Two sisters [Sadie Brogdon Blackwell and Christine Brogdon Gilchrist].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They both finished Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they're both deceased [sic.].  I'm the older of the three.
Speaker 1: Okay and they both were graduates of Allen too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: One taught English and the other taught math.
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Do you have an earliest childhood memory, one that's your first memory that you--?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it's the earliest, but I know we were very close and we were--family was important.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you were the youngest sister?
Speaker 2: Oldest.
Speaker 1: The oldest, okay the other two were younger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oldest.
Speaker 1: --you're the oldest okay.  All right, so how many more years are you older than, the next one?
Speaker 2: I'm eleven months older than the one next to me and four years older than the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so it wasn't that many years, not, not a whole lot of years separating you?
Speaker 2: It didn't mean that much because we were all extremely close.
Story_ID: 435584
Speaker 1: Describe where you lived, and--now you lived in different places you had told me right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, you first you lived in Orangeburg [South Carolina] for a while, you were in Belton [South Carolina], you were born in Belton.
Speaker 2: I was born--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I left as soon as I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: My father [Richard E. Brogdon] was sent somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Where did you leave, live first, I mean you were in Belton then where after Belton?
Speaker 2: St. Matthews, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then where, and how long did you--
Speaker 2: Orangeburg.
Speaker 1: Okay. How long did you stay in St. Matthews?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Orangeburg, five.
Speaker 1: Orangeburg, okay.  And then where?
Speaker 2: Georgetown [South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --eight.
Speaker 1: Eight years, okay.
Speaker 2: Charleston [South Carolina] the rest of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so by the time--well, growing up basically you were in St. Matthews, Orangeburg and Georgetown, basically.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Did you live always near the church, you live in a parsonage or how did you--?
Speaker 2: Parsonages.
Speaker 1: Okay, near the churches that, that he--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was pastor of.  Okay, well can you tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.  The sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Certain foods, certain club activities, always everything associated with the church.  Eating, very important, three meals a day.  School, very important.
Speaker 1: Now what do they call the meals, do they call them breakfast, lunch and dinner? Or do they call them breakfast, dinner and supper?
Speaker 2: That.
Speaker 1: Breakfast, dinner and supper?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah I thought so.  I just--but it's different a lot of people don't call that anymore so that's why, why I asked you.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, lunch and dinner.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes ma'am.  Okay, so and they were, so these are sit down meals?
Speaker 2: That's correct, sit down.
Speaker 1: And did you have like a tablecloth--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and everything was--
Speaker 2: Silver, china.
Speaker 1: And suppose you, you know, I mean, what--was there ever a time you or your sisters [Sadie Brogdon Blackwell and Christine Brogdon Gilchrist] says, oh, I don't want to eat let me just, let me listen to the radio or read a book, or something--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time when you and your sisters would just say I don't want to attend, you know, I want to do something else or--?
Speaker 2: No, we had better sense than to say that.  'Cause we knew it was part of living and it was a part what we're supposed to do to become well versed and to become cultured individuals.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how would a typical meal work, I mean what would happen?  Your, your father you said would say pray and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was about more than eating then, right?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: It was about more than just eating?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 435585
Speaker 1: So what else would happen at a meal?
Speaker 2: We had conversation about what was going on in the paper.  And what were the leading topics of the day--that was always very important.  We must keep up with what's going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he [Purnell's father, Richard E. Brogdon] ever--I'm gonna ask this question 'cause he was born right at the end of Reconstruction, and Sumter County [South Carolina] I know was really a--there's a tremendous struggle going on there for black voting rights and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which eventually ended in the, in the snatching away of all those rights from the black community.  But it was, for a while they, they had elected representatives, and it was a very strong--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --it was one of the strongest places in the South.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did he ever talk about that in terms of the news (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a part of history, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what did he have to say about it?
Speaker 2: He gave the background, and if you had a reason to feel another way about a question you, you could discuss that.  But you had to give your basis for why you believed as you believed.   You had to do some thinking, thinking was very important.  A point of view, but why.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of the issues in the news that were affecting black people when you were growing up that you discussed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lynching, lynching in South Carolina was something else.  Ku Klux Klan [KKK]--how to be careful, your place, you didn't go too far, without knowing what your place was in society.  And your time would finally come, but you had to be ready.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by that, your time would finally come?
Speaker 2: That you'd have rights--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and privileges, that you didn't now have.  Well you know segregation was rampant and there was the toilet for the black, toilet for the white.  The fountain for the black, fountain for the white.
Speaker 1: But you're saying that your, your family believed that our time would come?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you had to be ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you get ready?
Speaker 2: Get your education, don't forget your place in the society then.  But be sure you were well read.
Story_ID: 435586
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Claflin College [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Claflin University [Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: And that's in Or- is that in Orangeburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, Claflin College was I think founded in the 1870s or '80s [1880s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and okay so you went to elementary school at Claflin College.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you--what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now were there--about how many students were going to school when you were there, I mean--
Speaker 2: About thirty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a small class.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And those are all, all the classes?
Speaker 2: Yeah well, in my class.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, in your class, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay thirty-five, okay.  So, but the classes--
Speaker 2: It was private you paid for it.
Story_ID: 435587
Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about Claflin College [sic. Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] I guess and, and who were some of the teachers that you had in grade school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember their names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were good teachers, they were Quakers.  I can remember how they looked, short, long dresses, long hair, no makeup, flat shoes, but they knew what they were teaching.  And they were very gentle with the students.  And they were all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's Claflin College.  Now, now you moved I guess before you finished grade school at Claflin (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I moved in sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay and what school did you go to then?
Speaker 2: Went to Waverly Elementary School in Columbia [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is that a public school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is did you notice a difference?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Difference in the students and even the difference in the teachers.  Because at Waverly I had all black teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't mean to say they were not good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you remember any of the teachers at, at Waverly?  Did, did any of them like take an interest in you in particular and try to help you?
Speaker 2: No.  I remembered one particularly in the sixth grade, her name was Ms. Manse [ph.], because she was real tall.  Real stately and wore beautiful clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know some Manses in Chicago [Illinois] actually.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right did you have a favorite subject at Waverly?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you display any, well did, did you have any talents, like could you draw, or play music or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I was, my teachers all said I was, well I just showed particular leadership; I took charge (laughter).
Story_ID: 435588
Speaker 1: So do you think you got that quality from your father [Richard E. Brogdon], from watching your father?
Speaker 2: Could have, could have.  I'm not sure, but he, he always encouraged us never to sit in the back anywhere we went.  And don't hold up our hands to answer questions, but always think through the question, don't just hold your hand up.  Make a contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he also said when you read a lot you have information.  He saw to it that we read so many books a week.
Speaker 1: Now, that's a value from the 19th century sort of that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you don't hear about that anymore though.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: I read that Charlotte Forten's [Charlotte Forten Grimke] father [Robert Forten] had her read a book a day.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, so you had so many to read a week?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And he stressed that was gaining knowledge, and we believed it.  And we did gain knowledge, you could speak on topics better because you had a broader knowledge of what you're talking about, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your father ever give you any indication that you couldn't do something, or wouldn't be able to achieve something be- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --because you were a girl?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Never, my father of the magnitude, he made you think that you could do it, whether you could do it or not.  For example, if you got a report card a got four A's and one B, he wanted to know why the B was not an A too.  Why couldn't you make B? That was his philosophy all the way up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he never said because you're a girl you should try to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So his expectations were high then?
Speaker 2: Very high, very high.
Story_ID: 435589
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Howard High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's in Georgetown, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was that, how, how many black students were at Howard would you say?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but how, about how many in the whole school would you think?
Speaker 2: Twelve hundred.
Speaker 1: Twelve hu- okay so it's pretty large school?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, twelve hundred students, all black teachers, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did you have, now did you take leadership roles in high school?
Speaker 2: Sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To the extent I had a little difficulty toward the end of my high school career.  They said three of us had the same average, the highest average in the class.  And the, they suggested that we pull a straw to find out who would do the speaking, who'd do the speech for valedictorian.  And I wouldn't take that; I argued that if three of us tied, three of us speak.  And they heard my argument, and I asked them to please let my father [Richard E. Brogdon] come in and listen to it and judge it.  And they let him come in and three of us spoke, oh I was loud.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm just saying that I was encouraged to take a stand for my belief, but I had to prove what I believed in good solid English, and solid talk. And not just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had to defend you positions and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, defend it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so and you, you could do that apparently.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 435590
Speaker 1: So now who was the principal of Howard High School [Georgetown, South Carolina] in those days, do you, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Professor Beck, Beck, B-E-C-K [J.B. Beck].
Speaker 1: And he was the principal, and were there, were there any other teachers that were important to you in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor Howard [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right does his, is his, has his, is his name anyway associated with the name of the school?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, he just taught social sciences and was a good teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, was the school name for the same General O.O. Howard [Oliver Otis Howard] that they name Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So, now, what was the facility like at Howard?  Did you, I mean was there enough room or space to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Poor, poor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Poor.  Made due with the library, didn't have a good library, made due in the science area.  But the teachers were smart.  They brought in a whole lot. And used their own money for facilities.  They helped us to grow.
Speaker 1: Now they school was supposed to be paid for by tax revenue, right?  Like all states schools?
Speaker 2: Supposed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Supposed.
Speaker 1: But, the, they didn't?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever get a chance to see what the white school was like and what they had?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it s- was it comparable, or?
Speaker 2: Very competent.
Speaker 1: I mean was it, was it the same as you?  I mean was it, were they equal schools in terms of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Supposed to be.
Speaker 1: But were they?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  But the black teachers tried to make them as equal as they could with what they had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were a senior in high school, now do you remember, what, what did you speak about when you, when you got a chance to speak as valedictorian?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't quite remember but I know it was in the area of leadership, I'm sure of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was made aware of the importance of leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had had to choose our own subject and write our own speech.  And deliver it from memory, write it and learn it.
Speaker 1: Now, did you see the movie 'The Great Debaters' that was just out--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about the Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] debate team?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, very good.
Speaker 1: Did that remind you of those days and at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And one of the Wiley original debaters died this past week.  I saw that in Jet.
Speaker 1: Was that the lady in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I knew her name, I, I apologize I forgot it but, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a lady in Texas that was--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --part of that original debate team--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: They mentioned that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 435591
Speaker 1: Were you ever on a debate team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now you went to Allen College [sic. Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You got it.
Speaker 1: And it--was it hard to choose what college you were gonna go to (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No 'cause I knew that's where we were going.  I didn't have to choose.  I knew where we were going.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there any discussion of you going to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] or--?
Speaker 2: No, we couldn't afford it.  We knew that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I mentioned that 'cause it's was another A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school, but--.  All right, so at Allen College, so you were pretty familiar with the college and the people there, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your major?
Speaker 2: My major was psychology.
Speaker 1: Now, well, psychology for those days, there weren't a lot people taking psychology were, were there? Was--
Speaker 2: No, you had to put education with it, so you could get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You knew better than that just have that by itself 'cause nowhere could you get a job.  And even if you got your master's [degree] in it, you weren't gonna get a job.  Where were you gonna work? Nowhere.
Speaker 1: So no one was employing psychologists in those days as such in the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, unh-uh, no.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, how did you become interested in psychology?
Speaker 2: Because I liked what they say in psychology, why do you do what you do?  What causes you to do what you do?  The why, where, what, when, theory, I liked that.  And it was dealing with why people act as they act and that's--I was interested in that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you, had you ever heard of any black psychologist when you decided to--?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause there weren't any in, in my area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who were the people that you studied when you were in school, the psychologists?
Speaker 2: Gates [Arthur Gates], Wynard [ph.], Haroldy [ph.]; the, the standard ones.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now, did you, were you in any leadership positions in Allen College, amongst the students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, ooh, yeah, if there was a club or something I was a member of it.  You, you learned to become a part major areas.  Like music or, well that's how you got your extra education, in the club areas.  And then you could court much better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause if he was in it that meant you two could see one another one more time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause the--well now to put this in perspective for those who are watching this tape now may not know that the rules for intermingling of male and female students were pretty strict in those days, right?
Speaker 2: Very strict.  Even on, where you walked on the campus.
Speaker 1: Even where you walked, really?
Speaker 2: Well, this is the part you walk on and he walked on that part, going to the dormitory, women's dormitory.  He didn't, he didn't have the right to walk any time of day up that walk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he could walk with you from the library at night so you went to the library (laughter).
Speaker 1: So I see there's an ulterior motive for all the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah, you got to use your, your brain.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay.  Now, now did you meet anybody special on campus in those days?
Speaker 2: I did, but my father [Richard E. Brogdon] shot that out of my head fast.  Because my grades went down one semester.  And he gave me another semester to pull 'em up.  Because I thought I was in love with that young man, and he shot love out my life (laughter) for a long time.  Go back to the original theory, the books.
Story_ID: 435592
Speaker 1: When you were raised up, now, could--was, was popular music allowed in the house, I mean could you play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --oh yeah, we could play that.
Speaker 1: All right, and who were some of the popular mu- musicians, I guess when you were in college [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina], I guess would be 1932, '33 [1933], something like that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can't remember their name, but 'Stardust' was the--if they played 'Stardust' on the floor, and we were dancing, your boyfriend better find you, or else he was quit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the old '40s [1940s] songs, and that was good music, too, good music, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jimmie Lunceford, those boys were good.  And we played them a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did, did they come on the radio a lot or did you have to play records?
Speaker 2: Radio, radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Radio was important in those days, yeah.  We played records but you could get anything you wanted all kind of music and all kind of stories on the radio.  So you had your little Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] radio right by your bed.
Speaker 1: Now did--yeah, Sears, huh?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I still got my Sears radio.  They don't wear out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Di- now did you go to the movies a lot, when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Not too much, not too much.  But they had good movies then.  Good movies, 'cause I look at some of 'em now on the old movie station, those are good movies.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I watch 'em too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did--how did they treat you in the theatre did, did you have to go through some changes to go to the movies?
Speaker 2: Upstairs.
Speaker 1: So, there weren't any black theatres in--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay--where you grew up.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Upstairs.
Story_ID: 435593
Speaker 1: Well tell us about joining AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  Now did you join AKA when you were at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hate to say this, but, in my era, AKAs had a bad reputation in a way. We had the white AKAs and the black AKAs.  And most of them were the real light AKAs.
Speaker 1: Now were those called the white AKAs?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we called 'em white AKAs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We called 'em Delilahs [ph.] if they were black, and I forgot the other name we called 'em if they were white.  But--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --they'd tell you in a minute, you will never make it.  And that's what they used to tell me because of my color.
Speaker 1: They told you that you would never make it?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So you would be too dark to be in AKA (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah and I told 'em, watch me.  (Laughter) And you know when I was made supreme basileus, some of those girls at the boule and they said, "You said watch you."  I said, "You see me now?" They say, "Yeah" (laughter).  But, oh yeah, most of the AKAs were really light-skinned.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is something that a lot of the AKAs deny because it, I know the story I'd heard years ago was that the Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] broke off from AKA because of the skin color conflict.  Then the, now the AKAs are saying that's not true, that didn't really happen like that.  And but what do you think what, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about the Deltas breaking off, but I do know that they were color struck, I know that.  'Cause they told me I'd never be in AKA because of my color.  And I told 'em, watch me.
Story_ID: 435594
Speaker 1: Now did their policy [in the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] mirror attitudes about color in the black community in general?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  Well, you know from Charleston [South Carolina] they used to tell the, those light-skinned girls if they even married a black boy they would disinherit them.  And they did that in Charleston.  You never heard that?
Speaker 1: So I have heard you know stories like that but did they have like a society of light-skinned people in Charleston that kept (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just about, just about.
Speaker 1: --similar, was it similar to the Creoles down here?
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct. That's correct.  When I came into Baton Rouge [Louisiana], the Creoles wanted--we had black theaters, and they wanted us black ones to sit in the balcony and let them sit down (laughter).  I tell you (shakes head).
Speaker 1: So, did, did it work?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I didn't think so but--
Speaker 2: No, there were too many of us black ones.
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this is an attempt by people of African descent to try to mirror what white people were doing--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --on a worldwide scale.
Speaker 2: And they did a good job too.  They did a good job, there's no doubt about it.  I wouldn't tell you they didn't, they did a good job of it.
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a psychological understanding of what that's about?  That you can share with us?
Speaker 2: No, and didn't want it.  I just thought that they needed a little education and that we could give it to 'em.  Because they began to go to college more--see they didn't go to college for the most part, they married and had children.  But, when I came here, they were beginning to go to college.  And (unclear)--become educated.  But, we've been through a lot with whites as whites and black whites.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, things have changed though over the years.  Do you think things have changed over the years (unclear)?  Do you see things have having changed?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: That--situations having changed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh lord yeah.  Oh indeed so, because the black blacks saw to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a struggle within a struggle you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've seen it both ways.  'Cause you know Charleston is very much like New Orleans [Louisiana] when it comes to race.  But it's something else, and there's a good bit of it left.
Speaker 1: So it's not eradicated yet.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's changed a lot.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.  You can feel it.
Story_ID: 435595
Speaker 1: So when you joined A- so did they make things difficult on you when you were joining AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I didn't allow that, unh-uh.  You--I knew my grades were up, I knew I was in leadership roles, you can't question what I was doing, neither could you question my grades.  No way they could keep me out.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did anybody try to keep you out?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would they say things to you that were--or did they do anything?
Speaker 2: No, they could have, what they would have is the votes.  Therefore you had to strategize as to how you were gonna get those votes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you recall what your strategy was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote some term projects for some of those girls who couldn't write 'em (laughter).  And then charge 'em my regular one dollar a paper (laughter).  I shouldn't tell you that, but that's the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were so good a student--
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was what you call smart-etic [ph.], I don't mean academically smart, you got to know in human relations what button to push and I learned that long ago as to how to maneuver with people, and that's nine tenths of it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your social IQ was high.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: You knew how to, okay, all right so.  Now when you, you, so you, are there any professors at Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] you think we need to mention before we--any, any special people there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember their names.
Story_ID: 435596
Speaker 1: You came out of Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940]?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you earned a B.A. in educational psychology?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to Atlanta University?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And the idea was to earn a master's degree, yeah?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did you like Atlanta?
Speaker 2: I liked it all right.  I shouldn't say this to you, I went, I lived in the dormitory, the dormitory was filled with homosexuals.  And it was difficult to live in there with them.  To the extent that my friend and I went everywhere together and even coming back to the dormitory because those homosexuals would (laughter) chase you all down the hall.  Oh, it was terrible.
Speaker 1: Now these are women you're talking about right because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm talking about women.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I can deal with the men, they're easy to deal with.  But women are horrible.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I never would have guess that, in those days.  But I--
Speaker 2: Well, where I'm concerned you need another person's opinion.  But I just think they are horrible.
Story_ID: 432459
Speaker 1: Why did you choose Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to work on your master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I got a full scholarship there.  And they had dormitory accommodations.  See when I went to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] they still didn't have dormitory accommodations for black women.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so Atlanta University when you were there, now did you ever meet Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]? I think he was teaching there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His girlfriend's mother was my best friend's--well he went with the mother of my best friend in the dormitory.  We used to walk together (laughter) to protect one and another.  And Du Bois used to take us to dinner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And his, his--he was going with your girlfriend's mother?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is of course, we know that he was married at the time so--
Speaker 2: Right, but he used (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and we also know--
Speaker 2: --to fix dinner for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We used to eat in his apartment a lot.
Speaker 1: And he would fix dinner?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what kind of an individual was Dr. Du Bois to you I mean, as you met him?
Speaker 2: Human, very easy to get along with.  Helped us when he could.  Well in those days, I was young enough to appreciate a good meal.  And he would cook dinner for us often, and I ate it too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you know over the years people have written about him, and they've written about all of his interest and activities I guess he was, he was in- heavily involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] then.  Was editor of The Crisis magazine and--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense of how, how--of his stature in those days, did you know, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Yeah to some extent, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He shared a lot with us.  And would check to see how we were doing on our projects.  And I liked that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was he, was he of use in terms of checking, I mean to check facts with and to get ideas, how to make your papers better?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just to think you were with Dr. Du Bois meant a lot to us.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any particular stories about him?  'Cause we've interviewed so many people that have a story they tell, or some story about Dr. Du Bois?
Speaker 2: No, my story was eating and getting ideas from him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever take a class from him?
Speaker 2: No, he was in a bra- another field.
Story_ID: 432460
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your other professors, any of the professors you did take classes from, what they were like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Was Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] at, in Atlanta [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] then?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  We'd look at him, and listen to him speak at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, right, right, okay.  So, what about, now the Atlanta U complex [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] drew a number of black intellectuals from all over the country and world.  Were there any other significant personalities you had a chance to hear and speak at there, I mean--
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh. To hear speak, but, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's what I mean.
Speaker 2: But not--
Speaker 1: Like people like Howard Thurman or, or who else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a beautiful complex and really an educational complex with all those colleges, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you got your master's degree, in what 1944?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Or was it '44 [1944] or '42 [1942], let's see?
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you d- did you go right after your Ph.D. after that?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked at Morris College [Sumter, South Carolina] and South Carolina State College [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you teach educational psychology?
Speaker 2: No, courses in education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and in 19- I guess, I suppose it's someplace in the '40s [1940s] you decided to go back and get your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about, you, you went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I applied, went and studied and came back.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That wraps it up, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, that about wraps it up there.  So, any significant professors or--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --there--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were some, but I didn't linger on them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was it culture shock attending an all-white school basically after being--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, because when I went there we had a group of blacks who sort of organized the class themselves.  And we went around together.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Reading and language as a basis.  You see, I was from Charleston [South Carolina], and they speak a language of their own, especially on the plantations.
Speaker 1: Oh, the black people in Charleston (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what are you talking about what they call Gullah, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did you have to say about it in your, your dissertation?
Speaker 2: I was interested in understanding 'em and what we could do to help them to merge their language into the regular English language.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were starting to tell me that your Ph.D. was--your dissertation was about language as a basis for--what, I mean what?
Speaker 2: For reading.
Speaker 1: But you particularly focused on the Gullah dialect?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I used to be able to speak it too.
Speaker 1: Okay. You can't speak any Gullah anymore, do you know any--
Speaker 2: No, I have to concentrate on it now.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you think of, can you say something in Gullah for us that--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lost it.
Speaker 1: I know that there was a, there was a representation of it in the movie 'Glory.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When they were in South Carolina and--
Speaker 2: See, my father [Richard E. Brogdon] had several members on the plantation, and I learned a lot from them.
Speaker 1: Church members you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in the movie they depicted it as sounding like the Caribbean dialect sort of, is it like that?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Flatter.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, I wish you could do it for us, but we're just going to keep going (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 432461
Speaker 1: So what did you do after you got your Ph.D. [from University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] now, now you have a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Came to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, Southern University.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and been here ever since.
Speaker 1: Now when you received your Ph.D. in educational psychology in 1948, how many other black people had Ph.D.'s in educational psychology?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Were there other black people that had a Ph.D. in educational psychology when you got yours?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, because they were hiring them then in colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so there were more, you weren't the only one, there were other people (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you came to Southern University--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this was 1948, I guess?
Speaker 2: Six [1946].
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946], 1946.
Speaker 2: Been here ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came here before your Ph.D. was finished and then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, I, I understand, so you were here from 1946 to 19- I think you said like thir- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Thirty-three years, right, you said?
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: Thirty-eight years okay, thirty-eight years, all right.
Speaker 2: Until 1983.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And when you came here the, the president I guess was Fel--
Speaker 2: Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark].
Speaker 1: Felton Clark.
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: Now, was this, was this Felton Clark, Sr. or Jr. [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Felton Clark, Jr.  Okay, and so, did you like, well I guess you like Southern if you stayed so long?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still here, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what do you like about it?
Speaker 2: I like the atmosphere, I like the food.  I li- I like the academic atmosphere.  I liked everything about it, especially Felton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause he was brilliant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I found a good husband [Clifton Purnell, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay so you met your husband here on campus?
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay and well tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I met my husband in church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I came to Southern Friday, September the 19th and joined the church Sunday, September the 21st, joined the church as soon as I got here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what church is that?
Speaker 2: Bethel A.M.E [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: And well tell us the story, now how did you meet your husband in church he was?
Speaker 2: He was going there, he was a widower.  And he was going to that church.  And I wasn't married and I was going to that church and we started going out together.  He proposed and we married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and you've had, you've got like, you had one son [Clifton Purnell, Jr.] right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 432462
Speaker 1: Well tell us about some of your students.  Do you have any students that you're proud of that were--
Speaker 2: A good many of them, but I don't think I can think of their names to single them out.  But they were very excellent students, no matter where they came from, they could read, write and spell.  And that, that's what they can't do now.  But, that was the influence of the black teacher in the black school.
Speaker 1: So the quality of black students today is down you say in terms of (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ooh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Some are not, are not literate?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Some are not literate, I mean can't read and write?
Speaker 2: That's correct, plenty of 'em.  But when I came here they could all read, write and spell.  Influence of the solidly black school with the black solid teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, many people talk about the, the gains of the Civil Rights Movement.  But, I've also heard people decry what happened to the black schools.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That's correct, and to, to so-called integration.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea of what should have happened in those days, instead of what did happen?
Speaker 2: It was the quality of the teacher.  See the black teacher gave all she had to the black pupil.  What she knew she got it over to the black pupil.  When we integrated, they were going to teachers who didn't give a damn.  I mean, I got it, you get it, I mean there was not that solid counseling and the protection of the student, where the teacher was concerned.  There's a great difference in that.  And it's still that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any, any particular highlights of your teaching at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: I told you my highlights were when I came here they could read, write, spell.  You could see the impression of the black teacher on the black child.  And the caliber of student was ready for education.  They were told to learn, and they learned.  And they worked hard.
Story_ID: 432463
Speaker 1: In 1963, you were invited to the conference of 300 women by President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], that's July of 1963.  Now, what was the conference of 300 women and, and what were you supposed to do there?
Speaker 2: Talk about how we could, how to improve the quality life of black boys and girls.  What we, what we, we could do to help them in their reading, writing, spelling, arithmetic.  And how could we improve what was happening in the homes, that sort of thing.  That's what the conference was about.  I went to conference that Kennedy had, Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now in '64 [sic. 1965], Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], but he also signed the Economic Opportunity Act [sic. Economic Opportunity Act of 1964], which allowed the creation of the Job Corps.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And in 19- that same year, you were elected the leader of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], right? Or were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  And you went to Aph- Alpha Kappa Alpha Day in [U.S.] Congress, so that the members went to Congress to lobby their congressmen about--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was this something they did every year, or did was this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --something, something that you organized?
Speaker 2: I did it, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were planning to shake up Congress with AKA (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, we did too.
Speaker 1: Okay and the result was I guess the involvement in Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps]--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --getting the Job Corps contract.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're making history here.
Story_ID: 432464
Speaker 1: In 1978, you are elected national president of The Links, Incorporated.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?  'Cause this is another national presidency, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I ran for it, and I got it.  And I did the best I could after I became president.  You have to be--they are two different organizations, established in two different times.  And the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] happened to be a much older and excellently organized, organization.  The Links were a little different.  They needed a whole lot, as for example we didn't have a history.  We had our first history, I saw to that.  We were singing our hymn in the tune of 'Auld Lang Syne,' we incorporated our own hymn.  There were so many basics that we needed that, that's what I did with The Links. Constitution bylaws.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do The Links differ in terms of, in terms of organizational goals from AKA?
Speaker 2: Older organization, the AKAs. The Links were established by a group of society-oriented women who said, let's organize our friends in a chain of service throughout these United States.  And that's what they did.  I had my friends come, we, we organized the chain in Louisiana, and all of the states.  And that's how they became organized.  But the organization was different because it was women who were of the societal status; everybody couldn't be a Link and everybody can't be one now.  It's an expensive organization.  They organize from state to state.  It's a good organization with the emphasis on friendship and service.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so, be, if you're an AKA, it doesn't necessarily mean you have enough means to be a Link, right?  That's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: I'm saying that and meaning it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because with AKAs, the ground is at the undergraduate level. Scholarship is what the founders stressed.  Scholarship, love, sisterliness and services to all mankind.  The, the core of it is services, do something for somebody else free of charge, but do it.  And do it from the heart, but do it in sisterliness, do it in love, that's AKA.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I explained it well.
Speaker 1: I think you did, I think you did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 432465
Speaker 1: You retired from Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1986, right? And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T- three [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Four [1984], '3 [1983] or '4 [1984], anyway, my husband died in '83 [1983]--'84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nineteen eighty-four [1984], all right, now your husband was a, was an ath- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coach.
Speaker 1: Yeah, coach all right.  Did he coach Southern's team?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Before he went to the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he coach basketball or football or--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Both of them?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  What, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Clifton [Clifton Purnell, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Clifton Purnell?
Speaker 2: And there he is up there.
Story_ID: 432466
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I did it within that particular era.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh lord, family, going back to the family.  And the black boy, I'm real concerned about our black men.  Too many of 'em are incarcerated.  And they drop out of school too early.  They're not being educated properly.  And there is not the solidness in family life that we need for our race.  We need to work at the family unit area.  To me that's important.  Too many youngsters don't know who their fathers are.  And who have no--well they just don't know who their--they have no, no stability within the family unit, where father and mother are concerned.  They're reared by the woman alone, I don't mean to say she can't do it, but that's very difficult.  Then there're too many young, young, young, young mothers who don't want to be mothers.  You got to be--parenthood means a lot.  You got to study it to do it.  And there's too much of a looseness in the family unit, is my feeling.  You've got to strengthen the family.
Story_ID: 432467
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Sarah Christie Brogdon and Richard E. Brogdon] get a chance to see you become successful in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were they proud of you, was your father proud?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they, they were proud of you if you just did one plus thing.  You got praise for that, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what did your father think about you getting a Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Oh he loved it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done today, what today would consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope my legacy is sisterhood, communication, the Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps] and some of the publications in both organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay, just to put this is in perspective you, you were saying earlier, and I'm just getting this myself, that AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] under your leadership really wrote the specs for Job Corps, basically right?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You wrote the guidelines for the Job Corps.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean the operational guide guidelines.  So and it's a program that's still in operation today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I'm sure it's been modified some but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How long did AKA stay involved with it--it was for a long time right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah. 'Cause we've interviewed other AKAs who've, who've mentioned Job Corps, and the commitment to the Job Corps site in Cleveland [Ohio], I believe it was?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 432468
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  Now, tell us a little bit about your late husband [Clifton Purnell, Sr.] and your, your one son [Clifton Purnell, Jr.] passed too, didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh.  Well, my husband was a coach [at Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] all the way through. And his plaque for All-American in sports is one of the ones I put out.  My son was in counseling.  My husband was a good man 'cause he tolerated me through two organizations [The Links, Incorporated and Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and that wasn't easy.  But he backed me a hundred percent.  I kept him well fed though, I never went any place without leaving his food cooked, and that's what he wanted.  He didn't like to eat out; he liked to eat at home.  So, I saw to it that he ate at home.  I did what I thought was my job, and he really did his job.  We had a beautiful, forty-two year marriage.  We really did.  I miss him still.
Speaker 1: And, and you said your son was, was killed in an auto accident?
Speaker 2: Yeah, coming over here [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], during the Christmas holidays. His wife was driving, and they hit that embankment, it was two or three o'clock in the morning, he never revived from that. After a week, he died.
Speaker 1: Do you have two grandchildren right by him, his son (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two grandchildren and three great-grands.  One grand has two children and the other grand has one.
Story_ID: 432104
Speaker 1: It's me and it was taken one month ago, when I was honored by the women of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] for work in the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 2: That's Julia Brogdon Purnell [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell] again, speaking at a regional conference two years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Those are my sisters in earlier years.  Their names are Sadie [Sadie Brogdon Blackwell] in the middle, Sadie Blackwell in the middle and Christine Gilchrist [Christine Brogdon Gilchrist] on the end and I'm on the right hand.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Oh, I just put that--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well that's all right, that's Julia.  That was taken at the 1980 boule.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my family.  My sisters on the right hand, my mother and then me.  And behind me is my husband and behind my sister Sadie is her husband.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Julia, that hangs in the sorority house here [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] as a basileus of the chapter [Gamma Eta Omega Chapter].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's when I was invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.] by Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] for a women's conference.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Closer, got it.
Speaker 2: That's my father, Reverend Richard E. Brogdon, a minister.
Speaker 1: Reverend Dr. (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Reverend Dr.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Sarah Louise Christie Brogdon [Sarah Christie Brogdon].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are my two sisters at the 1982 boule, Sadie and Christine as they were made into The Links chapter in Ann Arbor, Michigan [Ann Arbor Chapter of The Links, Incorporated].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's Julia Purnell hanging in The Links' national headquarters.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that taken do you remember, approximately (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.
Speaker 1: --here that hangs in the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] national office, taken in 1966.
Speaker 2: I was in the national headquarters last month.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We interviewed the current supreme basileus.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: McKinzie [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got that one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  With you and your husband just go ahead and say what that is, one more time, year and--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell me one more time about this one?
Speaker 2: That's my husband, Clifton Alvin Purnell [Clifton Purnell, Sr.] a coach of football.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and when was that taken, you told us, but tell us again?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983]--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --just before he died.
Speaker 1: So he cuch- he coached the Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] football team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, before he went to the [U.S.] Army.
