Story_ID: 337392
Speaker 1: I'll start by slating.  My name is Evelyn Pounds and I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Denise Gines is observing.  Please state and spell your complete name.
Speaker 2: Monica, M-O-N-I-C-A, Rosielee, R-O-S-I-E-L-E-E, which is Rosielee, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, Kaufman, K-A-U-F-M-A-N, Pearson, P-E-A-R-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your date of birth
Speaker 2: Ten, twenty, nineteen forty-seven [October 20, 1947].
Speaker 1: And location of birth?
Speaker 2: Louisville, Kentucky--
Speaker 1: All right, today--
Speaker 2: Louisville, as we say it, L-O-U-I-S-V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February 21, 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The interview is being shot at WSB-TV, 1601 West Peachtree Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30309.
Story_ID: 337393
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you a few People magazine-ish type questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be lasagna.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Blue--that's baby blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Destin, Florida.
Speaker 1: What, Florida?
Speaker 2: Destin, D-E-S-T-I-N, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And a favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] says it: "It's what you do with what you have that makes you what you are."
Story_ID: 337394
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother.  What type of person is she--well, her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Hattie Wallace Edmondson, H-A-T-T-I-E, Wallace, W-A-L-L-A-C-E, Edmondson, E-D-M-O-N-D-S-O-N.  She was born March 24, 1923 in Louisville, Kentucky.  She's one of two children born to Rosie Langford, L-A-N-G-F-O-R D.
Speaker 1: From whence you got a part of your name?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that Rosie is from my grandmother.  Mother married her childhood sweetheart [Maurice Jones], had one child--me--after they'd been married some years.  Parents divorced, and so I was raised in a single-parent home.  My mother always took care of her mother and her brother who never married.  His name was Samuel Wallace, S-A-M-U-E-L, last name, W-A-L-L-A-C-E.  My mother has always--my grandmother was a single parent.  As a matter of fact, she never married.  And she, as my mother says, my mother never knew who her father was, but her favorite phrase is: "I know who my Heavenly Father is."  She always tells the story that she is sure her father is the same father that her brother had.  My mother is very fair.  My uncle was brown-skinned.  My mother is the younger of the two.  When she was born, the father, seeing her, said, "This couldn't be my child because everybody in my family is brown."  My grandmother was fair because one of her parents was Indian [Native American], and I think somebody else was white, so she was a very fair woman.  But no one understood genetics back then.  So, Mr. Wallace looked at my mother and said, "That couldn't be my child," and immediately left with Buster, my Uncle Samuel, and left my grandmother and my mother.  Years later, my grandmother did receive her son back when he died, the man died--Mr. Wallace.  His sisters put my Uncle Buster into an orphanage because they didn't want to take care of him.  And so, my grandmother then got him out of the orphanage, and reunited her son and her daughter.  So, my mother, because of her background, always was a non-drinker because both my grandmother and other parts of the family loved to drink and have fun.  My grandmother only had a third grade education.  My mother is the first person on the maternal side of my family to graduate from high school.  I am the first to graduate from college.  So, my mother was the goody two-shoes, they always called her.  Hattie, oh, she tells wonderful stories growing up in Louisville, and how they always lived in an alley.  And her dream was to one day live on a street with a real address because my grandmother made a living basically by selling bathtub gin and beer on weekends.
Speaker 1: Was this moonshine?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's moonshine.  She, with a third grade education, what else you going to do?  She had been spoiled rotten by her parents who had lived very long together and had been married.  But Rosie, because she was an only child, was pampered, and she never learned to do anything.  She dropped out of school when she was in the third grade.  Once her parents died, it was pretty much up to your cousins, my Cousin Lee [ph.], who was actually my grandmother's cousin, and my Cousin Harry [ph.], who was Cousin Lee's brother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that group of family to take care of Rosie 'cause she was the only girl.  So, she never really amounted to much, as they would say, except she taught me how to play Gin Rummy, and she taught me how to play poker, and she taught me how to do Black Bottom.  She was a great deal of fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what is, what is Black Bottle [sic.]?
Speaker 2: It's a dance (laughter) that they used to do in the old days.  So, I only knew her as a child because I always sat in her lap.  Her nickname was Bowleg Rose.  She was a hefty woman, almost 250 to 300 pounds, but my mother loved her dearly as did I.  And my mother took care of her for most of her, you know, adult life.  By the time my mother married at twenty-four, I wasn't born until I think she was twenty-six, so grandma was a special lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was special--
Story_ID: 337395
Speaker 1: My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson], you know, stayed and went to high school.  She went to--she was raised actually by her Aunt Hattie [ph.], and her Aunt Hattie was married to Cousin Lee [ph.], so she really wasn't an Aunt Hattie.  They just called her that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was married to Cousin Lee who was my Grandmother Rosie's [Rosie Langford] cousin.
Speaker 2: 'Cause she was a cousin, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, Aunt Hattie took in mother because grandma was really not a very good mother at that time.  She was going out and having a great time and doing other things.  So, they sent mother off to school in Baltimore [Maryland], so she could get a good education.  And then, she ended up going to school in New Orleans [Louisiana] at St. Mary's Academy, which was an all-girls Catholic high school, located in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana].  As a matter of fact, mother graduated from that school sixty years ago last year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It --
Speaker 1: The school still exists, but it's no longer in the French Quarter.  Well, it's actually on Chef Menteur Highway, and it doesn't exist anymore because Hurricane Katrina and the flooding took it away, but it will be rebuilt.  Mother has a scholarship there in her name for a single-parent home.  Anyway, mother went to school there, but she was a boarding student, and she also worked to help pay for her tuition.  She graduated from there, came home, and was one of the first women hired to work in the post office during the war [World War II, WWII] because when many of the men went off to war, they needed women to work in non-traditional jobs.  So, she was a mail sorter at the post office and was very independent.  My father [Maurice Jones] came back from the war.  They got married and stayed married, I think, four years, like I don't remember the exact amount of years.  But then, they got divorced, and then, she became a single parent on her own.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she worked in many jobs.  When the soldiers came back, the women lost their jobs.  And she then had all kinds of odd jobs, you know, being a house sitter for people, being a housekeeper.  The best job she had--I guess was when I was a teenager because then, she got a job working on a janitorial staff at the post office.  And it was a union job, so it allowed her to make more money than she had ever made before in her life.  She used to hock her engagement ring to pay my tuition at Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky] where we also have a scholarship fund set up for a single-parent family.
Story_ID: 337396
Speaker 1: Where is Presentation Academy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in Louisville, Kentucky.  It's the high school I graduated from in 1965.  Because mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] always said education was your key to success, if you had an education, nobody could take that away from you, and you could be anything you wanted to be.  It didn't matter if you grew up in Smoketown in Louisville, Kentucky.  What happened, that's her favorite saying, "It's what you do with what you have that makes you what you are."  And she always said, "If you had a good mind and a good education, you could succeed in anything you wanted to do."  And just because we lived in Smoketown, and she was a divorced woman, 'cause back then, being divorced was tantamount to being horrible that, if you just got that education, people would learn to respect you because of what you've done.  And her thing always was be proud of where you're from because, you know, you're going to do well.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--why is it called Smoketown (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Smoketown, well, actually, I've always--I've never really known why, but I've always been told it was because of the industry that was in the town.  Hillerich and Bradsby bat company [Hillerich and Bradsby Company, Louisville, Kentucky] was a stone throw from the house that I grew up in, in Smoketown.  But it was also next door to Butchertown [Louisville, Kentucky], which was where all the Germans lived.  So, it depends on who you talk to.  Some people say it was called Smoketown because of the industry that was there.  Other people would say, well, it's because it was next to Germantown, and that's where they had all the butchers, and that's where the meat was smoked.  I really don't know the real reason for it being called Smoketown.
Speaker 1: But was it a predominantly black section of town, or was--
Speaker 2: It was a black part of town, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, Presentation Academy, now, was that a private school or was that--
Speaker 2: It's an all-girls Catholic high school.  It was a private school.  Yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all righty.
Story_ID: 337397
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your father.
Speaker 2: My father, Maurice Jones, M-A-U-R-I-C-E, he died two years ago in Indianapolis, Indiana.  He came home from the [U.S.] Army and, basically, worked in Abrams grocery store--Abrams, is it Abrams or Abramson [Abramson's Market, Louisville, Kentucky]--I can never remember.  But after they married, they lived above the grocery store.  He basically delivered groceries and was a clerk in the grocery store.  A very handsome man, who loved philandering more than he loved anything else (laughter).  As a matter of fact, I can remember when he came to visit me here in Atlanta [Georgia].  I lost him one evening because he met up with a cutie, and that was the end of the evening with him.  But he--
Speaker 1: So, wherever papa laid his hat was his home, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, but he did remarry later on, and had five or six children.  I can't remember how many, because I'm not close to my, my half-siblings at all.  I really don't know them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I, and my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson]--I've always been my mother's child.  I was the only child--her only child.  And she always used to tell me, and I always felt, that he ran away to keep from taking care of me.  And it ended up, he ended up, taking care of--I think the woman he married [Velma Canedy Jones] already had several children, and then they had five.  And what's most interesting, before he passed, he came to spend some time with me.  And he always said I was the only one that turned out well, and that how he wished he had stayed, but--
Speaker 1: That was it.
Speaker 2: --that's another story for another time.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what was his birthday?  When was he born?
Speaker 2: I don't know his birthday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Approximately?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I know he and mother were close.  Now, mother could tell you that, but I don't know, because you got to remember, I had no contact with my father when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He moved to Indianapolis and never came back because--
Speaker 1: But he was born in Louisville?
Speaker 2: He was born in Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know more about my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Now, I am close to my father's only surviving sister, my Aunt Corine [Corine Jones Claypool], who still lives in Louisville.  But I know very little about him.  As a matter of fact, at his death, my Aunt Corine said to me, "You know, you look so much like your grandmother [Sarah Jones], your paternal grandmother."  And I said, "I've never even seen a picture of her."  So, at his death, she gave me a picture of my grandmother, and a picture of my father from when he was a baby, and I have never seen either one of them.  And I'm fifty- I'll be fifty-nine years old this year, and he just died, as I said, two years ago.
Speaker 1: Two years ago, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I know nothing about, other than my Aunt Corine, I know nothing about my family history on my father's side because there was not that contact.  And if it hadn't been for my aunt, at his death, I never would have known about my grandmother on that side.  The only thing I'd ever heard about my grandmother on my father's side is, and it's a piece of that history, and maybe that's the reason why they didn't talk about it, is that her daughter sassed her.  And she picked her up, and threw her over a balcony and killed her.
Speaker 1: Well, she had a temper--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to say the least, huh?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you know, but, you know, in the old days, they tell you, I brought you into this world and I'll take you out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's--
Speaker 2: And she did.
Speaker 1: --was literally, she really, literally, did that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she sassed her, and she threw her over the balcony.
Story_ID: 337398
Speaker 1: Now, on my mother's [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] side, I do know, because I did a report, three--two to three years ago.  I--and we wanted, my mother wanted to find out more about her history.  So, I spent a great deal of time trying to trace it on the maternal side.  And we went to Pewee Valley, Kentucky where we knew my mother's, my mother's grandmother had come from.  And we knew that the family there had owned a pig farm because mother remembered as a child, them coming in after the hogs had been killed, and bringing the chitterlings and hog pieces to celebrate.  They would come from the farm, but mother never knew where Bob [Bob Langford (ph.)] and Nettie Langford [ph.] actually came from.  Nettie was my great-grandmother.  We knew that three sisters had come from Pewee Valley, Kentucky, and bought three homes in Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky] where they raised their families.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, again, that would be my great-grandmother.  So, I went to Pewee Valley, Kentucky, and we went through records.  And we were able to find, maybe one Langford that was possibly connected to us, but we'll never know for sure.  The cemetery was not marked properly, so we don't know in many cases when black people died in the country.  They didn't put a grave marker.  They did it by word of mouth.  We buried Aunt Sally [ph.] over there and that's where she is.  Well, years later, nobody remembers Aunt Sally, so my great-grandmother or her relatives, we could never find them.  But we do know they came from Pewee Valley, Kentucky.  We do know they were pig farmers, and we did find the farm where they used to live.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: We did find them.  There was a house there now, but we did find the farm.  Well, mother still wanted to know more.  So, then, through africanancestry.com, we did DNA, and I learned through them that on my maternal side, mother's ancestors and my maternal ancestors are from the Bamileke people in the Cameroons.  So, mother felt very comfortable with that because it gave her a sense of a history.  You know, she said again, "I may not know, I remember--."  She remembers pictures of family members that disappeared over the years that she doesn't have.  So, she kept saying, "It's good to know at least, you know, on my side of the family, I can be traced back to the Cameroons and the Bamileke people."  And that made her feel good.
Story_ID: 337399
Speaker 1: I'll never know on my maternal--my paternal side because my father [Maurice Jones] died before I could do a DNA test.  But mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] says that--interesting things you find out when people die--that he was really not a Jones.  He was a Ballinger [ph.], and that when his mother remarried, she changed his name from Ballinger, which is French, to Jones.  So, there's the possibility, 'cause people when I was in Senegal doing this report, 'cause we went to Senegal, we did all this stuff, that when they kept looking at me, they thought I was Senegalese because of my pea head and the eye shape, and all of that.  So there's the possibility that maybe on my paternal side, I am at, from Senegal, but we'll never know because they would need my dad's DNA to find out.
Speaker 2: Now, your dad's sister [Corine Jones Claypool]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --is she still alive?
Speaker 1: She's still alive but, remember we only carried the female chromosome.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's the male that carries both.  And to get that paternal side, we would need, we would need him because I don't have a relationship with the brothers that I have.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But you could do it through the brothers?
Speaker 1: But I don't want to.
Speaker 2: I mean, but I mean if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I could do it--
Speaker 2: --I mean, if, if necessary, you could.
Speaker 1: --but it would, it would, it would be very difficult to do.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of bad blood there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I would just as soon not stir it up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, the two families really are very separate.
Story_ID: 337400
Speaker 1: On your mother's [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] side, your mother's, mother's name is Rosie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was Rosie Langford.
Speaker 1: --was Rosie Langford.
Speaker 2: And her mother was Nettie Langford [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Nettie Langford.
Speaker 2: -- and her husband's, Nettie Langford's husband--
Speaker 1: Was Bob--
Speaker 2: --was Bob Langford [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, but you said your mother did not know who her father was?
Speaker 2: No.  She was told--
Speaker 1: But she assumed that it was her brother [Samuel Wallace]--Wallace.
Speaker 2: --by her mother that the father was Mr. Wallace--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but Mr. Wallace, because of her color--
Speaker 1: Did not accept her.
Speaker 2: --did not accept her--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and said it could not be his child.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Of course, we know, genetically, that's not true.  You know--you're darker than the darker parent, or any lighter than the lighter parent.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: But back then, they didn't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he denied her.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, and everybody is from Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, everybody's from Kentucky--
Speaker 1: As far back as you can go on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: As far back as we know on mother's side, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how far is Pewee Valley [Kentucky] from Louisville [Kentucky]?  Is that--
Speaker 2: It's only about an hour drive away from Louisville, maybe an hour and a half at the most.  It's a short drive.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  Now, did your grandmother, Rosie, who is your namesake, I know you said you spent a lot with her because your mother raised (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, she was my babysitter until my mother got off the bus from work one day, and saw my little wagon sitting out in front of, of a bar, and me inside the bar with--on my grandmother's knee.  That's when I went to daycare (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother had plenty of stories to tell?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandmother was a character there.  As I said, they used to call her Bowlegged Rose.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did she actually have bow legs?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she was as bowlegged as they came.
Speaker 1: They were very bowlegged (laughter).  My grandmother was bowlegged (laughter).
Speaker 2: A gorgeous woman, she was beautiful complexion, very high cheek bones because mother said she remembers seeing as a child, pictures of grandma's great-grandmother, who looked like an Indian [Native American] with very long braids.  And they used to call her Sitting Bull, you know, from this picture.  But the picture disappeared.
Speaker 1: Now, this was Nettie's mother?
Speaker 2: That would be Nettie's mother, yeah.  And mother said that Nettie looked quote like a big Irish woman with her bones, you know, with her bone structure, and she was very, very fair, that she could have easily passed--
Speaker 1: But she didn't (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) but didn't, but didn't.
Story_ID: 337401
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of childhood?
Speaker 2: When I think of growing up in Louisville [Kentucky], I always think of mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] and me walking from the market.  They used to have the old kind of farmers market because mother never learned to drive, so we never had a car until I was sixteen, and got my driver's license, and mother bought me a car.  But we always took the bus everywhere, or we walked and because we lived in Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky], the market was very close by.  So we, on Saturdays, we'd get up early and walk to the market, and get our fresh produce, and get regular hot dogs--the things you remember--these wonderful garlic franks that we would eat up half of them before we got home.  But I remember her teaching me very early how to pick produce.
Story_ID: 337402
Speaker 1: Also constantly telling me about, you know, your responsibility to get a good education, so you can buy a home, so you don't have to rent because she [Pearson's mother, Hattie Wallace Edmondson] hated renting homes.  She always said, you know, you're, you're at the beck and call of other people.  And I remember how hard it was for her sometimes to find housing because she was a single parent, and people did not want women with children in their homes.  It was very hard.  I can remember her always working more than one job, but always being there to go over my homework, and keeping her foot in my behind.  I mean, she would--there would be girlfriends that I had, but she would say, "You can't hang out with them."  I, I can--my mother has all these sayings.  There was one young woman I used to love to be friends with as, as a young--I mean, I wasn't even ten--and I remember mother saying this.  And she said this, "Unh-uh, you cannot hang out with her because, eventually, she's going to look like a porcupine."  And I said, "What do you mean by that?"  She says, "Honey, if they have as many sticking out of them, as they have stuck in them, they look like porcupines.  She's fast, and she's going to end up with a baby."  Mother was right (laughter)--and she did.  So, my mother was very straightforward, very, you know--privacy, there was no such thing as privacy.  Okay?  She would come into your room, look at everything, read everything, but she was a very loving parent.  But she was a very hands-on parent.  I remember at one age, I sassed about something.  I must have been about thirteen.  And my mother was working all these jobs, and I sassed her about something, and I think I raised my hand like this.  The next thing I knew, I was hit, and I was going halfway across the room.  In this day and age, I could call the police, and they would arrest her for child abuse.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) For child abuse.
Speaker 1: But she then, not only did that, she picked me up, and called the cab and drove me to the juvenile detention center where she was going to leave me.  I remember that so vividly.  That was the turnaround (laughter), and the only reason they didn't take, take me, was because they were full.  That was the first and last time I ever sassed my mother (laughter).
Speaker 2: Point well taken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean Hattie did not play and, you know, I'm real--I look at that and I laugh now, but, and it wasn't funny at the time.
Speaker 2: Of course not.
Speaker 1: But I am so glad that she loved me enough to discipline me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she--
Speaker 1: --because when I look at many of my friends that I grew up with, they did have children in their teenage years or before.  They didn't, didn't finish high school.  They didn't finish college.  They didn't amount to much.  And I think it was because of my mother being such a hands-on parent 'cause she said, "I'm the first to graduate in this family from high school, and you are going to be the first to graduate from college."  And she said, you know, the people who used to talk about her in Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky], you know, being a single parent, and living in the back alley when she was growing up, she said, "You can show them better than you can tell them.  You're going to be a success."  And that's all I ever heard.
Story_ID: 337403
Speaker 1: I can remember when the schools integrated because my first schools were segregated--naturally.  And I went to my first integrated school in the third grade.  And I remember my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] telling me, "Nobody has to like you, nobody has to talk to you.  What you need to do is go in there and learn.  And if you raise your hands, and answer the questions correctly, and you do well on your tests, eventually, you will make friends.  But your job is not to make friends.  Your job is to go in there and be a good student for this family."  And I look back at that and think, you know, she was absolutely right.  Popularity wasn't what was important to her.  What was important, that I got good grades.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was right.  The smarter I was, the more friends I had, but I can even remember she dressed me to the nines, even with my, my uniform.  You know, we bought used uniforms.  We actually would go shop at Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.].  And I think that's why I still love thrift stores 'cause my mother and I used to shop in them all the time.  And I was always well-dressed.  People didn't know where I lived, or that, you know, we were just barely making it on the minimum wage.  My mother, as I said, used to hock her engagement ring to pay my tuition.  And I look back at that, so when I finally graduated from college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] and got a job, the first thing I did was to tell her, "If you ever hock this ring again, it's between me and you."
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's for you to keep.  But you had no more, no more should it ever leave your hand (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no more, no more, and that was the joy.  The two biggest joys in my life with my mother had been--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --getting her ring out of hock, and keeping it out of hock, and building her a home--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because she never thought she would own a home.  And she thought she would always, always, always end up hocking that ring to pay for this, that, and the other.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We're going--
Speaker 1: And it was funny, you know.  She did eventually own a home when she married for the fourth time (laughter), but that marriage did not end, you know, did not go on, so she did have a house that she eventually owned.  But I never--I always wanted her to have her own house, and that's the joy.  I built a new house for her behind the house that I live in now.
Story_ID: 395526
Speaker 1: And there's one other sister who died.  I cannot remember her name, but there were four of them, two boys and two girls.  And Aunt Corine [Corine Jones Claypool], and her other sister [Dorothy Dawson], and Uncle Puddin' [C. Edward Jones] were all very fair.  I am exactly the color of my father [Maurice Jones].  The only difference between me and my father is that I'm female and he was male.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Even in his second batch of children, I'm the only one who looks like him.  Even to the way my fingers lean this way, I never had straight fingers, and my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] laughed and said, "You would get that."
Speaker 2: Just like your father?
Speaker 1: Just like my father (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: My hair is even gray.  My mother has just a slight patch of gray hair.  I have a lot of gray hair from my father.
Speaker 2: Just a lot of his characteristics.
Speaker 1: When I came out of the womb, they said, when I cried, mother thought, oh, there's something wrong with her because I had this really deep contralto voice.  And they said, "No, that's just her voice," so when you hear me in the morning, I sound like a man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I have a very deep voice and now, as I get older, it's funny.  I used to be a first soprano, and now I actually am a contralto when it comes to singing.
Speaker 2: Oh, so you do sing?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You do sing, okay.
Speaker 1: So, so, it's really interesting how much I am--
Speaker 2: Like your father.
Speaker 1: --as my, exactly like my father, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what we're going to do when we're going, we're going to revisit--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --okay, your father's side as much as we can (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I know very little
Speaker 2: You know, whether to get your--well, just to get the name--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of your father's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  His mother's--
Speaker 2: But wait a minute--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: His mother's name was Mariah [sic. Sarah Jones].  I don't know his father's name.  His mother's name was Mariah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The second husband was Jones, or it might be the first husband.  I don't even know the birth order.  Aunt Corine, as I've been told, is the oldest.  Now, she'll never admit that 'cause she won't even tell me her age, and our birthdays are the same, October 20th.
Speaker 1: So, you even have twin birthdays in the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we have twin birthdays--
Speaker 1: --on your father's side.
Speaker 2: --on my father's side.  And, so I don't know.  Aunt Corine is the oldest, according to my mother.  Aunt Corine will not tell whether she's the oldest (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, but she's the only surviving one.
Speaker 2: He's the only--she's the only surviving one.  And then, daddy, I know was the baby, and this picture of him as a baby with his hair slicked down, naked on the grass, on this little patch, wearing a necklace.  Now, you think about it.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, but is that the, the string necklace, or is that--
Speaker 2: It's a string necklace, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that was--did it have a dime or--
Speaker 2: It had, I couldn't tell, but you can't tell.
Speaker 1: --or is it a coin on the end?
Speaker 2: That it looks like it, but I can't really tell from the picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what they did a lot for babies--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during that time 'cause he was born somewhere around the '20s [1920s] like, in fact, you said born in '23 [1923] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, momma was born in '23 [1923], so I think he was either a year or two years old older than her.  She could tell you better, better the date.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he--here he is on this rug.  And then, I have this picture of my maternal [sic. paternal] grandmother, Mariah, who has the same mouth that I have.  She's the same complexion that I have and she's got this really thin hair.  And my aunt told me, "She's got on a hairpiece.  You got hair just like your, like your grandmother," and that she always wore hairpieces because she had very fine hair, whereas my Aunt Corine, and her sister, and even her other brother, Uncle Puddin', all had very thick hair, and they were all fair.  So, daddy was a Ballinger [ph.] who became a Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Corine didn't tell you anything about the name change (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, she doesn't talk about any of that.
Speaker 1: That, that's still--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a closed secret.
Story_ID: 395527
Speaker 1: Well, let's visit your childhood again.  What kind of neighborhood did you live in, the community that you lived in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived next door to a pool hall [in Smoketown, Louisville, Kentucky].  And the house that we lived in was my Cousin Lee's [ph.], remember, Cousin Lee, the cousin, who helped take care of my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, actually, the house is where they had mother's wedding reception after she and daddy [Maurice Jones] married.  They had an integrated wedding.
Speaker 1: What do you call an integrated wedding?
Speaker 2: White people came to this wedding because Cousin Lee was a driver for the president of Ashland Oil [Ashland Refining Company; Ashland Inc., Covington, Kentucky].  And at derby time [Kentucky Derby], mother would sometimes work at the to-dos that they would have for the president of Ashland Oil.  And when they would go to Florida in the winter, my Cousin Lee would drive this president down to Florida.  And he would go to Hialeah [Hialeah Park Race Track, Hialeah, Florida], and they would sometimes even go to Cuba where my--
Speaker 1: Now, what is Hialeah?
Speaker 2: Hialeah is a race track--
Speaker 1: And that's in--
Speaker 2: --in Miami [sic.].  I think it's in Miami--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he would drive down there, so when Cousin Lee's favorite, Cousin Hattie, got married, all of these white people came to the wedding 'cause they've known her.
Speaker 1: So, they had a nice wedding?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they had a--oh, this was not no jumping the broom wedding.  They had full long wedding dress, flowers, five or six attendants, small children.  I mean, this was a big middle-class wedding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: --in the '40s [1940s], yes.  Cousin Lee put on this huge wedding for mother and Maurice.  And so, all these white people were there 'cause Cousin Lee worked for the president of Ashland Oil.  My mother still has these pictures.  And she, she can tell you every person on there and, I mean, it's amazing to me.  Her memory is very sharp.  Her memory is better than mine.  So, they had this big wedding--
Story_ID: 395528
Speaker 1: I grew up--when my parents [Hattie Wallace Edmondson and Maurice Jones] divorced, my Cousin Lee [ph.] said to mother, "You come home with your child.  You don't need to live by yourself."  So, I was in that house with my cousin Lee, and his wife, and mother, and then when Cousin Lee later on moved, mother and I still stayed in that house.
Speaker 2: Now, what kind of house was it?  Was it--
Speaker 1: A shotgun house.  It originally was a single-level width on the back of the house.  There was an upstairs.  And then, years later, they just tore the top off because of taxes--didn't want to pay the taxes (laughter).  And they, they just had, just a shotgun house.  I can remember there was a, a great arbor in the backyard.  They grew scuppernongs and they would make wine.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minutes.  What's a scuppernong?
Speaker 1: It's a grape--scuppernong grape has a very thick skin.
Speaker 2: Is it like a muscadine?  I mean, like a--
Speaker 1: It's very much like a muscadine--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --but they would have grapes in the backyard.  I can remember my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Langford] having chickens.  And I don't remember the outhouse, but mother remembers it.  I don't remember that.  And then, you walk up the street, and there was the Catholic church where my parents were married, and where I went to school [St. Peter Claver School] at St. Peter Claver Catholic Church [St. Peter Claver Church, Louisville, Kentucky].  And that's where I went to school until I was in the third grade, and then went to St. Williams School [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 1: And that was my first integrated school, or was that third grade?  I think it was third grade.  It was either third or fourth.  Momma can tell you exactly.
Story_ID: 395529
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells that you recall when you were growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's easy, oh, that's easy, that's very easy--homemade rolls being baked.
Speaker 1: And who were baking these?
Speaker 2: That would sometimes be mother's [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] friend who lived up the street.  There were a lot of women in the neighborhood who had children.  So, everybody, like I grew up with, with a girl whose birthday is today, as a matter of fact, Janice Rucker, whose mother and my mother had been friends since they grew up.  I remember Ms. Mary [ph.], my mother's best friend, who was my godmother who, when she died, left me this gorgeous red mink.  At seventy-five (laughter), she was still wearing three-inch heels, and all the wigs she wanted (laughter) who, who first introduced me to the drink of Scotch and milk.  And I can remember Ms. Mary sitting in the kitchen with my mother, who was a non-drinker, laughing and talking.  They had become friends as children.  Ms. Mary's eyesight disappeared very young.  And my mother remembers kids play--making fun of Ms. Mary, and my mother would take up for her, and they became lifelong friends.  I cannot remember a time in my life when Ms. Mary and my mother were not friends.  And the joy of my existence as my child, Claire [Claire Deveaux], got to know Ms. Mary, and they were great friends.  And Ms. Mary--oh, I don't know how many years she's been dead, but she died because she was a black woman who people thought didn't have any money.  And when she went to the hospital, they didn't take her complaint seriously.  I had to bring her to Atlanta [Georgia] for--to find out she had congestive heart failure.  They put her on an--handy oxygen to carry around.  She was so vain.  She said, "I am not doing this.  I'd rather die.  I don't want people feeling sorry for me."  She called us one weekend and then said, "You know, I'm ready to go," and she was dead within a week.
Speaker 1: About how old was she?  Was she--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six, seventy-seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was that proud?
Speaker 2: She was that proud.  This was a woman who, oh I'm telling you, in her seventies, she was still wearing three-inch heels, and had a wig every color to match every coat.  We went on a cruise once with mother, and they lost her--Ms. Mary's baggage--and Ms. Mary would not wear any of mother's clothes.  She said she'd wear mine because mother's clothes were too dowdy.  It was a wonderful way to grow up because I had this very stern, straightforward, non-drinking, wouldn't even play cards, go out dancing, but who taught me how to roller skate mom.  And Ms. Mary, who was teaching me how to play cards, introducing me to Scotch and milk, and telling--, "Oh, Hattie, quit being so old-fashioned, and smoking up a storm all the time (laughter)."  I had the--
Speaker 1: And then, you had two grandmothers, too.
Speaker 2: And I had my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Langford], who also was just a character, but I remember the women sitting around and talking.  I remember the music from the pool hall next door.  I remember the housing project across the street.  Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky] was a place many people didn't want to tell people they were from.  But I'm very proud of being from there because it was, it was, but an interesting neighborhood where--remember Abramson [Abramson's Market, Louisville, Kentucky] grocery store where my father [Maurice Jones] had worked, or where my parents have lived above the grocery store?  Jerry Abramson, the son, who worked there in his father's store, became the mayor of Louisville, Kentucky.  And I went back home to get an award, and took mother with me.  And he was there, and my mother went up to him and said, "I remember you when you were a little boy.  They used to have to stand you on a box in order to wait on people in the store."  And he was so happy to hear about this part of his history from a woman who knew him as a child--great memory, I keep telling you my momma's got.  I remember walking past Hillerich and Bradsby [Hillerich and Bradsby Company, Louisville, Kentucky] and hearing the sound of those saw machines, and I remember--
Speaker 1: Now, what do they do at--
Speaker 2: They made bats--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --they made baseball bats, Hillerich and Bradsby bat company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They made baseball bats.
Speaker 1: Now, this is where you said, they said the smoke came from, too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  There were a lot of factories in the area, a lot of factories in the area.  But it was an industrial part of town where poor blacks lived.  The only white people who were there were those who had grocery stores.
Speaker 1: And that was just to work for the stores during the day and leave at night (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  No, not leave at night.
Speaker 1: They lived above--
Speaker 2: Many of them lived above the grocery stores until they made enough money to move out.  That's how mother and dad got to live above the grocery store because by then, the Abramsons had been able to buy a home.  And so, mother and dad got to live above the grocery store because that space was then available (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In their facility.
Story_ID: 395530
Speaker 1: --Were the streets paved or were--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were paved, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you did--
Speaker 2: But you did have alleys, and the alleys were not.  Where my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] grew up, mother talks about growing up in alleys that were dirt, and how they used to pile up bricks on Friday night because, you know, you'd have neighborhood tussles on Friday night.  People would get drunk and do things they weren't supposed to do and, you know, that was just the way you lived.  She said we were--it was called School House Alley [Smoketown, Louisville, Kentucky].  And my mother would oftentimes walk me through that alley and say, "This is where I grew up.  I used--there used to be a house right here."  And, and she would go--she said, "You know, I remember myself being this dirty little girl walking barefooted going through ash cans trying to find things that we could salvage and use."  And she said, "You know, and you never lived in an alley, and I made sure you were never going to live in the alley," and we never did.  But she said, "I want you to know what you come from, and then be proud of it, and that every step is a step forward."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: I don't know how you'll going to be able to edit this.  I'm all over the place (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, there's no edit.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so (laughter), you know, what we hear is what we got (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Story_ID: 395531
Speaker 1: How were holidays for you?  You were an only child, so what were holidays like--Easter, Christmas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, let's talk, let's talk about the, the first holiday--Christmas.  You would have thought my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] was a very wealthy woman because she always had a Christmas savings account where you would put five dollars, two dollars every week in the bank.
Speaker 1: Now, was this in a bank?
Speaker 2: Of course.  And you didn't get any interest now, you know, you just put that little two dollars in there, and at the end of the year, they'd have a little book.  And you'd put that two dollars or whatever it was in there every week, and then, you'd get the money close to Christmastime.  And she would buy a Christmas tree.  And I can remember getting a ballerina doll.  I could remember getting a cowgirl outfit which I always wanted.  I remember when we got our first TV, you know, my mother really saved her money well.  And I can remember (laughter) the second--always got a new outfit, always got a new outfit for Christmas to wear to church.  You get your hair done.  Oh, I remember the burning smell of going to the hairdresser, and them using those hot combs, and my hair was already thin.  And they'd blow straighten it, using those little things with the knobs on the end that opened up, and they pull it, and it would look like the cat had licked your head (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The curling irons (laughter).
Speaker 2: --'cause your hair would be close to your head, but you'd--she'd tie those bows on.  And my mother used to always say she'd break a bow trying to get it on my head.  But, you know, I remember for Easter, you always got a new outfit for Easter.  You always, for the big holidays, you got a new outfit.  I always got for Easter a hat and gloves.  You would have thought we were just filthy rich because she dressed me.  When she wanted me to have something special, she would work extra hours.  And sometimes, my Cousin Lee [ph.] would give her extra money to help me out.  When I made my First Holy Communion, I had on a dress that I still have a picture of, that was these tiny little hand pleats even to the collar.  That dress was a fortune.  Momma could still tell you how much it cost.  But I was literally the best-looking kid and the best-dressed kid.  My mother always dressed me well.  She says it's because my Cousin Lee said quote I was so dark brown and ugly there was no way in the world I was ever going to be able to get a husband or anything else, so I'd better be smart, and I'd better be well-dressed 'cause I was too black for anything else--
Story_ID: 395532
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's one of the things I think I remember more than anything is that my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] loved me unconditionally.  My Cousin Lee [ph.], who loved me, always felt that I was too dark.
Speaker 2: Now, how was he?  You said he was fair-complected?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was fair with the wavy hair.  He learned to speak a little bit of Spanish so that he went down to Florida, he could pass.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was fair.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then Uncle Harry [ph.], his brother, looked just like a stevedore.  He was muscular--whether, whereas Cousin Lee was more effeminate-looking, but he wasn't a effeminate, but he was more what you would call--he was not a threat 'cause he was very soft, well-manicured hands, no, well-dressed, no callouses anywhere, a dandy, whereas, you know, Uncle Harry, his brother was rough and tough as they came.  He didn't even marry his wife until on his death bed, so she could get his social security.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, that was--
Speaker 1: --he was never going to get married.
Speaker 2: --yeah, that was popular back then, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, Cousin Lee and Uncle Harry were as different as night and day.  Their father looked like a white man.  His father was a white man.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, Uncle Mick [ph.], as they called him, was able to pass in order to raise money for his family.  Cousin Lee, his son, was able to get a work at--working and driving for Ashland Oil [Ashland Refining Company; Ashland Inc., Covington, Kentucky] because he looked the part.  Uncle Harry did whatever he could do.  Now, if he'd let his hair grow and show his curls, and had not been such a roughneck, he probably could have had an easier life, but he chose not to.
Speaker 2: So, did Cousin Lee ever marry?
Speaker 1: Yes, he had, he married his Aunt Hattie [ph.], Aunt Hattie, who I told you about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who never had children.  Therefore, they ended up raising my mother.  And when she died, he dated a woman for years.  She was much younger than he, and they never married.  Then, he married this (laughter) woman from Mississippi, who we always said put roots on him because after that, everything--he moved to Indiana, sold everything, wouldn't let momma buy the house that she had grown up in, and that I had started growing up in.
Story_ID: 395533
Speaker 1: That's the one thing--that man's [Pearson's maternal relative, Lee (ph.)] been dead for years, but when I get to heaven, provided I get to go, I'm going to fuss at him real good for not allowing me to buy that house because he thought I couldn't afford it.  By then, I was a reporter working for a newspaper, and had more than enough money to buy the house.  And that is the--my deepest regret is that there's no family property left that my three--my [maternal] great-grandmother [Nettie Langford (ph.)] and her two sisters--
Speaker 2: So (unclear)?
Speaker 1: That property is gone because they sold it.
Speaker 2: Okay, what--
Speaker 1: And, and that is the one thing--I look at black families who can point to their family land, and just wish how--what a disservice to those three uneducated women who sold the family farm, came to Louisville [Kentucky], bought three houses, and then within a generation and a half, it's gone.
Speaker 2: It's gone.  Yeah, that happens so frequently sometimes.  But let me ask you this.  When you said that the lady from Mississippi put roots on him--
Speaker 1: Roots on him, yeah.
Speaker 2: --explain that, so that the people who are listening (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: --will understand what was meant by that.
Speaker 1: What they believed is that she had probably cut some of his hair, and gotten some of his fingernails, and put it into some kind of little bag, and did some voodoo over it, so that whatever she did to him--he, whatever she said, went.  He wouldn't listen to his family--nothing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: So, when they say roots, it means, you know, some voodoo had been involved.
Speaker 2: Now, there was a friend of mine who always explained--he said, "Do you know what voodoo is?"  I said, "No, you can tell me."  He said, "It's who is doing what to who (laughter)."  So, it was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we never know because before he died, he signed over everything to her--I mean, everything.
Speaker 2: Did he have children by her?
Speaker 1: No, he never had children, and she never had children, but we've lost everything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To her?
Speaker 1: --because he had everything.  And then, when she died, things went to her family, and it was like, over the years, it's just gone.  I have nothing from--except my mother's stuff.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] still has her high school diploma [from St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana], the big one that they gave you when you graduate, and the little one, you took around.  She still has her high school ring, but I have nothing that I can say that belonged to my family, other than my mother.
Speaker 2: Now, it's amazing.
Story_ID: 395534
Speaker 1: Your mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] went to high--she graduated high school from a private school, an academy in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And this had to have been during the height of the Depression [Great Depression] or during that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, she worked, she worked, and she said, "You know, I can--I went to private school, but they boarded me out to the school."  She worked in the kitchen.  She worked, you know, cleaning the school.
Speaker 1: So, she paid her tuition.
Speaker 2: And that's how she paid her tuition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, the family sent her there, and she was there almost all year around.  The only time she came home was in the summertime.  And she talks about, you know, being in New Orleans, and going to school with girls who, once they left St. Mary's Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] on weekends, they passe blanc.  And they would see her on the street, and they wouldn't even speak because they were being white.  She would go to a movie theatre, and she'd have to be upstairs because of her skin color and her hair because you could tell she wasn't white, whereas the same women she went to school with, would be downstairs passe blanc.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was an interesting time for her because she was away from her home.  She was made to work in servitude, but she got a great education.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting.  So, she went to school with the quadroons, the octoroons, and the women of, who were of color--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --but who passed.
Speaker 2: --who passed.
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't actually pass, but they had special status--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: --in New Orleans
Speaker 2: --in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: And at, at that particular time, there's a whole (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And some of them did pass after they got to a certain age, or to get certain things, they did pass.  But she was just, had enough of little brown in her, so she couldn't.
Story_ID: 395535
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I started out at St. Peter Claver [St. Peter Claver School, Louisville, Kentucky].  That's where I went and then, there was a school I went to just for a year that was a public school, and I don't remember the name of it.  And then, I went to St. Williams [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky], which was a Catholic school, that I graduated from eighth grade 'cause we didn't have junior high back then.  And then, I went straight to Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: All right now, at St. Peter Claver?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the memories that you have of St. Peter Claver?  Were there any teachers who influenced you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really.  I vag- I vaguely, all I remember at St. Peter Claver would be my First Holy Communion because it was quite a special event.  I can remember getting into trouble for locking all the stall doors in the area where the nuns went to the restroom (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what, what prompted you to do that?
Speaker 2: You know, to this day, I can't remember why.
Speaker 1: You did it by yourself or with (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I did it by myself.  And my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] had a fit because the thought of me crawling around on a bathroom floor, it was just--and I remember getting punished for it too, both at home and at school, but I really don't remember why I did it.  So, I don't remember very much from St. Peter Claver.  Not long ago, when we were doing the piece on my history, my search for my roots, I went back to the church [St. Peter Claver Church, Louisville, Kentucky], and I remember it as a big church.  And when I got there, it's no longer a church.  The school has been torn down.  The church pretty much has been gutted.  It's--they're trying to make it into a community center.  But I have these beautiful pictures of, of the interior of this church from when I was a child, but I really don't remember it that well.
Speaker 1: Now, what mix of children were at the school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What do you mean, what mix?  It's black folks (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Were there black--it was all-black folks?
Speaker 2: --nothing but blacks.
Speaker 1: And what about the teachers?
Speaker 2: The teachers were all white nuns.  That's the way it was at St. Williams.
Speaker 1: Now this--
Speaker 2: St. Williams was an integrated school.  St. Williams was the first integrated school I went to.  And there were only eight of us in my graduation class, but it was a black and white class.  And I never had--I didn't see my first black nun, whereas my mother had nothing but black nuns when she was in school [St. Mary's Academy, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: And this was in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: And this was in New Orleans--nothing but black nuns, nothing but--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --and when she was in school in Maryland [Baltimore, Maryland], it was nothing but black nuns, Oblate Sisters [Oblate Sisters of Providence], she used to say.  So, she had, had never, had nothing but black nuns.  White priests, but always black nuns.  And I never had anything, but white priests and white nuns.  I, I remember still very vividly meeting my first black priest, you know, as an adult, and meeting my first black nun as an adult.
Speaker 1: Now, that is amazing.
Story_ID: 395536
Speaker 1: But for your mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] to have all black nuns--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, 'cause, remember it was a black boarding school.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--
Speaker 2: St. Mary's Academy [New Orleans, Louisiana] was a black boarding school.  And it still exists.  It's, again, it's on Chef Menteur Highway now, but it was in the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Strangest thing happened--my mother, to surprise her for one of her birthdays, I took her down to New Orleans [Louisiana] and just, literally, picked a hotel out of the hat--serendipity.  When we walked up to the hotel, got out of the cab, my mother started crying.  And I said, "What is wrong?"  She said, "You didn't know?"  It was her school that had been turned into a hotel, and there was the sign, St. Mary's Academy.  I had no idea.
Speaker 1: And that's the hotel you lived in?
Speaker 2: And that's the hotel we stayed in.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: And the hotel people were nice enough to let my mother walk through the part of the building that had not changed.  And she showed me, "You know, this was where the kitchen used to be."  And then, she said, "Oh, Moni [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson], remember that picture."  I'm called Moni in my family.  "Remember that picture I showed you of me in my uniform."  She played in the band.  She said, "This is where this picture was taken in this courtyard."
Speaker 1: Ohh--
Speaker 2: So, I saw that hotel in a very different way through my mother's eyes, 'cause I've seen these pictures of the school growing up, and there we were in what had been her school.  Talk about a God link?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then, we went from there out to the new school on Chef Menteur Highway, and she was able to find a nun who had been her classmate--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --because in many of the--in, in the old days, a lot of the women stayed and some of them became nuns.  So, when we went back for her sixtieth anniversary in 2004--she graduated in 1944--when we went back for that, there was one nun who was younger than she, who they remembered each other.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, do they have class reunions now, or they--
Speaker 2: My mother, they have what is basically a class reunion every year, but she, that year, was the only one there for her sixtieth anniversary.
Speaker 1: Ha, okay.
Speaker 2: And she still has her class ring.  She has the big sheepskin, and then she has the small diploma that you carry with you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to prove that you had graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Story_ID: 337059
Speaker 1: Now, you went to, after you, did you graduate from St. Peter Claver [St. Peter Claver School, Louisville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: No.  St. Peter Claver, I went to first and second grade.  Third grade, I went to the public school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I cannot think of the name of that school--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to save my life.  Then I went, only went for one year.  Then I went to St. Williams [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky] where I stayed from the fourth.  The third grade is when I went to the public school.  The fourth grade is when I went to my first integrated school, and that was St. Williams.  I stayed there through the eighth grade, graduated from the eighth grade, then went to Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky], went all four years there, and graduated from Pres.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any teachers who influenced you at St. Williams?
Speaker 2: Hmm--
Speaker 1: Do any stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: No.  The teacher I remember that did stand out in my mind, interestingly enough, from the third grade is Mrs. Johnson [ph.], who was, I remember she--I loved to read and so she would give books to me.  As soon as I'd finished one, she'd give me another, 'cause my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] always took me to the library.  That's the other thing I remember most about growing up in Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky] is that every Saturday, my mother would take me to the library which was the colored library, big sign--
Speaker 1: Was it closer?
Speaker 2: --colored library.  Oh, yeah, the pool hall was here, our house was here, four houses, an alley, the school yard, the church.  Then you had, maybe a couple more houses, then the grocery store, then the street, then the library.
Speaker 1: Everything was just right there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything was right there, yeah.
Story_ID: 337060
Speaker 1: You stayed at St. Williams [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky] 'til what, the fourth grade, you said--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --or the eighth--fourth through the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Fourth through the eighth grade, and then you graduate, and you go to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you had graduation, you had an actual graduation ceremony?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I still got pictures of that, yeah, Momma [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] still got pictures of that.
Speaker 1: You had cap and gown?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no.  We dressed up in--as a matter of fact, one of the things that sits in my mother's living room, she has a great picture of me and her when I was a little bitty girl where we were both dressed to the nines.  And then, she's got a picture of me in my First Holy Communion outfit with the, the gorgeous dress.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And then, there's a picture of me when I graduated from high school [Presentation Academy, Louisville, Kentucky] that, even though we had caps and gowns, which we have a picture of, we also had to--that, no, come to think about it, that picture of me in the gorgeous white lace dress that Cousin Lee [ph.] bought for me was from the eighth grade.  That's from the eighth grade.  I have on this--
Speaker 1: That's the eighth grade graduation?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's the eighth grade graduation?
Speaker 2: Eighth grade graduation, yeah, from St. Williams.  I have on this unbelievable dress.  It is so pretty.  When he would help mother out, he would help her out, and we would go to Byck's department store [Byck Brothers and Company, Louisville, Kentucky]--
Speaker 1: That was my, that was my next question.
Speaker 2: --Byck's department store, or to Selman's department store [H.P. Selman and Company, Louisville, Kentucky], or to Kaufman's department store [Kaufman-Straus, Louisville, Kentucky].  But when you really wanted a special dress, you went to Byck's.  And they knew my mother by name because she would buy--I remember this gorgeous black velvet dress she bought me when I was a little girl that had tiny little mother-of-pearls on it.  I mean, this woman--and Cousin Lee would fuss at her saying, "She's going to outgrow these things."  But then, he'd say, "Well, she is ugly and brown, so you'd better get something to keep her dressed well."  He was so funny, and mother would get so mad at him.
Story_ID: 337061
Speaker 1: I can remember when you were talking about smells--my Cousin Lee [ph.] was an excellent cook.  And I loved fried chicken as a child, still love fried chicken, but he fried chicken like nobody's business.  And I can remember that chicken being so hot--I would just almost grab it out of the iron skillet, and would be eating it.  And then, after he cooked it and would pour the grease off, there would be these crumbs of--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --stuff in the bottom.  And I would just eat the crumbs of that, that fried chicken from that skillet.  That man could season some chicken.
Speaker 2: He was quite well-rounded, wasn't he?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was.  He was a great cook--loved to bet on the horses.  He taught me--I can remember, as maybe a nine or a ten year old, being able to read a racing form.  I don't think I could do it now, but he was really into the horses.
Speaker 2: Well, what was horses, what was the, what was (unclear) like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I grew up in Kentucky, in Louisville--
Speaker 2: Right, so what was it like--
Speaker 1: --so Churchill Grounds [sic. Churchill Downs, Louisville, Kentucky] was there, and remember, he worked for Ashland Oil [Ashland Refining Company; Ashland Inc., Covington, Kentucky]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --would drive the president.  So, one of the big parties every year was the derby party, the first Saturday in May.  So, you know, everybody's going to the horse races, so you place bets.  So, you need to learn how to read a sheet so that you could see the past performance of the horse.
Speaker 2: Horse, right.
Speaker 1: What were the odds going to be?  And then, place the bet.  Mint juleps, I remember him making those.  And I can remember him bringing food home.  You know, I, I tasted lobster long before a lot of black children did because when you work for the president of Ashland Oil, they would oftentimes give the black help food to take home.  So, he would come home with shrimp, and with oysters and, and lobster--all these things that I got a taste for (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All kinds of delicacies left over from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was left over but, you know, it let, you know--
Speaker 2: --but it was still--
Speaker 1: --you don't always have to eat chitterlings, and collard greens, and cornbread--which I still like chitterlings.  And my daughter [Claire Deveaux] is just like (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: You can take the girl out of Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky], but you can't take Smoketown out of the girl (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh gee.
Story_ID: 337062
Speaker 1: So you graduated elementary [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And went straight into--well, the eighth, ninth grade.  It was high school, that was high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, ninth grade, which is high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what was high school like?
Speaker 2: Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky] was fun for me because it was an integrated school, and everybody just liked you.  I mean, I can't remember any problems with prejudice there at all because I was a cheerleader.  I was in debate.  I worked on the newspaper.  You know, it was--I was with a typical girls high school.  And the nuns taught you that you could be, and do anything you wanted to be and do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, did you sing also?
Speaker 2: So, it was a very--it was, oh, it was a wonderful place to grow up.  And I was in the chorus, you know, it was just a great school.  That's the reason I've been--went back for my recent class reunion.  I've been out of school now forty years.  It's hard to believe, but it happened.  And so, I've, you know, I've been back for that.  And I got an alumni award.  And, you know, I just, it's really interesting that when, when I look back, going to an all-girls Catholic school really help prepare me for--to, to study well because there were no distractions.  I really like single-sex education.  I really think for some kids, it works well.  And for me, I think it was very good because you got all the nurturing you needed.  And you, you learned about boys sooner or later, but I really liked being in that environment where--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --you didn't have to compete in the sense that many girls have to compete with other girls over boys.  I was there to get an education and that was, that was the most important thing.
Speaker 1: Now, were there other schools in the neighborhood that other--that the other black children were going to?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, most of the kids I grew up went to public schools, but my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] was determined I was going to get a good education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what was the name of the public high school that the others--
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Meyzeek Junior High [Jackson Street Junior High School; Albert E. Meyzeek Middle School, Louisville, Kentucky], but most kids went to Central High School [Louisville, Kentucky], which was the black high school, where Muhammad Ali went to school.  I mean, you, you either went to Central, or you went to Male High School [Louisville Male and Girls' High School; Louisville Male High School, Louisville, Kentucky], which at one time had been an all-boys school.  But then by that time--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: --it had been desegregated, both by gender and by color.  So, if I had gone to school in my neighborhood, then I would have gone to Male.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I would have gone to junior high at Meyzeek, but I stayed in the Catholic schools.
Speaker 1: So, were you--did you have to ride the bus to Catholic school or did you--
Speaker 2: I rode the bus and sometimes I walked.  I mean, walking was--
Speaker 1: It was in walking distance?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was not a big deal to walk.  I mean, some people would say, gee, that's a long way to walk.  But you remember, my mother didn't have a car, so we walked everywhere.  We took the bus.
Speaker 1: So, did you have friends that you would have walked with that, that went to the school, too?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I was the only kid from my neighborhood [Smoketown, Louisville, Kentucky] going, so you take the bus or you walk.
Story_ID: 337063
Speaker 1: So, what did you all do for, like sports?
Speaker 2: We had--
Speaker 1: Were there sports in the Catholic school [Presentation Academy, Louisville, Kentucky] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, remember I was a cheerleader.  We had a basketball team.
Speaker 1: But no--
Speaker 2: We had a tennis team.
Speaker 1: --football team?
Speaker 2: No, girls school--no football, remember, all-girls Catholic high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's all-girls, okay.
Speaker 2: It's all-girls, so it was girls sports.  We had hockey, field hockey, so we, you know, I didn't miss out on anything.
Speaker 1: Oh, but did you ever go to any of Central High's [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Central stuff, and Male [Louisville Male and Girls' High School; Louisville Male High School, Louisville, Kentucky] stuff 'cause I had girlfriends, you know, who lived in the neighborhood [Smoketown, Louisville, Kentucky], but it was not a big deal.  I don't feel like I missed anything.
Speaker 1: Now, it's a new thing for me to hear about cheerleading for basketball teams (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so you, just like you were cheering for football--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we had cheerleading.
Speaker 1: --you cheer for basketball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That, that's about a second time that I've heard (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And you had cheerleaders for the hockey team, for the field hockey team.
Speaker 1: Oh, gee, well--
Speaker 2: You had a pep club.  We had everything except boys and a football team.  And if you've ever played field hockey, it's pretty close to football (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But you didn't play any of the sports?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did intramural sports, but, no, the only, uh-uh, I, I just cheerleaded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Basketball back then was too slow for me because we played half-court.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Well, what do you mean, you played half-court?
Speaker 2: Oh, how old are you?
Speaker 1: I'm about three years younger than you.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so you didn't grow up in an atmosphere like this.  Girls back then--they thought it would--oh, we would die if we had to run full-court.  So, you only played from the half-court line up to the basket.  You never played on the other end.  Full-court basketball for women is fairly new (laughter).  You used to play half-court, only play half-court, 'cause they thought we couldn't run the full-court.
Speaker 1: So, they did, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, you only played half-court.
Speaker 1: No, but in my, in my hometown, we did play full-court.  But that was even in elementary--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, no, no, no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: We played full-court.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, we played half-court.
Speaker 1: And certainly, half-court was the new one.
Speaker 2: Half-court.  And by the time I graduated, yes, we were playing full-court--
Speaker 1: Full-court then, okay.
Speaker 2: --but uh-uh, it was half-court.
Story_ID: 337064
Speaker 1: Well, when you were growing up, were, were you thinking about what you wanted to do when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just assumed--
Speaker 1: --grew up?
Speaker 2: --I would always be a teacher because when you looked around at people--not the people who lived in my community--but the people I saw, they were teachers.  Or, you know, even the ministers' wives.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson], my mother is a Catholic convert.  My father's [Maurice Jones] side of the family has always--well, my father, not my father's side of the family--my father has always been Catholic.  And either his mother [Sarah Jones] or his father was Catholic, whereas his sisters and brothers were raised Protestant.
Speaker 1: So, when they got married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was Catholic--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so my mother converted to Catholicism when they got married.  Even though she had gone to Catholic schools, she did not become a Catholic until later.  I was raised--I'm what's called the cradle Catholic.  From the minute I was born, I was Catholic because my father was Catholic.  There is this funny story my mother tells about my father.  When they hadn't become pregnant, you know, within a certain amount of time 'cause back then, mother said, you know, everybody was looking at you, thinking if you got married, you were pregnant 'cause most of mother's friends, when they got married, they were pregnant.  So, everybody was waiting on her to come up pregnant and she wasn't.  So, after they'd been married, I guess, about two years or three years, she--my father finally went to church and prayed that, you know, if God would give him a child, he, he would dress that child in, in oddly enough, my favorite color, baby blue, as thanksgiving.  So, when I was born, you know, the big deal was I was supposed to be named Marceline, but they couldn't find him on the day that I was born.  My Cousin Lee [ph.] took my mother to the hospital because my father was out gallivanting somewhere.  So, mother got mad at him, and rather than naming me Marceline, she named me Monica [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson], which was really Aunt Hattie's [ph.] real name, which she didn't use because people used to call her Monkey (laughter).  So, she named me Monica after Aunt Hattie, who really was Monica, and Rosie for my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Langford], Lee for my Cousin Lee, Jones is my maiden name.
Speaker 1: You're the, the second person that--my grandmother used to brag about--she had five names, and she was very proud of those names 'cause they were for someone and the family name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, for family members, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's how they carried the names on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm--Monica Rosielee Jones.
Story_ID: 337065
Speaker 1: So, after you finished high school [Presentation Academy, Louisville, Kentucky], after graduation, what did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], and got a student loan and paid that off, thanks be to God, many, many, many years ago.
Speaker 1: Well, why did you say like that--I got a student loan 'cause your mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] had been paying for everything all along or what?
Speaker 2: Well, mother could never pay for college.  She had taken care of the basics.  But you're talking about one hundred twenty five dollars a year for Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky] up to something like two thousand dollars a year to go to college.  I had a job from the time I was sixteen.  I worked as Tri-Gray-Y leader for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the black Y (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that again?
Speaker 2: Tri-Gray-Y leader.  I basically worked with kids in the third, fourth, and fifth grade doing after school programs with them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that allowed me to make some money.  I used to have a job working for S&H Green Stamps [Sperry & Hutchinson Company] which was another way my mother got lots of stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember S&H Green Stamps, yes.
Speaker 2: --and top value.  I counted the stamps on pages 'cause what people would do--they'd fill up the front of the book--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they'd fill up the back of the book.  And then, they would kind of skip pages in the middle, so my job was to make sure they didn't skip those pages.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I had a job there.  I worked--my summer before I went off to college, I worked as a summer social worker trainee for the state where you would learn whether or not you wanted one day be a social worker.  I also--that job taught me, no, I did not want to do that.
Speaker 1: You did not want to be a social (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That was stressful trying to help families who are on AFDC [Aid to Families With Dependent Children] or then, back then, called A-, ADC--
Speaker 1: Aid to Dependent Children.  Oh--
Speaker 2: --trying to help people get qualified, and trying not to notice there was a man in the house when there wasn't supposed to be there, knowing if you reported it, the woman was going--I just couldn't deal with it.
Speaker 1: So, how did you get these jobs or that job, especially and you hadn't--
Speaker 2: No, you apply for them.
Speaker 1: Now, you hadn't gone to college?
Speaker 2: No, but I applied for them.  I mean, you look for student jobs and, and I didn't mind working.
Speaker 1: And that was one, okay.
Speaker 2: And one good thing, I've always been pretty good at convincing people of things.  So, and I was pretty smart.  So I, it was not that hard for me to get jobs, and I was a hard worker.  My mother had taught me how to work.  I mean, I can clean a house about as well as any janitorial staff because mother always said, "All work is good work as long as long as it's honest work."  So, I worked for a company called Almart, which was like Kmart [Kmart Corporation], where I worked the cash register.  The only thing I never did was a waitressing job 'cause I was too clumsy to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a volunteer at Louisville General Hospital [Louisville, Kentucky] 'cause I wanted to see whether or not I wanted to go into medicine and--
Speaker 1: As a candy striper or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, as a candy striper.  And I'll never forget the day I saw blood in the emergency room, and that was the end of that job in terms of, you know, what I wanted to do.  And, but Tri-Gra-Y really showed me that I really did like teaching, and that's what I had planned to get my degree in.  My degree is in English, and I really had planned to go on and get a teaching certificate and eventually teach.  The closest I've gotten to teaching is in speaking to students about what I do.  And then, once a week now, I work at an elementary school, Lenora P. Miles [Lenora P. Miles Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], where I read to first graders.  But other than that, that's the closest I've gotten to teaching.
Story_ID: 337066
Speaker 1: What was the young Monica [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson] like?  What type of person were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, talkative, always have been talkative, always curious.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] used to always say to me, "Nothing spoils a duck, but its bill."  Now, you wonder, what does that mean?  A duck is a beautiful, beautiful animal until it goes quack-quack, quack-quack.  Its voice just grates your nerves.  My mother said--another famous thing was, "Will you shut up?  You're talking so much like a clapper up a goose's ass (laughter)."  That's what she used to say.  And a clapper, if you had a clapper, do you know what a clapper is?
Speaker 1: I know what a clapper is, but how would you--
Speaker 2: In a bell--well, what if that got caught in a goose's rear end when they walk, it would go (makes sound), so my mother was very blunt (laughter).  I love to talk (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To say the least--
Speaker 2: And that's the only thing I would get into trouble for in school was running my mouth 'cause I talked a lot.  And my teachers would always say, "She's going to end up doing something where she talks."  When I was in high school [Presentation Academy, Louisville, Kentucky], because I loved to sing, I got to be on a show, which is, when I look back, I, I laugh, called 'Hayloft Hoedown.'  It was a country music show, and I was this little black girl on there singing country music, but they would use me all the time.  I also, in high school--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  What, what was one of the songs that you sang, Monica?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "If I could see the world through the eyes of a child, what a wonderful world it would be.  There'd be no trouble and no strife, just a big happy life.  And a bluebird in every tree" ['If I Could See The World (Through The Eyes Of A Child)'], Patsy Cline song.
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Charley Pride had a (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, Charley Pride was late.  So, I would be on 'Hayloft Hoedown' with "Cactus" Tom Brooks and Randy Atcher.  And I would sing country music.
Speaker 1: Now, you got paid for this, right?
Speaker 2: Funny, yes, funny thing about it, I ended up working at that same TV station many years later as a reporter and weekend anchor.  But I started out at that station as a teenager singing country music.  And then, I also worked part-time for free at WLOU Radio [Louisville, Kentucky], which was a Rounsaville [Robert Rounsaville] station (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute.  You worked part-time for free?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not volunteer?
Speaker 2: I worked.  Volunteering--the way they worked me, that was not volunteering (laughter).  I didn't receive a paycheck.  They worked me.  I did the Charlie Brown show in the morning.  He [Charlie Brown] was a white deejay and I would do, "Hey, everybody, it's a Charlie Brown show time," because I was lucky enough, at that time, to be this black kid who sounded white.  You know, there was a time in our background where it, it was important for you to sound white--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --middle American.  That paid off for me in my ability to get a job later on in television, and doing radio for WLOU.  It was a black-owned station--Bill Summers who got so many young black people into radio.  But I would do 'Charlie Brown Show.'  Then, they would have a, a whole segment, which was gospel music show, and it was "Little David" ["Little David" Anderson] who did the show.  And I would read prayers on his show.  So, that was where I got my first break, I guess you would say, in, in radio.
Story_ID: 337067
Speaker 1: Then, I would volunteer to do columns for the Louisville Defender, which was the black-owned newspaper, the Louisville Defender, owned by Frank Stanley [Frank L. Stanley, Jr.].  So, I would do that.  Now, they also had a pageant every year--the only time I can remember my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] not being supportive of me.  I was--the year of the Emancipation Proclamation one hundredth anniversary, so that would have been maybe 1963 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen sixty-three [1863], '64 [1864].
Speaker 1: I wanted to be in their beauty contest because it would give you some money--you would win some money.  And my mother--I came home and told my mother I'd applied.  And my mother said, "I think you're beautiful, but nobody else is.  I don't want you being in this."  And I said, "I really want to do this."  She said, "Well, I'm not going to help you."  So, I took one of her old formals, and took the little money I had made, and had her formal cut up into a dress that was more contemporary.  I practiced singing and all of this.  And there was this wonderful woman, Mrs. Lois Morris [Lois Walker Morris], who went on to become a city councilman, who actually was working with them on this pageant.  And my mother went to her and said, "I don't want my daughter in this.  Your daughter is, is--can be in it but, you know, they're going to pick a light girl to win.  My daughter doesn't have a chance.  I don't want you all tearing down her self-esteem."  And Mrs. Morris told my mother, "Please let her do it--it's important."  It ended up--I won Miss Congeniality, and I was third runner-up, so I didn't do too badly.  But she was right--the girl who won it was light and bright, and damn near white (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Even in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: Even in Louisville, even in Louisville.  But also, you know, that's just the way things were back then.  That's just--you don't take it personally, that's just the way it was.
Speaker 2: Well, that still didn't deflate your ego (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no, no--
Speaker 2: --or your self-esteem?
Speaker 1: --I was happy to be Miss Congeniality.  It had great pictures and it had a huge trophy.  At the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], something really happened that showed me that people can change.  And many times, where we are now, it's because of the strength of people who said, this is the way it should be, and I'm not going to be.  I ran for Miss U of L [Miss University of Louisville], and I think I won Miss Congeniality in that one, too.  But one of my sponsors, the main sponsor, actually was a white fraternity.  And I'm--I, I bet you if I found--I cannot remember--I tell you, my mother remembers everything.  But a white fraternity sponsored me for that pageant, and I came in as Miss Congeniality.  That was a very brave move on their part, a very brave point on their part.
Speaker 2: Did you solicit them or they volunteered (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, they--what happened is they--all the girls needed sponsors.  And this group, you know, the different fraternities and sororities, and so, they sponsored me.
Story_ID: 337068
Speaker 1: Why did you choose U of L [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] over some other choice (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, that's another story.  All my friends either went to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky], or they went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], or they went to Tennessee A and I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], now called Tennessee State.  I wanted to go to an all-black school.  Now, you've got to remember--my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] is eighty-two, soon to be eighty-three.  Back then, integration was the most important thing.  And she wanted me to be in an integrated school, number one; and, number two, she was afraid going to an all-black school far away from home could open you up to influences that were not good because too many people we knew--the daughters had gone off to Fisk or to Tennessee A and I, and had quote come up with a baby.  So, she wanted me home, so I, I literally went to school, and came home every day.
Speaker 1: And (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I did get, I did get to stay in the dorm in the summer because of the--I was one of the first tutor counselors in the Upward Bound program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  That shows you how long ago that was (laughter).  One of the first tutor counselors in the Upward Bound program.
Speaker 1: So, this is around '65 [1965], '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 335604
Speaker 1: So, you're at U of L [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], and you're home with your mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] during the school year except for the summers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then you're living on campus.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what was it like--not being able to go home?  What was it like staying at the dorm?
Speaker 2: It really wasn't that--you got to remember, it was still the University of Louisville.  I mean, and I was there at Upward Bound, being a counselor, so I was basically working.  It was no big deal.
Speaker 1: So, you could still go home on weekends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would still go home on weekends.  And I did pledge a sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, when I was at U of L because the--they were just starting an undergraduate chapter at U of L.  So, I think that was in my sophomore year--it must have been my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Were you the first line?  Was, was your class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Either the first or second line.
Speaker 1: --or second line?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, but, yeah, I remember very clear.  I remember playing Bid Whist in the student center (laughter).  I remember Eleanor Young Allsbrook [sic. Eleanor Young Love] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, who was--
Speaker 2: --who made a huge influence on all the African American students because her brother was Whitney Young [Whitney Young].  And she was one of the few black professors at the University of Louisville.  I remember her being a very elegant woman, a very smart woman--no non-sense.  But, you know, as she walked around the campus in sometimes Afrocentric clothing, people would go, you know, her brother is Whitney Young (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did you have any classes under her?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  She was tough, but fair.  She just wanted us to be the best we could be.  She was quite a character, really a good woman.
Story_ID: 335605
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we would be just all out wrong if we didn't mention the Civil Rights Movement and what was going on--
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember very clearly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at the university.
Speaker 2: --the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] was very integrated quote unquote.  We had maybe a handful of black students.  It was not a big deal.  I can remember, as a child, at one time in my childhood, my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Langford], because of her alcoholism problem, was put into a mental hospital.  And my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] and I would have to take the bus, like a Greyhound [The Greyhound Corporation; Greyhound Lines, Inc.] or Trailways [Trailways National Bus System; Trailways Transportation System, Inc.] bus, to go see her.  And I remember going into the bus station, and I remember so clearly the colored waiting room, the colored fountain.  And my mother would never let me go into the colored bathroom.  I mean, it was like, you went to the bathroom before you went, and then when you waited until you got to, 'til you got to the area where the hospital was.  And then, you went to the bathroom on, in the ward, but, you know, mother would--was really good about not letting me be exposed to those kinds of things, if you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We had a black theatre, the Lyric [Lyric Theatre, Louisville, Kentucky], and the Rialto Theatres in Louisville [Kentucky], so you went to the all-black theatres.  The only time I can remember really wanting to go to--there was this, like an amusement park in the west end that I wanted to go to.  And we couldn't go because they didn't allow black people in.  But you really pretty much had your own places to go.  I can remember when we had marches and sit-ins.  I remember Mr. Lyman Johnson [Lyman T. Johnson] who was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--I heard from his son not too long ago--who really was an educator, and also led the Civil Rights Movement there.  I remember when A.D. King [Alfred Daniel Williams King] was the pastor of Zion Baptist Church in Louisville, Kentucky, and his brother, Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to speak.  I can remember those sit-ins, and my mother saying, you know, we must be supportive because this is the only way, you know, through demonstrations that we will able to, to get what we need, and what we want.  But I was right in that middle segment because, remember, my first integrated school was in the fourth grade [at St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky], so I was just transitioning when most of everything was going on.  I remember when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated because of going to a Catholic school--first Catholic president.  I was in class.  We were stopped.  We had Rosary, Mass, the whole bit.  I remember when Dr. King was killed.  By that time, of course, I was in college.
Speaker 1: In college.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I look back at the names I remember very clearly--Frank Stanley [Frank L. Stanley, Jr.] and his newspaper [Louisville Defender], writing editorials about equal rights.  I remember the marches.  I remember the first time we went to Walgreens [Walgreen Company] and sat at the counter and ate.  It was a big deal, and to Kresge's [S.S. Kresge Company].  I remember that clearly.  But I also remember very clearly that my mother tried to shield me from most of that.
Story_ID: 335606
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in the Catholic school and high school, were there any racial incidents there?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.
Speaker 1: There was no--everybody used the same bathroom (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was mainly, that was mainly in--oh, yeah, we all, I mean--
Speaker 1: I mean, that was--
Speaker 2: --it was an integrated school.
Speaker 1: So there was no--
Speaker 2: Presentation Academy [Louisville, Kentucky] was an integrated school.  There were no black bathrooms or (unclear), that it was an integrated school, plain and simple.  I remember, and that was the same way at St. Williams [St. William School, Louisville, Kentucky].  When they integrated, they integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't keep us apart--truly integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went straight from an all-black environment [at St. Peter Claver School, Louisville, Kentucky] to an environment where, in my eighth grade class, I think I was the only black in my eighth grade class.
Speaker 1: I think so, at Presentation?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, that was at--
Speaker 2: --eighth grade.  That's at St. Williams.
Speaker 1: --eighth grade.  That was St. Williams.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And at Presentation?
Speaker 2: And at Presentation, I think, in my freshmen class, there were three of us maybe.  And in my graduation class, there were maybe, I think, the same three were there.  I only remember Ruth Ann [ph.], so I think there were just two of us by that point.
Story_ID: 335607
Speaker 1: At U of L [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], what did you say you majored in?
Speaker 2: English and philosophy really.
Speaker 1: Philosophy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my minor.  I got enough, enough hours that I could really say philosophy was my minor.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you choose philosophy?  I know you're a talker, you're a doer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.  I think because I--the professors, I think I enjoyed the reading.  And when I look back at it, the logic courses are the perfect thing I needed for what I do.  It was not something I had planned to do.  It's really weird how you end up with majors.  I always knew I'd probably major in English.  I didn't, I knew I'd probably be an educator, but it's just strange how sometimes you're not in control, and you still end up in the right place.
Speaker 1: So, you were still thinking about being a teacher?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I took theatre courses, public speaking.
Story_ID: 335608
Speaker 1: But in my sophomore year [at the University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], I decided to get married, so I dropped out in my sophomore year.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] nearly died.  Got married, and took a job working at a bank as a teller.  And the teller, the bank, Liberty National Bank [Liberty National Bank and Trust Company, Louisville, Kentucky] was across the street from the Courier-Journal and the Louisville Times newspaper.  And after I'd been there, I guess, about a year, I kept wanting to get into the management training program.  And they told me that women would never be bank managers.  And so, I said, "Well, if I can train these people how to figure out when I'm out of balance, while I'm out of balance, and if I can teach them to do what I'm doing, I surely could be a bank manager."  So, I started looking for a job.  The newspaper at that time--John Herchenroeder was the ombudsman.  It was a new thing where people could call and complain, and Mr. Herchenroeder would then solve their problems.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, they hired me as a newsroom clerk.  Then, in the summer of 1969--well, actually, I need to back up.  In 1968, the summer program for minority groups [Summer Program in Broadcast and Print Journalism for Members of Minority Groups] started at Columbia University [New York, New York].  Because what had happened, the riots of 1968, white owned media looked around and said, "Oh, my God, we don't have any black people in here, and the white reporters we're sending in to cover these riots are being seen as the enemy.  We need some black reporters (simultaneous)."
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So, the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] and Columbia University in New York [New York] started the summer program for minority groups in 1968.  In 1969, they added print.  They started with television, then they added print in '69 [1969], and I went to the first print class.  I came back from that program and worked as a reporter at the Louisville Times in the women's department, and then on the city desk.  When I had been there a total of five years, I decided I really wanted to do something else.  I wanted to get into this new thing called television.  So, one of the TV stations actually had an opening, and I went to apply for the job.  And I am so happy to say that the guy who talked to me said to me, "You know, we like you, you're very nice, but you're never going to make it in this business."  And so, I said to him, "What do I need?  What's wrong with me--tell me."  And to his benefit and to his credit, he said, "Well, you sound like Mickey Mouse.  You dress like you're still in high school.  You need to--."  And just gave me a laundry list of things to do.  So, then took a charm course to learn how to dress--
Speaker 2: Charm--okay.
Speaker 1: --to learn how to dress--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --how to do makeup.  Now, this is at a time when Diane Sawyer was the weather girl at an independent station [WLKY-TV] in Louisville, Kentucky.  This was a woman with a degree who was the weather girl.  So, you know, back then, they were looking at hair down to here, chest out to here, and not much up here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, he basically--they were more interested in you being pretty than they were in being smart.  Diane Sawyer was the weather girl.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I took a charm course to learn to do makeup, learn to do hair, learn to sound a certain way.  And part of that charm course involved doing informal modeling for Byck's department store [Byck Brothers and Company, Louisville, Kentucky].  We're back at Byck's.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: You would put on a dress at Byck's out at the mall.  You'd go into this restaurant.  You'd walk through, and tell people what you were wearing.  So, I ran into a woman one night who said, "What are you doing?  You don't do this."  I said, "Well, I'm a former newspaper reporter, now working for Brown-Forman Distillers [Brown-Forman Corporation, Louisville, Kentucky] in public relations, and trying to get a job in television."  Her husband was the news director of WHAS-TV in Louisville, Kentucky.  She said, "My husband will be here in a moment.  I want you to come back and talk to him."  I talked to Tom Dorsey, who is now the critic at the, at the newspaper [Courier-Journal] in Louisville--television critic.  And he said, "Well, come in, and I want to," you know, "interview you some more."  I went in--got the job as a reporter.  What I didn't know, when they finally put me on as an anchor, that I was the first black anchor in the city.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Never knew that--first black woman anchor in the city, never knew that, never knew it.  They told me that years later.
Story_ID: 335609
Speaker 1: But Tom [Tom Dorsey] saw something in me that other people, that the other news director didn't see.  Now, the rest of the story, I anchored on weekends [for WHAS-TV, Louisville, Kentucky].  First, I was a reporter, and then they let me anchor on weekends.  And the very man who had told me I would never make in the business, we were beating the pants off of them on weekends.  So, he gave a tape of me off the air to his consultant which was Magett [ph.].  Magett then gave the tape to WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] because they were looking to put a woman on the six o'clock news, just a woman, but they decided to do something very unusual--to put a black woman on.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: I interviewed for the job and got it.  Until I came to the station, black women and women had anchored the noon and weekends, but no woman and no black had ever anchored Monday through Friday at six o'clock.  It was all four white males or three white males--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause sometimes they didn't have co-anchors.  So, they hired me, and I always laugh.  Now, the other giggle in the story--the guy who told me I'd never make it, then got me a job here.  Before I got the job here, Channel 5 [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], which is our main competitor, asked me to send a tape.  And I sent them a tape.  And they said to me, they were looking for a noon anchor.  "You need to stay where you are a couple more years."  Three months later, WSB calls me. If I had gotten the job, I would have been doing the noon at Channel 5.  Instead, I got the six at the number one station.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it's funny how your life takes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, well--
Speaker 1: --twists and turns.  And my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] says, when I didn't get the job, I was really disappointed.  And my mom said in both instances, "God has a blessing waiting for you.  And it's how you handle disappointment that will determine whether or not you get the real gift you're supposed to have.  So, if you're angry and downtrodden, that's not going to turn to anything good.  Learn from it."  And, sure enough, she was right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was right, she was right.
Speaker 1: She was right.
Story_ID: 335610
Speaker 1: Now, you want to talk about discrimination.  I faced more anger and hatred anchoring the news than I had ever faced in my entire life.
Speaker 2: Would this be internal or external?
Speaker 1: External.  Internal people were very supportive.  External, you had black folks calling up, saying, I wasn't black enough, that I needed a big Afro, and that I was an Uncle Tom, sounding too white.  And then, you had white people--what's that N doing on the air?  She's not deferential enough to and, oh, you could not please anything.  But Don Elliot Heald, who was the general manager of the station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], who hired me, said, "She's going to be all right, and we are going to support her."  And thirty years later--
Speaker 2: Here we are.
Speaker 1: --now thirty-one years later in August, but this is a station that traditionally has done stuff nobody else did.  Lo Jelks was the first black reporter on Atlanta [Georgia] television, a man--he went on TV.  This station hired someone, a black person, to put on TV when Lester Maddox was elected governor.  That shows you the kind of guts they had.  So, I had, feel very blessed, and that's the reason why I've never left this place is because they stuck their neck out for me.  You know, we've had people who worked here, left, and gone some place, and come back.  I've been here the whole thirty-one years because they took a chance, not just on me, but many other black reporters when they didn't have to.
Speaker 2: I mean, that kind of says it all, it really kind of says it all.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 335611
Speaker 1: What is the typical day like in the life of a TV anchorwoman?
Speaker 2: Well, it's changed a lot from the way it used to be--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --now that I've got thirty-one years under my belt.
Speaker 1: Well, when you first started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I first came here [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], up until the last five years, I've cut down on my speaking schedule a lot.  I always tell young reporters, if you want to get known in the community, you go to every church, and do a women's day program.  I used to spend more time in other people's churches than I did my own because I was there to do women's day programs.  Now, I leave that to the young reporters 'cause I've done it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the more you're involved in the community, the more people get to know you, so that when the rating services call and say, do you know, then they say yes.
Speaker 1: Then they, okay.
Speaker 2: I relied on my community support to build me a base because I wasn't so sure that what I was doing on the air was that good.  I don't fool myself thinking I'm that great of an anchor.  I know it's my community involvement that helped--
Speaker 1: That helps, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --me grow in the community and keep my job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it also kept me honest, if you know what I mean.  When you have to go back to those same people, they let you know how they feel about a story you need.  So, that is the one thing.  I think that was to my benefit is that I've always stayed involved in the community.  I used to do one year, I actually did something like three hundred appearances.  There was almost no day in that year I did not do a speech.  And now, I don't do more than fifty-two a year.  I just can't do it anymore.  So, a typical day for me now is more fun than it used to be in the sense that I get to actually sleep late (laughter), where it used to be, I'd be up at 9:00, even though I worked nights because I would be out working, doing speeches at schools, sometimes two and three a day.  I was serving on boards in the old days a lot.  Now, I'm able to give money to groups versus serving on boards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It makes it a lot easier.  But that helped me, again, build alliances across--I, I worked for the Butler Street Y [Butler Street YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], which was the traditional black Y [Young Men's Christian Association], but then I also worked for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] with white women.  I worked for United Way [United Way of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] because United Way helped my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] raise me.  I mean, I could not have been a Girl Scout if it hadn't been for people giving money to United Way.  She couldn't afford to pay for me to be a Girl Scout, so people who gave to United Way helped me to be a Girl Scout.  I told you we dressed from Goodwill [Goodwill Industries International, Inc.].  Goodwill is a United Way agency, so I found myself giving back.  I'm very proud of the fact that I'm a United Way recipient who eventually became the second woman and the first black to be the president of the United Way of Metro Atlanta [sic.].  So, it's, you know, in the old days, my days were full.  And now, it's a lot easier.  My, I can tell you pretty much, I get to go to exercise class now.  I do certain appearances, like this past weekend, I did emcee the Beaux Arts Ball which was to raise money for the Atlanta College of Art [Savannah College of Art and Design Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  I did on Friday night, I emceed an event for Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] for their major contributors.  So, I pick and choose now what I really want to do, whereas in the old days, I did everything that came my way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still do special assignment reporting, like I had to do close-ups this weekend.  I will probably be going down to Florida to do an interview with young Francoeur [Jeffrey Francoeur], who's one of the new phenom players in baseball for the Atlanta Braves, so I still do that kind of thing.  But I take it easy a lot more now.  I am enjoying it.  I always, with my daughter [Claire Deveaux], made sure that I went to her basketball games.  I loved working nights then because in the daytime, I could be a room parent which is what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was so much fun doing that.  And then, in the evening, on my lunch hour, I would go to her basketball games.  Now, you know, she's twenty-five years old, and has a job of her own, and, you know, trying to save money to get a condo.  So, my life is a lot simpler now than it used to be.  I work once a week at Lenora P. Miles Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] reading to first graders.  I've been doing that for the last five years.  I love doing it and I do that through the Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is your--
Speaker 2: --because over the years, I've done some acting.  And I have a Screen Actors Guild card.  I've been in a couple of movies, so that's fun.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So, it's a lot easier now than it used to be.
Speaker 1: --so with the children, you do get a chance to pay back your educational debt, so to speak?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I always feel that way, but I've always done that.  I mean, my mother, even when she was dirt poor, she gave stuff back to Goodwill.  My mother always, you know, you have to pay it forward--whatever you've been given, you have to give to someone else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it just works that way.  I couldn't think of doing it any other way.  I'd be afraid I'd block a blessing.
Story_ID: 335612
Speaker 1: Tell us about your, your life?  How many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Just the one, Claire, Claire Patrice [Claire Deveaux].  She's now twenty-five.  She's the second person on the maternal side to graduate from college.  She went to a private school her whole life, Paideia Ele- Paideia [The Paideia School, Atlanta, Georgia], from the first grade through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: And then, she went to Illinois Wesleyan [Illinois Wesleyan University] in Bloomington-Normal, Illinois [sic. Bloomington, Illinois] where she played basketball.  It's a Division III school.  She knows nothing but an integrated lifestyle because that's all she's ever known.  I remember her first experience with racism.  They used to have a school bus that picked up kids in Ansley Park [Atlanta, Georgia].  Ansley Park is one of the first subdivisions in the city.  My house was built in 1906.  When I bought the house, there was actually a covenant that said that no one of Jewish or African ancestry could own it.  I know they're rolling around in their grave.  It was built by a Dr. Thomas Hoke [sic. Michael Hoke], who was one of the founders of Piedmont Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], and went off to become the doctor for Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.]--I mean, for Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] down in Warm Springs [Georgia].  So, anyway, this house was built in 1906.  And we live in this very hoity-toity neigh- neighborhood where we have, you know, four or five black families.  Now, it's more than that, but when we moved in, I think maybe there was one other black family in the neighborhood.  So, Claire would take the bus to Paideia.  And one day, she was getting in line, and this white kid pushed her out of the way and said, "You go to the back of the line."  And Claire is like, "What do you mean?"  And she said, "Well, the maid's children are supposed to go back."  And Claire went, "What maid's children (laughter)?"  And, you know, she came home--she said, "Momma, she didn't like me because of the color of my skin."  So, I said, "Do you still want to ride the bus?"  She said, "Yes," so she learned to fight back real fast in being able to say, "I live in this neighborhood."  I can remember when I wanted to build the house for my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson].  Everyone fought me because they thought I was going to have to rent out the house.  I said, I'm not--
Speaker 1: And this is still where you are now?
Speaker 2: And this is in Ansley Park.  And they said, "Well, we're opposed to rental property."  And half the people who were raising Cain had rental property behind their houses.  All I was doing was building a house for my mother.  And I remember going to the zoning hearing, and it's the first time I had lost my cool because I actually turned to them and said, "Unlike you, I don't have to rent it out.  This is a home for my mother."  And I got the zoning ordinance, so that I could build a new house for my mother because the house that was back there was falling apart.  It was termite-infested, and they were afraid I was going to rent it out.  And I said, and no, I don't need to do that (laughter).  So I, and I explained to my--my mother used to work in houses like this.  My mother is going to have a better house to live in.  Now, if we have to go to court over this, we will.  But I'm building a house for my mother, and we did.  But I had to let the little girl from Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky] come out.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 335613
Speaker 1: I always tell people--I earned being middle class, I earned it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And why would you make that statement?
Speaker 1: I earned it.  I had to learn to be middle class.  There is a whole another side of me where you push the right button and I become Rosie [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that's the little girl from Smoketown [Louisville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, who can curse you out, and knock you down.  Now, my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Langford] taught me how to fight.  So, you don't ever want to see, as my grandmother used to say, the colored side of me.  And I'm very proud of it because sometimes you have to use it.  I got saved one night in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] because of my grandmother--of what she taught me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You got saved?
Speaker 1: Saved.  Two men were approaching me.  I was going to an event downtown, and I was leaving my car parked on the street, and had to walk about half a block to get where I was going.  And these two men approached me, and it was very obvious to me that they had planned to do something to me.  It was obvious.  They were either going to grab my purse, or grab me, or something.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And one of them--when they started closing in on me, I walked to the street.  And then one of them went--and I, before I knew it, I just stopped, put my hand on my hips, and went into the--don't you even dare think about putting your da, da, da, da--and they thought I was crazy.  They left me alone.  My grandmother taught me that in--as did my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson]--in times of trial, you sometimes have to go someplace you didn't want to go in order to save yourself.  I still remember, as a child, my mother and I walking through an alley.  And this dog came from out of nowhere attacking me.  I still see my very young mother grabbing this dog before it even got to me by the neck and almost--I mean, she had that dog in a death grip--
Speaker 2: Whew.
Speaker 1: --and then slung it to the ground.  Now, needless to say, the dog took off running, but that's the kind of women I come from who will stand up--
Speaker 2: Strong--
Speaker 1: --for what is right.  And, yes, we can be sweet, and we can be mannerly, and we can be everything you want us to be.  But sometimes you have to go there to Smoketown.  I don't go there very often, but when I do (laughter), folk leave me alone (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's called survival.
Speaker 1: It is survival, but I think that sometimes, you know, you have to teach your children.  And I can remember taking Claire [Claire Deveaux] down to a resort in Amelia Island [Florida], and I had called and asked is this--are children allowed in the gym?  And the woman said, "Oh, absolutely, you know, even if they are under the age of sixteen, if a parent is with them, it's fine."  So, we went in and this really hoity toity woman comes in.  And she says to me, "You need to get your child out of here," and looks at me, and she says, "And it doesn't look like you belong in the gym," 'cause I was a little heavier.  And immediately, I turned to her and said, "Just because you're white and from New York [New York], I paid the same amount of money to be here as you did.  And I got permission for my child to be here.  And my child is going to stay here, and if you got a problem with it, you need to go get the management, and we'll take care of it.  And as a matter of fact, you owe me an apology."  Well, you know, she got really uppity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did--
Speaker 1: --and the manager escorted her out.  My child needed to see that.  And Claire remembers that to this day.  She was embarrassed at the time.  She wanted to run away.  And I said, "Oh, no, no, no. no.  What you need to understand is America--in America, what's really important is not skin color anymore, it's the dollar bill.  If you got the money, you can be anything and everything you want to be."
Speaker 2: That you want to be.
Speaker 1: You can even buy a presidency.  You can buy a governor's house if you got enough money.  So, you know, my thing is green power.  Yeah, black power, but black and green power.  And I've always told her that.  You know, I don't want to start over with every generation.  You know, my mother had to start over because what her forebears had was gone, was used up, was lost.  Claire's not going to have to start over.  She's going to build on what I have and, hopefully, her children when she marries and has children, will build.  It's not about starting over with each generation.
Story_ID: 337053
Speaker 1: Okay.  There are just a few questions that, that I have.
Speaker 2: Sure, I'll be succinct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there--okay.  Is there anything that I did not ask that I should have asked that you'd like to comment on at this particular time?  Have I missed anything?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of.  You've been very thorough.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 2: Let me think about family stuff.  Regrets, regrets that I didn't get to know my father [Maurice Jones] 'cause that is a whole side.  And it was really sad when he came back just before he died.  I would, I would stay in touch with him after I became older because I just felt like I needed to know him.  And I can remember his last visit.  He was flirting with Mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] and said, "You know, I always loved you."  And she's like, um-hm.  And I can remember asking him, "Well, if you loved her, why did you hit her," 'cause mother had told me all of these stories.  And I remember him making excuses for it.  And then, I remember that generation.  That was the generation that thought it was okay to hit a woman.  And, luckily, my mother said, "I'm not going to be anybody's punching bag."  And then, when he started dating other women, she just said, quote, "I, I can have nothing by myself," (laughter).  That's another one of her favorite sayings.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They will tell you that quick, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, he always, he said to her, I remember him looking at her and saying, "You know what your problem was?  You were too GD independent."  And she said, "It's a good thing I was 'cause where would we be if we had counted on you?"
Speaker 1: He couldn't say anything then?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, couldn't say a word then.  She said, "'Cause what would you have done?  Would you have gotten her through school?"  And she looked at him and said, "The best thing you ever did for me was to give me Moni [HistoryMaker Monica Pearson], and I thank you for that."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, that's where you get your outspokenness from--your mother?
Speaker 2: Ohhh, yes, I come from a line of outspoken women.  And my daughter [Claire Deveaux] is so funny.  She's the same way.  She is--she can be very biting.  I can remember the only time I got called to her about her in elementary school [The Paideia School, Atlanta, Georgia] was for her mouth because somebody said the wrong thing, and she laid him out in a very nice way.  She's a Virgo, so she is very sure of herself.
Speaker 1: When is her birthday?
Speaker 2: September 6th.  And I'm a Libra, so, you know, we can be wishy-washy.  My mother is an Aries and oh, is she, oh, is she!
Speaker 1: The Ram.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, she's a character.
Story_ID: 337054
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: I have no regrets.  I used to have regrets about marriage that my child [Claire Deveaux]--I was a child of divorce, and my daughter became a child of divorce.  And I finally realized many years ago that I was looking for my daddy [Maurice Jones], that I was always trying to be successful for my daddy, that maybe he would love me then, and accept me then, and maybe, you know, was there something wrong with me that he ran.  So, I always picked men who were not good enough for me.  And I was so glad when I finally learned that you got to love yourself, even though I seemed to be such a very strong person, there was still this little girl in there--was looking for someone to love her--that my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson], my mother loved me to death, but it was not the same as having a daddy's love 'cause I think all girls want that approval.  And I think, it's because your relationship with your dad that determines what kind of man you date and marry.  And so, I always ended up marrying men I took care of versus someone taking care of me.  So, my only regret is that I didn't learn until I was in my fifties what I should have learned in my twenties (laughter).  But having said that, it was important to me when Claire's dad [Clinton Deveaux] and I divorced, that I didn't want her to grow up that way.  And I insisted at a time when people thought it was heresy that we would have joint custody of her, that she would spend just as much with him, as she did with me, because I did not want her to grow up the way I did without a man in her life who was a good father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, to see Claire dating--the kind of guy she dates, and the way she is, I laugh because she really--her daddy loves her, and has spoiled her rotten, and she adores the ground he walks on.  And that's a good thing.  So, if I did anything right, that's the one thing I did right.  If there was any regret, I wish I had gone about my personal relationships differently.  Being a child of divorce, I should have known better.
Story_ID: 337055
Speaker 1: For those going into the television industry and who aspire to do what you do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't want them to--
Speaker 1: --in your career--
Speaker 2: --I don't want them to.  I do not want them to be anchors.  I do not want them to be reporters, except in the beginning, just so you can learn the field.  I don't tell people what to do.  I don't hire.  I don't fire.  I don't decide what we put on the air.  I can give my input, but in the end, it's the news director who makes those decisions.  So, I want more of our young people, both black and white, but particularly African American men, to go up through the ranks where you are a reporter to begin with, but then you become a producer, and then you become an executive producer, and then you become a news director, and then you become a general manager, and then maybe one day, you'll be an owner.  I want us to set policy, and to hire and to fire, versus being talent.  I love my job, I love my job, but in the end, I don't control what I do.  My management does.  So, I tell my young people, it's fun to be on the air, but in the end, you want to be the person who controls the things--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --behind the scene.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's what I want more of our kids to do.  Stop wanting to be in the front, so everybody can know your name.  Be the one who determines who's going to be on the air, what we cover, how we cover it--the budgets.  It makes a big difference, it makes a big different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I try to discourage from being reporters and anchors.  I want you to be in the management.  I want you to be owners, and that's where the power is.
Story_ID: 337056
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I recently remarried and I've been married now--well, how many months--five months?  Yes.  And it's very, very different.  It is really different because this person is the exact opposite of any person I've ever dated before--a, a policeman (laughter).  He's a major in the police department, a commander of the north precinct [Atlanta Police Department].  And he comes from a family where he's the youngest child, but he might as well had been the only child because he's the only one who looks like his mother, so he is spoiled rotten, but he is very hands-on, take charge.  I've never had anybody go to my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] and spoil her the way--she calls him before she calls me now.  He dotes on her.  I never dated someone who had a, who wasn't a consultant, or something like, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He has a full-time job.  He's a BMW, black man working, has his own career, twenty-five years on the job, really doesn't care what I do.
Speaker 1: Did you say he has a BMW--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --or he is a BMW?
Speaker 2: --he is a BMW, black man working, who's not looking for what I do, who could not have cared less about what I did.  As a matter of fact, he didn't want to go out with me because I was on television.  "What am I going to talk to her about?"  And I didn't want go out with him 'cause he was in law enforcement.  A Jewish girlfriend introduced me to him (laughter) of twenty-five years because she said, you two are so much alike--yet, you complement each other so well.  Our strengths are very different--very much involved in his faith.  What's interesting, he is non- non-denominational.  I'm Catholic.  I go to 8:00 Mass and sing at church, and I meet him at 11:00 at his church.  It is one of the most fun--he does things for me.  Do you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I've never had anybody do--usually, I'm the one doing everything.  I just let him do it.  I have never been taken care of.  I finally have gotten what I deserve because I knew what I wanted, what I didn't want.  And I knew what I wouldn't put up with for the first time in my life.  I was very happy being single, very happy being not alone, but living my life.  I was no longer afraid.  Years ago, I used to think, oh, what am I going to do without a man?  I had finally gotten to the place where you know what?  I can do very well without a man.  My mother had always told me that, but I didn't believe her.  And then, at that point, when I finally said, you know, I'm having fun.  Then John [John E. Pearson, Sr.] comes along.  It's the first time--I mean, what you should know is my--I keep telling my daughter [Claire Deveaux], I want her to break the maternal curse.  I want her to go back to her great-grandmother--well, she would be my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Her great-great--
Speaker 2: It would be her great-great-grandmother to Nettie [Nettie Langford (ph.)] and Bob Langford [ph.].  They were married forever.  Her--my mother has married four times.  This is my fourth marriage.  I said, "Claire, you are going to be like Nettie and Bob.  You're going to marry somebody, and you're going to stay married to him until the day you die."  My husband's parents have been married sixty years.  So, it's like, finally, in my old age, I'm getting what I deserved because my mind changed.  I learned that I deserved a lot more than I had allowed myself to have.  And I think that comes really from that father-daughter relationship.  Girls who don't know their fathers, or don't have a strong male relationship in their families--my uncle wasn't there, my Cousin Lee [ph.] was too old, and remind--remember, he was constantly telling me I was black and ugly, smart, but black and ugly.  So, my relationships, even as a child, with men, were not good, so I didn't know what a good man was.
Story_ID: 337057
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Ooo, that's a tough one.  It goes back to my mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson].  It's the same thing.  She always says, "If there's a legacy, I want--the thing I want on my tombstone is, 'What you do with what you have that makes you what you are'."  That's my legacy to my kids when I talk to them, you know.  And they say, I can't do this, I can't do that.  I say, unh-uh, God gave all of us good brains.  It's, it's what you want to do.  Don't make excuses.  Make work, another one of my mother's famous sayings, that I believe strongly, very strongly, in getting a good education, not letting anybody tell you what you can't do.  I get furious with parents and teachers who say, oh, no, you're not cut out to do that or, oh, no, I think you should try something else because nobody in your family has ever done that.  I always say, make a lie out of people.  Show them that you can be whatever you want to be as long as you believe in yourself, and do it honestly.  So, my legacy is a simple one.  It's just that you work hard, and then you give back.  I guess, it's that old--we are our brothers' and sisters' keepers, but, more importantly, got to take care of yourself first, and develop who you are so you can turn--
Speaker 1: Turn--
Speaker 2: --develop someone else.  It's what you do with what you have that makes you what you are.  If you have nothing, then you've done nothing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that's really true.  People get upset with me, you know.  And they talk about affirmative action.  I believe in affirmative action, but I also believe in--how did so many black people in the old days make it without affirmative action?  Because they had their own kind of affirmative action, they put their nose to the grindstone, and they learned how to work both sides of the fence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, they did.
Speaker 2: --and they got it done.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I get so upset with our children now because there's so little they have to do in the sense that they don't have to fight segregation.  They have the opportunities.  But so and so doesn't like me, and, and, you know, they're just doing that 'cause I'm black.  I don't want to hear it.  You're not having to sit in the back of a bus.  You're not having to be measured to try on clothes.  All you're asked to do is be the very best person you can be, to be as serious about your studies, as you are about your hair, your makeup, the latest dance, and learning to rap.  Put that same kind of hard work into something that's going to last you forever.  Once it's up here, nobody can take it away from you.  And that's what we forget, that's what we forget.  So, legacy--my momma, it's what you do with what you have that makes you what you are.
Story_ID: 337058
Speaker 1: Well, I've enjoyed it.  I want to thank you for your time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you're welcome.
Speaker 1: You've been so gracious with it.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--I just hope I gave you enough stuff.  I was here, there, everywhere, jumping all around.  And we didn't talk about faith.  My mother [Hattie Wallace Edmondson] is a very religious person.  And, you know, she--I can remember when my tuition was due because she'd be singing, 'The Lord will make a way somehow.'  So, I knew the ring was about to go into hock.  And she has always taught me, you know, I still read my Bible.  I still pray, 'cause I'm scared if I don't, something might happen.  I know, and I think faith is very important in your development.  My daughter, you know, has been raised in church.  And I guess many of us, at a certain point of our lives--I can remember my late twenties, I didn't go to church where I used to.  Momma just would pray over, pray over, and pray over.  Now, I'm doing the same thing with Claire [Claire Deveaux].  She goes, you know, on the special holidays, you know, Mother's Day, Christmas, Thanksgiving--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Easter.  But I know that's something all kids go through.  But I know the foundation is there.  And that one day she will come back--she will.  We all have to do our little thing, but we eventually come back.  If nothing else, the school of hard knocks brings us back.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Well, I want to say thank you--
Speaker 2: You're welcome.  Anything else?
Speaker 1: --and thanks for sharing.
