Story_ID: 624792
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Willie Pearson, Jr., W-I-L-L-I-E, P-E-A-R-S-O-N, J-R.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.  Only when I played sports.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 29, 1945 in Rusk, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Rusk, Texas, and that's R-U-S-K?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't actually grow up there, just born there.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.   And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a college professor.
Speaker 1: And you're professor of sociology--
Speaker 2: Professor of sociology of science and technology.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay.  And you're associated presently with Georgia Tech?
Speaker 2: Yes, Georgia Institute of Technology [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: April 13, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 624793
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that we ask everyone as sort of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is it?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Winter.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.  The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 624794
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Willie Pearson, Sr.], but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Do you want her maiden name or--
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Odessa Price [Odessa Price Pearson], O-D-E-S-S-A, P-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that's--I'll have to look that up.  It's, I'll have to look that up, and I believe that she was born in Dallas, Texas, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll have to look that kind of historical stuff up.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have an idea what date, maybe 1920 or what do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would have been, let me see.  What is this 2011?  She passed in 1998, so she was eighty-four.  So what is that?  She would have been born I think around 1910 or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far--well, what do you know about them first of all?
Speaker 2: I know that her father's father migrated from Milledgeville, Georgia around 1853 or '54 [1854] to what is presently Cherokee County, Rusk, Texas area and that there was the male.  He had twin boys, and there was another boy.  He had his mother in law and his wife.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just recently found--actually, when I moved here.  It turns out Milledgeville, Georgia had a small free black population, but I had no understanding of that at all until I came to Georgia.  It was purely by accident that I learned that because there's never been any discussion of issues like that.
Speaker 1: Is there a--do you know if he migrated prior to the Civil War or after?
Speaker 2: It was prior to.  It was 1853.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and apparently, it took like a couple of years that it, I think they left Milledgeville probably around 1852 or '53 [1853] and arrived in Texas around 1854, I believe.  And Texas became a state in, I think 1848 [sic. 1845].
Speaker 1: Okay, what was his name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I have to look.  I can look that up.  I'm trying to think because I thought about I should go over there before you guys came, but--
Speaker 1: This would be your great-grandfather, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'll have to look that information up.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's fine.  But he came, he migrated from Milledgeville, Georgia.  He was a free black, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he came here in 1853--came to Texas in 1853 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 624795
Speaker 1: Any stories associated with that migration or why?
Speaker 2: Not, not that have been passed on down from the family.  I started doing some family history when I got here.  I came to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] as chair of the School of History, Technology and Society, first African American chair at Georgia Tech, and had always wanted to try to get back to see about family history.  I knew that my mother's [Odessa Price Pearson] family were the Sessions.  And I know the Sessions were, they were not what you considered to be, at the time, very well educated persons, but they owned a lot of land.  So I think one year I went to Texas, to San Antonio, and they have a museum of Texas cultures [Institute of Texan Cultures, San Antonio, Texas].  And I saw that the Session name was there, and I knew that, from that side of the family, it ended with an S.  It was Sessions.  And so I was struck that that was the only black family that had been portrayed.  So I started looking at the background material a little bit more when I got here because I had anticipated that, first of all, they would be enslaved and then secondly, that there would be Indian [Native American] ancestry and particularly, for my father [Willie Pearson, Sr.], it would be kind of the opposite situation.  Well, when it turns out that I discovered that they ended up in Texas at that very early period, I did visit that part of Texas.  It's not too far from where I grew up in Tyler [Texas].  And one of the magistrates there was very helpful.  And then I could see all the land that they owned.
Speaker 1: Now, what part of Texas is this?
Speaker 2: This is Rusk, Texas.
Speaker 1: Oh in Rusk, okay.
Speaker 2: It's actually Cherokee County [Texas].  And that still would have been kind of largely in the 1850s, a lot of groups coming that way.  So I was struck by a few things, you know, why everybody was Methodist.  And it turns out the Methodists did a lot of recruiting by horseback.  So then when I went to visit that area and look at the records, I was just struck by these black people owning three and four hundred acres of prime land.  So as a social scientist, I thought maybe it was being held in their name for whites.  And it turns out that it was actually their land and that the twins, 'cause twins apparently run in the family, but the twins that would have been there at the time, owned equally a fairly large amount of land.  I'm just assuming that the great-grandfather had a skill, 'cause when I looked on the census, his personal wealth was higher than many of the whites in that same census track.
Speaker 1: Now, he's a Sessions, right?
Speaker 2: He was a Price.
Speaker 1: A Price, okay.  Now, how is he related to the Sessions?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother is, her mother's side of the family--
Speaker 1: Are Sessions?
Speaker 2: --is Sessions, yeah.  But she was a Price.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she came from the Price, I guess the best way to put it, that's her paternal heritage, is the Price, I mean frater- paternal.  Her maternal heritage is the Sessions.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, okay, now--
Speaker 2: So this would have been her, 'cause that was her grandparents, the Price that came from Georgia.  See, it was one of his sons that was my mother's father, who married a Sessions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are most of the Sessions related in the country?
Speaker 2: I think the ones with the name that end in S is, 'cause Session and then there's a Sessions.  So there's S-E-S-S-I-O-N and then there's one that ends in S.  And typically, the ones that end in an S, if they're in Texas, they tend to be related.
Story_ID: 624796
Speaker 1: Now, there's one that plays for the Cavaliers, a guard, Ramon Sessions, played for Milwaukee [Milwaukee Bucks].  Now, he plays for the Cleveland Cavaliers.  I was wondering if he was maybe related?
Speaker 2: I don't know because actually my--they never really talked about a lot of historical stuff.  And I think one of the reasons was because of racial mixture.  It was not something that they were proud of bringing up.  So I learned all this stuff after my, just before my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] passed away.  And so there was never any mention of Georgia at all.  And then I just knew that they had quite a bit of land, and I only knew that--my sister [Vassie V. King] was fifteen years older than I.  And she finished high school at fifteen.  So we both grew up as kind of only children.  And since she got skipped in school a lot, she was not with her contemporaries.  So there was just a lot of, not a lot of talk about history of the family.  I had to find that out on my own.  And I think that the name thing was, 'cause I believe my mother's father, I think his second marriage was to a white female in that area.
Speaker 1: Now, that's unusual for those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think it's an unusual little place.  They actually own a lot of the territory that was called Sycal, Texas [ph.] now.  I think it's S-Y-C-A-L, I believe.  And I just knew from another cousin there was a big issue about the white side of the family getting the land.  And my position was that it's a rural area and it's not likely for very much to happen there in terms of development.  But that was basically it in terms of my family mentioning anything.  And that's the only reason I could think of, is that the issue about the mixing, 'cause like I said, there was never any mention of anything.  And when I started looking this information up, then I was actually surprised that they actually came in 18 something.  I was expecting them to have always been from Texas.  So when you look at the census, I could only go back to the 1820 census, so I couldn't find out where the Price started before then.  I just know that for his mother in law, was from Virginia.  And I know Virginia also had a small free black population.  So it was not clear whether or not, there was slavery before then and they got an opportunity to free themselves through work or what.  I, the census--the Ancestry.com and the census data did not allow me to go beyond that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your mother's father was a descendant of the people from Milledgeville [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Then her mother was a Sessions--
Speaker 2: Right, from Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, I haven't gotten a chance to go back.  I just know the Sessions were pretty prominent in that area of Texas.  That's East Texas, and I knew that there were family members in the Beaumont [Texas] area.  So, I just remember that part, that they did go and visit 'cause it was kind of an unusual family.  They were not that many of them in that at the time--now, this is my mother's brothers and sisters, I think almost half of them either had no children or they may have had two, which was not typical of family size for that area.
Story_ID: 624797
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Odessa Price Pearson] grow up on one of the big holdings of land that--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In the area of Rusk, Texas, Cherokee County and--
Speaker 1: Now, is that Rust or Rusk?
Speaker 2: Rusk, R-U-S-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, she grew up there.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories of growing up that she--
Speaker 2: No, that's what I'm saying.  There was never really any--a lot of details.  She talked about, you know, like her brothers and sisters and a little bit about her family, but you have to remember that--see, I was born when my mother was around thirty-three.  So I was basically a very late child.  So, and my sister [Vassie V. King] being like a child, a very gifted child, would have been there for that first fifteen years.  So my sister would have known a little bit more, but as I was saying because she was skipped, my sister was not really interested in a lot of historical stuff.  So she knew some of the relatives, but my mother only mentioned occasi- if I would ask when I got to be in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], I would ask question because I knew that the level of education was not very high.  But I knew they were very good with finances and kind of economic issues.  And then I kind of learned probably later on, much, much later on that being black, you didn't put your resources in one bank or something like that because bad things could happen to them.  So I had a better understanding that they were able to live way below their means, but she never spoke of any details, you know, besides she and my sister would go occasionally and sell timber, 'cause both my sister and I went to small, private colleges and that's how tuition and stuff was paid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had to consciously sort of live below their means in order to escape the consequences of racism in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, it was, I guess by the time I got to college [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], I was given kind of control of the estate or resources.  And I was just stunned at how much it was in terms of value, but I also came to understand that if they did not, 'cause there was no purchase of cars, no fancy homes, anything like that.  But we never had any, took out any loans or anything like that.  That's what I'm saying, it was like, it was contradictory in many ways.  But as I got older I understood that the consequences of being conspicuous with your resources, that it could have been taken away from you.  So in the end, it was very clever, and I think from my mother--'cause my parents were divorced fairly, when I was young, that to see how sophisticated she was with finances.  Actually helped me quite a bit.  I was, my minor was economics.
Story_ID: 624798
Speaker 1: Now, was the community she grew up in, now she grow up in basically, you say it was like a black enclave in Rusk [Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was, not in Rusk.  It was a, 'cause it was a very small town.  A number of her family members were Methodist ministers.  So you have to think of, I guess, a small area where almost everybody is related to some extent, but it was a rural area where, that they might have rural communities where that one family may be more prominent or a set of families for that.  And then it was maybe pretty typical for one family to kind of marry into another family, 'cause it was just basically kind of large, a number of extended families in that particular area.  And then I think she, it's not quite clear that she was born in an urban area but grew up in that area.  So, it was just never discussed, those kind of details.
Speaker 1: Okay, now her family, her relatives were Methodists ministers.  Were they, what denomination of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were all Methodists.  And it turns out--
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I'm asking, are they C.M.E., A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or M.E. [Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: At the time, they would have been called C.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then because one cousin was president of Texas College, which was a C.M.E., and I think there was a period where the Colored Methodist Episcopal [Christian Methodist Episcopal] joined with their white counterparts.  That area of Texas is kind of interesting 'cause you had at the time Texas College, which was an HBCU, historically black colleges [historically black colleges and universities], that was C.M.E.  And then across town, there was Butler College [Tyler, Texas] which was Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay, Texas College, I had never heard of that.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's in Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And within that same town was Butler. And then about twenty miles away was Jarvis Christian College [Hawkins, Texas] which was associated with Texas Christian University [Fort Worth, Texas].  And I'm trying to think of the woman's name, one of the movie stars at the time was associated with that school.  And then about sixty miles--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, but Jarvis would be like a black spin off of Texas Christian?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still there.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: It's still there.  So all that within the same kind of, within twenty minutes, twenty miles of each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was a movie star associated with the establishment of Jarvis?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think--Leslie Uggams.
Speaker 1: Leslie Uggams.  Oh, did she go to school there?
Speaker 2: No, her family was related to the founding of Jarvis Christian College.  They were, I can't think of, whatever their Christian denomination.  And these are all, of course, private, historically black colleges.
Speaker 1: So, now, did you mother [Odessa Price Pearson] go to, have a chance to go to high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to high school.  I think in the time she went, you know, it was not high school, what we call it now.  She did not finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she ever talk about her aspirations were?  Did she ever wanna leave there or did she wanna become a teacher or a nurse or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, never--I think, being a single parent, it was primarily focusing on her kids having an opportunity.  And as I said, both my, my sister [Vassie V. King] would finish very early, we both went to college.  My sister dropped out about, after about two years to become an actress, and it didn't work out.  I know my mother was disappointed in that because you could imagine a single parent paying for her kids to go to a private college.  And my sister went to preschool.  So it was very unusual at the time.  And I did not, but my sister did.  My sister was very, very smart.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me go to your--oh, do you know the name of the school that she actually attended in Rusk?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Story_ID: 624799
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Alford, A-L-F-O-R-D, Pearson, P-E-A-R-S-O-N [Willie Pearson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you don't have a middle name, but he does.
Speaker 2: No, because I dropped that.  You know, it didn't, didn't do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't like Alford as a middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, in my father's side, what they actually did with brothers and sisters, named children after each other, in honor of each other.  So, and his father, I believe was Alford Pearson.  I get the sequences mixed up.  So I'm named after him, but there would have been, just say another one of his sister's or brother's child may have been Alford Pearson [ph.], rather--and named then kind of--he took on the name of his father, but it may have been another brother or sister who named their kid Alford.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so you couldn't have that as a middle name because somebody else had it as a first name?
Speaker 2: Well, you could, but I think just not having, just having junior and not having that, was the way I ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have that offhand.  I know that he was probably born about 1900, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's not--'cause I haven't finished that, looking up that kind of information.  So it's not clear to me whether he was born in Louisiana or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he might have been born in Louisiana, you say?
Speaker 2: It's a possibility.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because when I started doing the family history, things got kind of reversed.  Their family was actually mulatto, classified as mulattos in the census.  And that wasn't what I was, I had anticipated.  I knew that one of the aunts could easily be classified, probably as white.  But I just didn't anticipate that.  So once I started doing some of the historical work on my maternal side, I realized that it, this is a full time job to trace back, you know, 'cause you find some things you don't want to know.  So I haven't gotten very far on my father's side.  I just know that they resided in this area called Marion, M-A-R-I-O-N, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he grow up in Marion, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Well, see that's what I don't know because I haven't gotten that far yet.  I discovered that it's better to try to go one side of the family at a time because you actually have to travel.  I do recall that visiting there when I taught at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], visiting my aunt, and I had an uncle who were there.  And I think they're both deceased now, that in the cemetery there, they would have like a picture of the person who was deceased.  That was very unusual and I just remember that in the 1800s, there were pictures of my father's side.  It's a cemetery that has a whole section just of them.
Speaker 1: So, you're not sure if your father or his brothers and sisters grew up in Marion or not?
Speaker 2: No, not quite certain.  I just know they lived there for a long time, but I know he left.  That's how he ended up in Texas.  So it's not clear whether he was the only one that left or are there others.  I know my aunt and a younger brother remained there most of their career.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he did come from Louisiana to Texas, so you know that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it may not have been Marion that he came from.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did he have a chance to go to school, finish high school?
Speaker 2: He didn't finish high school.  I know he went to school because I think during that period, I think most, what when high school ended, I think around eighth or tenth grade or something like that.  I can't remember, yeah.
Story_ID: 624800
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your dad [Willie Pearson, Sr.] talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It was just kind of a situation where then--that there was not a lot of conversation, liked detailed conversation because by the, I guess by the time, since I was born kind of late in the game, there would be conversations about some of their experiences as kids, but not a whole lot because at the dinner table, you would hear certain things.  And then occasionally going to family reunions, you would hear some things.  But mostly on my mother's [Odessa Price Pearson] side, since it was still in East Texas, 'cause there was no really connection to Louisiana until much, much later because of the divorce.  I actually went to school in Louisiana.  So it was a, I guess it was more of a case where I wasn't supposed to be there, but my father took me there.  So I went to school there for a while.  So I remember that experience, but--
Speaker 1: Was this in Marion [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember that experience, but it was only when I became an adult and then just happened to leave industry [Kelly Springfield Tire Company] to go and work in academe that I reconnect--that part of the family tracked throughout my whole life, but I had no idea that that was happening.  So there was still some contact with my father's--but then there was just a gap.  So when I went to teach at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], they physically came and sought me out.  And I went there on a fairly regular basis until I left Grambling.  Then I would go back occasionally because my mother was still alive, and I could drive down through Louisiana and then go on over to Texas.  But then after my, that particular aunt became more and more infirmed, she was placed in a nursing home.  So I didn't go as frequently after that, and certainly after my mother passed, it would be more infrequently.  Then I would go and see my sister [Vassie V. King] 'cause it was just the two of us.
Speaker 1: Did your father pass away early?
Speaker 2: Yes, much earlier 'cause he was older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how old were you when your father passed?
Speaker 2: Let's see, if he were--he should have been about seventy--close to eighty?
Speaker 1: How old were you, I mean, when he passed?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, I must have been in my, I can't remember whether I was in my twenties or thirties and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well, you were an adult when he had--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I know I was an adult.
Story_ID: 624801
Speaker 1: All right, so you didn't have many conversations with your father [Willie Pearson, Sr.] about growing up and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Did, would you think that's like part of that generation just not talking about--
Speaker 2: I don't think it's part of the generation.  What I know from my own work is that most people, regardless of race, know more about the maternal side, that is the mother's side because there's more interaction with the mother's side.  And I think in this case, since there was a divorce, that I didn't have that much contact with that side of the family.  But I think in either case that there were differences.  I think in my mother's side [Odessa Price Pearson], it was clearly the issue that probably, if I stayed in the, would go to the rural area where they have the family reunions more, and that was on what they called the Sessions, King and Henderson side of the family, 'cause my cousins know a little bit more.  But once my folks moved from that small town [Rusk, Texas] to Tyler [Texas], which is a little bit bigger, we didn't have that kind of interaction with family members except when they came to Tyler to visit or either to live with us temporarily.  So those sets of cousins knew much more about the heritage than what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my sister [Vassie V. King] knew a little bit more, but as I said, she finished high school when I was born.  So we both grew up as only children.  So our experiences were that of only children rather than just being brother and sister.
Speaker 1: It's just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 624802
Speaker 1: Let me ask you.  What did your father [Willie Pearson, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked with a, his family owned a pulpwood business in Louisiana, and I believe that's what he did when he was in Texas.
Speaker 1: So they would sell, what pulpwood.  They would turn wood into pulp?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would actually cut the trees, and they had a, you know, I guess in a sawmill, I guess that's what they call it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I do remember that part when I lived--
Speaker 1: So he basically worked for the family, his own family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it was a type of a family business where that, in that part of Louisiana, Marion, it's a lot of pinewood trees and things of that particular sort, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was he doing in, what did he do in Texas when he--
Speaker 2: I don't know all the details.  I'm assuming that it was maybe some of that same related stuff because I was what, less than four when they were divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were not sure at all what he did when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you probably--okay now is there a story about, that your mother [Odessa Price Pearson] told or about how they met?
Speaker 2: I just can't remember any of those kind of things.  I'm sure that at some point she did, but I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they met--so they get married around 1930 or so--no, it had to be, yeah, it had to be around that time?
Speaker 2: Well, because I think in those days, my mother was previously married and the fellow passed away.  And I think there was some, I think during certain periods of time, there were diseases or, you know, things that happened.  And some people didn't survive.  So that's why I don't--I think it were the case, if I were not that young when they divorced, I would have known kind of more, a little bit more.  But that's why I just know a little bit more about the maternal side.
Speaker 1: Is your sister [Vassie V. King] a part of the previous marriage?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're the only child of your mother and father's actual union (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now do you know why they split up at all?
Speaker 2: No, it was--my mother always took kind of the high road.  We were basically raised to always take the high road.  So it was never any kind of negative stuff mentioned or mean spirited stuff.  It was more or less, you know, you had to get on with life.  So, and that's the way it was.  But, no, none of that.
Story_ID: 624803
Speaker 1: Now when you, from what you know about your father's [Willie Pearson, Sr.] personality and your mother's [Odessa Price Pearson] personality and disposition--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and looks and talents and inclinations and habits, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think now that I've had an opportunity to go back and look at the historical record about them being able to manage and had resources, I would say that the maternal side of the family because for a long time, I knew that I had this kind of strong economic ability to manage and particularly, to know how to manage resources and how to think strategically and how to be very well organized.  I think that came directly from that side of the family; didn't know that in many ways until I started doing the kind of background stuff.  And I think being able to live, particularly within your means was drilled into me.  So, and always being able to save.  So I would say, at least from a fiscal point of view.  I think probably from a personality point of view, it's probably a blend of both families with the majority of the influence coming from my mother's side of the family because my paternal aunt and I were very, the synergism was very strong, my father's youngest sister.  But I think in the end, it was my ability and what I learned, and watching my mother manage, was the strong suit 'cause that actually served me very well.
Story_ID: 624804
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: Anything (laughter), exactly, the earliest childhood memory, the first time that you actually, consciously, you know, felt that you were, you know, had something to remember?
Speaker 2: It probably goes back to when I was maybe around age two.  I can remember, not only the kind of playing, you know, stuff, that was probably my first level of conscious, around two.  And then, being exposed to some of my sister's books, and then probably it heightened around three or four.  I just remember that she [Vassie V. King] intentionally made certain that I read her, not read, but she read to me and showed me pictures.  In those days, a lot of the college textbooks were these kind of glossy, black and white photographs.  And probably the thing that stood out to me, and probably why I continue to have an interest in anthropology, that one of her physical anthropology books had, like this stuff about Cro-Magnon, Neanderthal.  And I just remember there was a picture where it shows the, kind of the evolution of human beings.  I can always remember that very distinctly 'cause I remember to this day what kind of books they were, and even though I couldn't read it, she would explain to me what it was.  And I ended up, you know, subsequently, getting some training actually in anthropology.  So those are kind of the memories. And I have memories of, you know, playmates that to this day, we're still friends from about age three or four.  And so for many people that's kind of unusual that I still have constant contact with the very people I kind of grew up with.  So it was actually very, those very, very early years just still kind of stand there.  I know for a lot of my friends, they don't have friendships that date back to when you're three or four, especially the guys (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true, yeah.
Story_ID: 624805
Speaker 1: Can you describe for us the household you lived in, who lived there and what kind of house was it?  And what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It would have been just my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] and I because my sister [Vassie V. King] decided to--by that time, I think at first it used to be the three of us.  Then after she dropped out of college, she got her own place, which was actually next door.  It would probably a typical working class to lower middle class neighborhood.  And, of course, in Texas, it was racially segregated except for we had white neighbors.  It was kind of an unusual neighborhood.  In the front of us, across the street were white families.  So we actually played together, and then we got to a certain age and saw that the young girls were no longer allowed to play with us.  But one of the guys, we continued up until high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas].  So that was basically it because I grew up always having my own room, but that's because, you know, families were very small.  And I think in that neighborhood, there was only one family that probably had four to six kids.  Most of the families were, they either had no children or they had one or two, just in that particular neighborhood on my street and the other streets.
Speaker 1: So what kind of house was it?
Speaker 2: It was a frame home.  It was, let me see, one, two, three--four or five rooms--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --backyard, front yard and all that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: If it's around the, my neighborhood, probably the smells would have been what they locally call Chinaberry trees.  Peaches were fairly common there, particularly a peach called an Indian peach that's a small kind of, a type of peach.  And I guess the sights would be, primarily in that area, would have been pine trees.  It would also be kind of a grassy area.  But there was also a lot of red clay in that community.  Now, across town, it was a little bit different.  It was more sandy loams so that when I visited some of my friends, and I guess the other sights during that particular point in time would have been pretty vibrant activity in that community because you had, you know, salespeople.  You had a milkman.  You had people coming by with their fruits and vegetables from the local rural areas that was outside of the city, and a lot of, you know, playing and stuff like that.  And I think growing up I had cousins who lived kind of at the end of the street almost.  There were two boys and their parents, the Wickwares [ph.] were cousins.  But it would have been pretty typical for some of us to build go karts out of crates and things of that sort.  So that would be basically kind of it.  And I guess the other sounds would have been my sister's music 'cause she was, I guess being a college person, she had kind of an extensive music collection.  And the other thing would probably have been television because I remember we had the first television on the block.  I can remember this day it was a huge RCA Victor [Victrola] with a--black with a gold trim around the thing.  And so people would come, so you would have mostly kids would come to watch the cartoons, that type of stuff.
Story_ID: 624806
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and your mother's [Odessa Price Pearson] income was basically generated off the land that she had owned (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, part of that, but it would still have been very discreet.  It would not have been any kind of show of wealth at all.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a car?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have a car.  That came much, much later when my sister [Vassie V. King] got one.  That's what I'm saying.  Everything was very low, below the radar screen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just remember that the savings accounts and things of particular sort were kind of spread out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in '45 [1945]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it was like basically the end of World War II [WWII].  And did your family like keep up with the news and that sort of thing as we entered the '50s [1950s] and--
Speaker 2: Well, remember that when I was born in that small town [Rusk, Texas], but we moved.  And that--
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you moved?
Speaker 2: About two.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in a small town, but your mother and your father [Willie Pearson, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: I grew up in Tyler [Texas].
Speaker 1: Did your mother and father move to Tyler?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then he left when you were about four, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and--
Speaker 2: --'cause I think the sequence was they actually got in a state of a divorce, and that's when my mother left.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you grew up in Tyler.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't grow up in the other place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so in terms of news, see my mother always read the newspaper, listened to the news on television and radio.  So I always had that kind of drilled in.  I grew up with that.  So even to this day, I still watch the news, but we read the newspaper every day, watched the national and local news every day.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a name for the side of town you all lived on?  I know a lot of black communities have a name for (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not ours.  We, it was unusual because they had like the north part of the city.  There was an east part, and there was an area called Butler College [Tyler, Texas], but where we lived was kind of like central.  So we were really kind of in the middle of the city almost.  But there was no name for where we lived.  Everywhere else had a name, whether it was Butler College, which was named after the college that was there, but we did not.  And so where we lived, just say if there were the, there were two major high schools, I mean, excuse me, middle schools or what we call junior high.  So we were in a place where you could go to either one.  That's why, we were just basically in the middle, but we had no identity of the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a black side of town that had a name?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were several.  There was Butler College which was in the, would have been in the western part of the city, and then not too far from there was an area called White City [Tyler, Texas] which was not too far from Butler College.  Then there was a section of Tyler in the east, it was called, you know, basically, east Tyler.  And probably most of the African Americans lived in either one of those communities, but the largest group lived in north Tyler, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where the high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] was located in, on that side.
Story_ID: 624807
Speaker 1: Now, Texas is said to be the home of Juneteenth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember celebrating Juneteenth growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, we were very clear on that being a primary day of celebration rather than the 4th of July.  So that was something I think all of us were aware of because it was, and continues to be, a large celebration in Texas.  So there were events, like picnics, barbeques that were very prominent, parades.  And I believe that that still occurs.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're talking to people here for history's sake, that don't know what it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have to tell us what is Juneteenth?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, it was the freeing of black people in Texas, and part of the notion is that the word got to Texas a little bit late.  But that was the day that was celebration as the freedom that was announced to black people.  So it's been celebrated ever, ever since.
Story_ID: 624808
Speaker 1: Well, what did you like to do the most growing up?
Speaker 2: Probably, do you mean from the period of through high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] or--
Speaker 1: No, no, as a little kid.  We're still--
Speaker 2: As a little kid, probably building those go karts, playing typical kid games, especially stick ball and stuff like that, just as a young kid.  And probably, the other thing would have been reading the newspaper and watching the news.  And I guess very, very young, we had a little group.  We called ourselves the explorers.  So we would go to different parts of town, mostly out where Butler College [Tyler, Texas], that black section of town where you could, it was a sandy loam kind of area that had creeks and things like that, and we would try to explore those particular environments.
Speaker 1: Now, this is just an ad hoc group that the kids got together or was an adult in charge of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was all, it was all guys, but we were from different parts of town.
Speaker 1: Was it something that you all got together yourselves?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We were kind of a, I think we were fortunately in probably the early grades of junior high [W.A. Peete Intermediate School (ph.)] where we had fantastic teachers.  And I think we had read a lot of stuff about explorers.  So that was our version of, I guess it would have been like environmental education.  So we actually sought out things like the vegetation.  We saw different animals, and later on, I remember one event we saw what turns out to be a coral snake, eating plums because in that area, there were wild plums and things of that particular sort.  And we just remembered that, and I guess to this date, the snake was almost like standing up, you know, picking plums.  So that would have been very--
Speaker 1: A coral snake is the one with the rings and the color?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And there's another one that's really a bad actor (laughter), but I think the issue is that we, the one friend that dates back to the fourth grade, so there was maybe about three or four of us like that.  But it was purely ad hoc, but it was a pretty persistent group.  And we were just inquisitive--
Speaker 1: Okay, but there were no adults involved in it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, just something you guys would do?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So would you ever go out and spend the night camping (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, none of that night business 'cause we'd be at home.  We were in middle school.  So probably in some ways, we were allowed--at that time, I could walk across town, and you could either follow the tracks or you could follow the, you know, the streets.  And so we'd kind of meet up.  I might go to that side of town and play with them and then come home or it might be vice versa.  So generally, if it's a case where that they would come to my part, it may be sandlot sports or we might meet in the middle at our junior high and play sports.  So that's basically the way it was like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Odessa Price Pearson] have strict rules about when you had to be in?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, that persisted until, oh, period.  And even I was--you know, you had to be there by a certain time.
Speaker 1: What was your deadline?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  It was well before, it usually for dinner.  So I think dinner in those days was typically served around the time that the news comes on television.  So it would have been five [o'clock] or so.  But you had to be back before then, and you had to, of course, have permission to go.  Everybody had to have permission to go.  So you couldn't just go and hang out 'cause, you know, your folks had to know exactly where you were and who you were going to see.
Story_ID: 624809
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and which one, what denomination, did you attend a Methodist church?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My sister [Vassie V. King] attended a Methodist church.  When I was coming along, there was a woman in particular.  I've forgot.  Her husband had been a fairly prominent member of the community and he passed away.  So she lived alone, so my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] would allow me to be like her, this woman's, shared child.  And she was a Seventh-day Adventist.  So I would go to church with her on Saturdays, and then on Sundays I would go to a Baptist church 'cause my mother was Baptist through marriage, but raised a Methodist.  So we almost have like a reverse, my sister, the staunch Methodist, went to a Baptist college.  I grew up mostly going to the Baptist church, but went to a Methodist college [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] in the end.  But growing up, I went primarily to the Seventh-day Adventist church just about every Saturday.  And then on Sunday, I went to the oldest black Baptist church [Bethlehem First Baptist Church, Tyler, Texas].
Speaker 1: Now, did you look forward to going to a Seventh-day Adventist church on Saturday?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's surprising because just thinking of the nature, most kids, they probably wouldn't wanna be in church on a Saturday, but what was it like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they had very pretty women there, and it was--
Speaker 1: Oh, this is later now.  I mean did you notice that while--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in late middle school when it occurred, but I think I was in probably of exposure to my sister's college materials, I had lots of question about religion, and particularly, as I got probably a little bit older, questions about religion and the salvation of black people because the Baptist church where I went was very class based.  You know, it was purely, probably in today's term, would be probably upper middle class because we had harps, violins, violas, and things of that sort.  But when I got probably to the early part of high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] and went to other churches with my classmates, I saw that it was very different.  So the Seventh-day Adventist church was a different kind of experience than my Baptist experience.  The way they dressed was more conservative, but they seemed to be more, at the time, more kind of mission driven to not stay insular.  And what I mean by that, they seemed to do a few more things with the communities, but it was clearly more conservative.  But I think because of the woman that I would go with, we had a very good relationship.  So it would have been like, I had my mother.  And this woman was kind of like having my grandmother.  So, but we would always talk as we'd ride over, and it was a very positive experience.  Now, as I got older, when you start reaching the high school level, of course, I didn't go as frequently 'cause later on she was too infirmed to go.
Speaker 1: Now, the SDA I know has a reputation of being very, at least nowadays, I don't know what it was like then, but being diverse.  And I know their college up in Michigan, St. Andrews [sic. Andrews University, Berrien Springs, Michigan], I think--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --has a very diverse group of students working in their market.  And, you know, the vegetarians, or a lot of them are.  Now, what was the church like that you attended?  Was it a mixed race?
Speaker 2: No, because this is racially segregated at the time.  It would have been primarily the more conservative members of the African American community 'cause this is in a different section of town.  This is over in the north side of town where most of the African Americans lived.  Where we lived, there were not as many African Americans.  It was a much sparser community and more or less, I would say probably middle class to upper middle class.  So it would not have been diverse in respect to race and ethnicity.  That happened later on, probably after I was out of high school and would go back, you would see more of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the north side of Tyler [Texas], would you say it was more, it was organized as a black community and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was very organized.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the people that attended the SDA there, were they the prominent, the more prominent citizens?
Speaker 2: No, they were not.  The more prominent people would have been Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and then there would be a group that belonged to the more, what they call the elite black Baptist church and the Methodist church.  So it was, what I'm saying, it was kind of class based.  And if I'm not mistaken, I think our Baptist church in my neighborhood was the first brick one built west of the Mississippi.  So it was a very class based, you know, no shouting or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 624810
Speaker 1: Now, we were saying off camera that you were sort of a youth leader at the Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think one of the things, you know, keep in mind, this is a period of segregation, that there was a lot of leadership skill building at the church where I attended primarily, the Bethlehem First Baptist Church [Tyler, Texas].  We had a scouts group, so we were, I was pretty active in that.  We also had a baseball team.  And, but the youth had their own leadership, and I was, I guess, like a president of the youth.  So you actually got a chance to represent the youth voice and some decision making about the church.  And then most of us would have been in the choir.  So I think what it actually taught us, beyond the kind of leadership skills that you get in school, in church, you ended up speaking out to the congregation and you had to make decisions and do planning, things of that particular nature, under segregation.  So you came out with fairly strong issues about self-confidence, about what you could do, about the ability to articulate your belief systems and things of that sort.  I could see over time that changed kind of dramatically because at that time, that would have been aligned with your experiences in school.  So many people who were youth leaders in church, in the Baptist church, there was what they called a Baptist encampment.  So during the summers, it would have been youth coming from other town, and, you know, in the same general area, their leaders.  So we'd been all placed together, males and females, in terms of leadership.  So it was a case where then you would see these people every year.  Then you go on to college and then sometimes you would see people after that.  But that was a conscious effort on the part of the church.  And just like for the scouts, we went from Cub Scouts to, and then we went into the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and then you had up to Explorer and things of that particular nature.
Story_ID: 624811
Speaker 1: What was your first school, your grade school?
Speaker 2: It was W.A. Peete Elementary School.
Speaker 1: W.A. Peete, and that's--
Speaker 2: P-E-E-T-E.
Speaker 1: P-E-E-T-E (simultaneous).  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in Tyler [Texas].
Speaker 1: All right, and so did you go to kindergarten in your school?
Speaker 2: No, no.  They didn't have, I didn't go to kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had first grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were there through?
Speaker 2: Through what they call now, junior--well, that's the elementary school, and then down the hill, it would have been what they call W.A. Peete Intermediate School [ph.], but it'd be what they call today, junior high.  So that would have been seventh and eighth grade, I believe, because you played junior high sports.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the first one was one to--grades one to six--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then seventh and eighth at W.A. Peete Intermediate?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then it became junior high.
Speaker 1: Well, what were you interested in, in school?
Speaker 2: Primarily art.  I had a talent for that, and I guess--
Speaker 1: So you could draw like--
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think because of the kind of entrepreneurial spirit of my family, particularly, my maternal side, I actually developed a business in fifth or sixth grade.  At the time, their teachers had, they didn't use stencils a lot.  They, for the fancier boards, they had cut out letters.  So what I began to do probably from, maybe around the fourth or fifth grade, they had contests, at that time, Smokey the Bear contests, for posters.  And so I won a lot of those and developed a skill on cutting letters out and designing bulletin boards.  And then--
Speaker 1: And you could, I mean the teachers would actually buy your letters?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would, what I would do, they would maybe not have very good artistic skills.  So we would actually sit together and this is what they wanted.  So basically, during the summers and for holiday periods, they would pay me to do this.  So I might do a board on Thanksgiving with, you know, turkey and all that stuff.  And then there might be another one that I did for the opening of schools.  So probably from the, maybe the fourth or fifth grade--I mean I kept getting better, and so I would design this for a few of the teachers.  And they would tell me what they want.  Then I would, they would get the construction papers for me, and I would do that.  So I got paid for that up through I finished middle school--junior high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a thing to happen, and that's, that sounds interesting.  Okay, so, okay, now, so you were an artist.  Now, were you good in reading and math and that sort of thing too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that happened around, I can't remember, around the sixth grade you end up taking a test.  You know, at the time I didn't realize, of course, that this was a test to begin to sort you into so called smart kids and others.  So when I went from elementary school, still liked the reading and writing and math and all that stuff and art, and fortunately, that school system required that you engage in physical ed [physical education] activities.  You engaged in music.  So it was kind of a requirement to, and we had these flutophones.  I think I must have been in maybe the seventh, sixth or seventh grade.  I can't remember.  So you played in an orchestra.  And then, you know, the better you were, you went from maybe a fourth chair to second or first chair, depending on how you good--did.  And so you can imagine that regardless of your family wealth, you had to purchase these flutophones.  And I can remember to this day, they were white with burgundy colors which also tend to be our school colors later on.  And that I think the value during that particular time was kind of no matter what your class background was, you picked up, you learned to read some music about notes, but also some music appreciation.  And so I guess was pretty good with that instrument.  But I think that, so that kind of brought me up to my first year in junior high.
Story_ID: 624812
Speaker 1: Now, did you have, were there any teachers that were particularly interested in your development or any mentors in grade school [W.A. Peete Elementary School, Tyler, Texas] now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yeah, I think especially in elementary school because she was a young, pretty woman I remember named Mrs. Palmer [ph.].  And I think for a lot of kids, particularly, the boys, and you had these, you know, mistaken crushes.  So you would work a little bit harder to be impressive.  And I know for Mrs. Palmer, doing the artwork, was one.  So she's the teacher probably that stands out the most.  She was very encouraging and very, I think because of her youthfulness and coming out of school, she was much more progressive in the, in those kind of elementary levels.  And it was a different group at the junior high level [at W.A. Peete Intermediate School (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, now at the junior high level, what teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a pretty good situation.  By that time, I was being recruited more and more into sports.  So there was the phys ed [physical education] teacher, was a fellow by the name of Mr. Clewell.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I think it was C-L-E-W-E-L-L.  Clewis, no, it's C-L-E-W-I-S, Clewis, 'cause I remember it was a kind of an odd name at the time.  And especially in, I would say in athletics, 'cause by that time, I was still a skinny kid but I was maybe 5'8".  So he kind of encouraged my, probably athletic development, particularly for track 'cause I was still playing, you know, through, as a scout, on the baseball team [at Bethlehem First Baptist Church, Tyler, Texas].  Then there was a woman who was extraordinary--some I found were more extraordinary after I got on up.  So there was a woman who, by the name of Williams [ph.], never married, was very well dedicated to her profession.  She taught social studies.  And a lot of kids didn't take some things seriously, but again, because I had this influence with my sister's cultural books.  So that kind of stuck with me.  So I was always interested in other cultures and to this day I am.  So Mrs. Williams taught social studies or world, kind of like world history basis.  And she did something that was very unique at the time.  When we studied China, we ate Chinese food and used chopsticks.  And so, I learned to use chopsticks.  A lot of kids, you know, went through the exercise, but they never learned to use it.  When we got to Eastern Europe, there was Hungary.  We ate foods.  So the basic deal was she made the studies kind of come alive so that sometimes you would dress up for the part if we discussed, just say, Mexican history, you know, you would have--and some of these things were made out of paper.  The idea was to what we call now immersion.  That's what she was doing then.  And it's still kind of, I guess at that time, an interest in learning about the cultures and that people across the globe might be different, but I understood very early through her teachings that what we had in common was humanity.  And so it had a profound, probably impact on me in terms of seeing all people as equal.
Story_ID: 624813
Speaker 1: And I would say the other person was, he was my basketball coach.  I would say he probably didn't have any intellectual influence--well, I take that back.  He also taught biology, and he was very, very strict, that you not only had to know the biology, you had to be able to spell the words, like the scientific words.  I just remembered, you know, (unclear), (unclear) and to this day, you had to stand in the line and spell.  Unfortunately, what he did, had a little ruler so that when people didn't spell it, you, you'd get a little whack on the palm of their hand.  That, I felt was not an effective way of learning, but one thing that did come out of that, that if you paid attention, you did know the nomenclature for biology.  And I would say that there was a person who probably in general, I think the teachers were very strong.  There were some who had the negative effect, that they probably should not have been there.  Well, that's true of any school, but I think for most of us, particularly who went on to school, there are always teachers you can point out.  And those were some that had, I think, a profound impact.  I think in particular, kids who may not have been the most invigorated intellectually, those were the type of teachers who could kind of bring that out of kids within their own abilities.  And I think we had a number of teachers like that.  And one of the things, because of segregation, you had teachers who were highly educated at that time.  So they knew a lot of work, and so I think for probably, for junior high [W.A. Peete Intermediate School (ph.)], we had a pretty princi- assistant principal.  I just remembered him, Mr. Winters [ph.], and a person who was not a teacher, but had a profound impact, I think on a lot of us, was the janitor because he consistently said to all of the boys, "Get your education so you don't have to do what I'm doing."  And he did that on a regular basis of encouraging--
Speaker 2: What was the janitor's name?  Can you remember?
Speaker 1: I can't remember his name at the moment.  I mean I can see the guy, but I can't offhand remember it.
Story_ID: 624814
Speaker 1: So, was it, you'd generally say the atmosphere is that people encouraged youth to seek education and take school seriously?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I think also because that was during the first stage of sorting.  Some kids were, so we were actually being tracked at that point.  That just wasn't what they called it.  It was called like Beta group and so that group was, I would say probably, advantaged in terms of some curricular experiences.  And for sports, that was the first time that the school [W.A. Peete Intermediate School (ph.)] had a team.  It was basketball.  So there was only one other junior high that traditionally, that's where everybody played sports.  So now, we're the emergent junior high with a basketball team.  And we did, so I would have been in that first cohort and we did extraordinarily well for a new team.  And I think that out of that, that probably was a positive thing.  But then with Mr. Clewis developing our athletic ability, well our physical education, I thought that was very good because we had activity to try to embrace everybody, whether it was volleyball, whether it was dodge ball, whether it was track, whether it was softball, whether it was football, because that was still a very macho culture where no matter what size you were, you were kind of expected to be tough.  And that had its downsides later on, I think, by high school when people got injured.
Speaker 1: So they took it a little too far.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 624815
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school at Emmett J. Scott [Emmett J. Scott High School], named after the secretary for Booker T. Washington.  And that was nine through twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: And that's in Tyler [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went from--all my education was in Tyler.
Speaker 1: So, who was the principal of that high school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Asa G. Hilliard [Asa Grant Hilliard II].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had, one of his sons was one of the cofounders of the Association of Black Psychologists [sic.].  I think all of his sons have passed away now.  One was Asa Hilliard, who was very prominent in Afrocentric education and Egyptology.  He passed, what, three or four years ago maybe--
Speaker 1: He's the same one that founded the Association of Black Psychologists, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: --the very same one.
Speaker 2: And he had a brother [Thomas O. Hilliard] who founded, who was there with him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Asa G. Hilliard III [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III], we've interviewed him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, that was my principal's son through the first marriage because, we--the second marriage, we attended the same church [Bethlehem First Baptist Church, Tyler, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so Asa G. Hilliard is principal--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so who were some of the teachers there and personalities there that--
Speaker 2: I would probably say that because making the transition from one part of town to another was very interesting because remember that these folks who lived on that side of town would be our competitors, particularly in sports.  And I think that, again, you already had this cut where that you were gonna be in this accelerated group or not.  And I would say that going to high school, the group that came out of the, that kind of Beta group or whatever you wanna call the group, was already fairly advanced intellectually.  And so I would say probably in high school, there were a number of teachers who stood out.  And again, because of racial segregation, at the high school, I would say probably, the vast majority of the teachers had graduate degrees.  Now, it desegregated my senior year. So some people actually left.  So I would say there, there was a person who taught algebra, but he was also one of my football coaches, Louis [ph.] was his name.  So he was a very prominent high school algebra teacher.  There was another person who, I would say probably on the academic side, was my art teacher.  She was married to the assistant principal.  So I kind of continued the art.  Now, of course there was no--I did some bulletin boards, but I was kind of graduated to the point where I was actually doing some oil paintings and some sculpture and things of that particular nature.  And then I would say that my English teacher probably had a very profound impact.  There were two of them, both of whom are deceased now.  My homeroom teacher was Mrs. Shepard, and if you watch, I guess it used to be, what is this thing about Harlem [New York, New York], what's the name of the club, where they have the contests.  Kiki Shepard is on there.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Apollo ['Showtime at the Apollo']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's her daughter.  That was her youngest daughter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And we all went to the same church.  And so she was homeroom teacher, but she also taught English.  And there was a woman by the name of Raze, R-A-Z-E who was, probably as an English teacher, had a profound impact.  And then there was another woman by the name of Wilson [ph.] who taught English, had extraordinary impact 'cause I liked what they did.  We learned to write in Negro dialect, Shakespearian style, 'cause we had to come up with own stories like that, using that.
Speaker 1: So they would have you write in dialect and in Shakespearian?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then there was Old English, basically was part of the Shakespearian style.  These were teachers that, who were very progressive, but like I said, because they were so well educated, that at the time, they would not have typically been at that school in a different time in the South.  And as soon as desegregation happened, those teachers were plucked up to go to the predominately--to go to the desegregated schools.
Story_ID: 624816
Speaker 1: And there was another one, I would say--I'm trying to think back.  He was a coach and civics who was very good.  So in a sense I was very fortunate that my head football coach [at Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], and I guess he would have been something like the athletic director, had a master's in mathematics.  The position coach, Louis [ph.], had a master's in mathematics.  One of the other, the line coach was a master's in physics.  The, one coach had a master's in civics.  The other one had a master's in social science.  So it was very unusual 'cause none had any kind of background in physical ed [physical education].  They had all academic subjects.  But I think the other thing that ended up happening is that the Texas culture, as I mentioned before, is very, I don't know, macho.  And so even at that time, it was seen as being incompatible with being smart and also being good in athletics.  And so I remember one experience that I'd purposely kind of dumb it down in English, and I made a B.  And the, and in those days, the teachers had a lot of influence.  So my teacher called my home, and so that didn't go over well.  So that never happened again.
Speaker 2: So you purposely tried to dumb yourself down a little bit (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, because I was on the football team, and I just remembered that the other guys were not doing well in the class.  I would try to, you know, tutor, I guess what they call tutoring now.  But in those days, they would kind of call your grades out so, especially if you made high scores.  So they would like the, the first, the A.  But they wouldn't call out, just say if someone made a D or an F.  And being a male, there were not a whole of us who were achieving at the very high level.  But it took one telephone call and that was the end of that.  I went back to my regular performance in English.  But what I'm saying is that there were just a lot of, when you have macho cultures, at that time, a lot of the focus was on your physical prowess, not necessarily your intellectual prowess and that there were a number of us who were on the team, well, not a number of us.  There were some of us on the team who were good students, and during the time, 'cause I played multiple sports.  I went from football to basketball and then in the spring, you had to choose either track or baseball.  You couldn't play both.  So I did track in the spring, baseball during the summer.  So, in a sense it forced me to be--how to manage time because you had to keep up your academics as well.  And in my case, my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] wasn't a big fan particularly, of football.  But I was allowed to play if I kept my grades up.
Story_ID: 624817
Speaker 1: And I guess, the other thing going through high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], a number of us, males and females, we were very close.  So I never developed, I guess, like a sexist kind of attitude because for growing up in my neighborhood, we basically made no distinction between what the girls could do versus what the boys could do.  We knew we had some segregated activities.  But it was never that the girls couldn't do this or couldn't do that.  So in high school, it was never a case where that we all kind of worked together, and even as we got advanced in high school, we had the period of dating.  And we didn't know at the time, we were pretty equitable.  So it would be what they called Dutch dating.  And the guys would still buy the corsage for, corsages for the dances.  But when we went out to eat somewhere or go to the movies, it was, you know, you rotated, whoever had some money or, you know, you might pay this time.  And I think that was probably, served me well because my family was like that.  There was no distinctions of what, I guess, the way I was raised, my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] never instilled that men or boys only do this and girls do that.  So in high school, that was kind of reinforced.  So even to this day, we're still, my high school classmates, we're still like that.  And I would say probably coming out of there, you develop leadership skills as well.  So speaking and doing things like that, as an athlete was, it gave some balance.  So in a sense, you know, to put things in perspective 'cause during that period, there would be guys who would come and play football, and then when the season was over, they'd drop out of school.  And they would come back the next year, 'cause you have to understand, in a culture like that that's very macho, the focus was on attention for being a man.  And so it was easy to develop sexist attitudes if you didn't watch it because one of the issues for playing is for the attention from the females.  But it was also the thing that guys typically didn't necessarily focus on academics.  But there were a group of guys who did and people did very well 'cause it was a very good academic high school.  So you had the men and women who were in like this Beta group or privileged group intellectually, were all college bound.  So one of the things I thought that was very helpful, but later on, I saw how you could be disadvantaged because there was no reason, no matter where you went to college, you should have exceeded because--succeeded because our classes were college bound classes.  So I even had, took note hand, typing and all of that.
Story_ID: 624818
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], we were just saying off camera what a--it seemed like it was a very rich educational model for black schools in Texas.  We've talked to a number of people from Houston [Texas] and other places, and they seem to have a similar story about the teachers having advanced degrees and really making an extra effort to deal with the students.  Now, you said earlier, you said that you had a, when you went to the SDA [Seventh-day Adventist] meetings and that sort of thing, you had sort of, and your exposure, you know, reading your sister's books, you questioned things other people didn't question--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you seemed to look--well, what were some of those things, and did you have a sense of, or do you see it, as you look back on it now, do you see the early awakenings of a social scientist?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I saw more of an awakening of scientific principles that undergird social sciences as well as other sciences, that people could just make statements without being questioned.  And I think, I kind of learned from reading my sister's books later on, but then the way she would read some things to me, and I knew that there was the characterizations of black people being inferior in some of those early scientific writings, and that I knew that inherently in some of the things that I was, been read to me and then later on I read myself from her books, there was these contradictions because I knew early on the kind of origin of human species.  I mean I was still a young kid, but some things weren't making sense.  And so I think that kind of questioning of things that didn't seem logical to me was the basis of things starting.
Story_ID: 624819
Speaker 1: So even with religion, it was very, there were questions that I had that particularly, early on, in a racially segregated society, and the tenets of Christianity have been kind of embracing and this beloved kind of community.  Some things were not lining up of what people said and what they did.
Speaker 2: For example?
Speaker 1: I would say that one, that there was a notion about the, what some people might refer as the beloved community to treat and value all human beings.  And yet I could see among even some church people, there was stratification.  Some people were more privileged in the church than others.  And I remember very vividly when I was president of the youth group [at Bethlehem First Baptist Church, Tyler, Texas], we had been, you know, told repeatedly that we had voice.  And I remember that the church made the, the church made a decision, the deacons did.  And we, in the youth department, felt that that decision was not in the best interest of the church.  And plus, we were the next generation, and that when we spoke out, it was though our voices were then dismissed and that of our director.  But this was incompatible with having told us all along that the church values all of its members, and yet it became a clear issue that adulthood, as defined there in the decision making process was incompatible with the Christian instruction that we received.  There were also other issues.  I think because we brought it to the--it was my responsibility as a youth leader to bring this open, that on the one hand you said this, but on the other hand, this is not, seem to be lining up.  And that if you're saying that in a Christian community, we all have voice to speak on certain principles that are for the benefit of the church community, that now we're saying that age does matter with that.  But you never said anything about this before.  I think the other one about forgiveness and yet you would find, just say if the minister made a mistake, more or less a managerial mistake, that was not typically forgiven because in that particular Baptist realm, you just get another minister.  So then there were other issues I think as you, as I kind of went on I went to read works more critically.  So there is the reading of stuff and just kind of accepting it, but I think my early experience with my sister's writings and then my own inquisitiveness 'cause I always had questions about why this was like that and that really helped me, not to just accept something without some scrutiny.  So I guess, and the bottom line was, kind of skepticism that, kind of intellectual skepticism.  If it wasn't making logical sense, then I had to raise questions to kind of resolve that.  That's what I was saying, (unclear) it was something I think was very helpful, and particularly, in my academic studies later on.  And fortunately, I had teachers in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] and in middle school who encouraged that kind of thinking more critically because otherwise, it'd been more of a passive learning and you just accept it because it was in the book.  That's what I was talking about.
Story_ID: 624820
Speaker 1: Oh what pos- I didn't ever ask you, what positions did you play in these sports?  What position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Football, I played defensive back, and what they now call wide receiver, and then in basketball I played forward because even though I was what, 5'11", I could jump and in track, I ran middle distance because at that time, most of the guys wanted to run sprint.  So I was allowed to run sprints in practice, but we needed someone to run 400, what they call 400 metres and 800 metres.  It was called 440 yard dash then, and well, it used to, started off being 440 yard run, and then it was the 880 run.  And I would run the mile sometimes in practice to give the people who ran the mile, to help develop them.  And so I ended up making All-American in track.  And then in baseball, I played outfield and catcher and pitcher.  So I discovered I think that track, in particular, is a very smart thinking sport because you end, even if you're on a relay team, you're exposed individually in terms of your performance.  So, you know, you could drop a baton and that would be either your fault or the person who is receiving it.  But I think what it did early on because of these kind of intellectual experiences, I learned that it was not how fast you were, but how smart you were in distance running, middle distance running in particular because you could be fast as I don't know what and you tactically make a mistake by either sprinting too early.  So I could see early on that it was smart, but having coaches who were smart made you think because in football we had guys who were extraordinarily good [at Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], but sometimes their ability to think meant that we couldn't run certain complicated play.  And this time in Texas, since football was the king of everything, we ran pro set offense in high school in 19--in the 1960s which you think about it, we had cross blocking.  We had, these were techniques that were being used by professional players at the time.
Story_ID: 624821
Speaker 1: Well, there was a wealth of professionals that came out of Texas I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --around the early '60s [1960s], and with the development of the American Football League--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --the amount of, a lot of, oh, who was, out of the Beaumont [Texas] area especially--
Speaker 2: Right, and Galveston [Texas].  But you also had, because of college segregation, a lot of them played at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  And there was also a migratory pattern from Tyler [Texas] to Los Angeles [California].  There was actually one area of Los Angeles where a lot of the people, the business people who were black were from my hometown.
Speaker 1: What area was it there?
Speaker 2: I don't know what area of L.A., but they were, a number of them who ended up, and they grew up Tyler, started in Tyler, and then they moved there, and some of them played for USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], and I think one of the guys who was in track did that as well.  We had an Olympian, Robert Taylor, who came after I did, but when I was there, I had a, there was a colleague, Donald Butler [ph.], who was a year or two ahead of me.  I think the two of us together, we won more medals than in entire previous history of the school.  But he was very, very smart.  And so I think what you had was a number of athletes who were gifted, but unfortunately, because of some of the macho stuff, they didn't have the academics to go on to college.  So at the schools that were much larger like Galveston, Beaumont, Houston [Texas], Dallas [Texas], you had some of that, but now, see, it's a different story, where there's several students, when Earl Campbell came along.  I played with his brother, but things had changed.  So when Earl Campbell came along, he went to a desegregated high school there, but from that cohort on, a lot of people went to the pros.
Speaker 1: I keep wanting to ask you, are you related to Preston Pearson, the--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I don't think so.  It could be, but I don't--
Speaker 1: He played for the Dallas Cowboys--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, played receiver, yeah.
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, yeah, it takes a lot of stamina to run that 440 [440 yard dash] and 800 [800 metres].  I know you do have to be smart--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to do it.
Story_ID: 624822
Speaker 1: Now what other activities you, were you involved in in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas]?  Did you run class office or--
Speaker 2: I--for high school, I was what, the campaign manager but also I was on the, I think school newspaper, and I'm trying to think because I was engaged in a different kind of extracurricular things there.  But I remember that the newspaper, I was class officer.  So it's one of those cases that I think because of popularity, 'cause I was elected most popular, that because of my own upbringing, I interacted with people from as they say, across the tracks on all sides.  That's when I think the equity part, I never saw a difference between people who were from this side of town or from this type of family.  So I was able to embrace just about everybody.  And so we had what, one openly gay person in our class and a couple who were not, but that person is a vital part of our class.  And to this day, he is--and there was a woman who was a lesbian.  They were openly accepted by most of us, and certainly, at that time, that was kind of unusual.  So in some ways, I guess we were, as a group, that is, just this small group, and certainly there were some elitism too because there were some groups that didn't interact with the so called masses.  But I think the value of the overall experience is that when you interacted with all the different groups, you learned that people were basically the same.  And I had kind of learned early on from leadership development that you can't run organizations or clubs without having the input and the value for everybody's contribution because not everybody can contribute at this level, but they can at this level.  So I think that that was very helpful.  In playing sports, you knew that some people may be good at running, some may be good at blocking.  There'd be some who were good on defense but not offense.  But without all of them, it didn't work.  And so in a sense, a type of discipline, but I think a type of respect for what each person contributes.  That was probably very helpful, I think, in developing not only my own character, because I think for knowing that hard work can get you some places, but I think my experiences there showed that you could be the best, for example, in a particular sport or a particular activity, but it didn't mean that you would necessarily get the opportunity to start or to be part of that.  I was also a thespian.  So I kind of learned that it's just not how good you are sometimes because sometimes if the person making the decision was biased towards that or in favor of another person, even in athletics--I don't think it really happened that much in high school, but I did know that this person may be better than the person who got the gig.  But I think I had enough sophistication to know that that's part of life, but you still have to achieve in spite of that.  I think that that just really helped me.  And that goes back to some of the teachers who were beyond teachers, but they were mentors, because otherwise you could have let the fact of segregation or racism stand in the way of being academically motivated 'cause you had to have some idea, I think coming out of high school and being involved in sports, I ended up with a very strong consciousness.  You had to evaluate yourself, and if you were not good in this, you needed to work on improving that, but I knew that self-evaluation was a pretty tough thing.  But if you ever wanted to be the best or among the best, you had to realistically assess your own inabilities.  And for me that was, whether that was writing, whether it was verbal, whatever it was, I think that was a very helpful platform.
Story_ID: 624823
Speaker 1: When you're a senior, what are your career aspirations?  What are you--are you thinking about a career or what do you think you're gonna--I suppose you know you're going to college, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, that was kind of always, you know, even, and there was just never a doubt about that.  So, you know, I didn't necessarily know about the finances.  I mean I knew the finances would come--I didn't know as much detail about the money at that time.  I knew that that wasn't gonna be an issue.  So it was a matter of where I would go and what I would pursue.  And I think that because I had some abilities that other people saw at my school, there were these issues about what, because there were people who, kind of outside of my family, like these would have been kind of mentors and other people, including classmates, wanted me to go be a lawyer.  And there were some because I, you know, engaged in a lot of speaking stuff, to be a minister.  And then there were others who, about physicians.  But somehow, and I don't know all the details about it, so I had a chance to go to school on an art scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Wiley was something that, I'm not sure whether, it was not a conscious thing, but in some ways, I guess maybe it was because I had considered three or four other schools.  One was for athletics, one was for art.  And somehow or another I learned that they had some of these--well, I guess before then, I decided that I wanted to be a researcher.  But I wanted to make change, but social change.  And somehow or another I found out that in sociology, they did that, and economics could do that.  So that, in a sense, had some connections with Wiley because they had Vattel Daniels [sic. Vattel Daniel], who I didn't know anything about sociology, quite frankly, and nobody else basically did because they knew, you know, psychology and a few other things.  But then, I knew that Vattel Daniels was a very prominent sociologist who finished from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I believe.  And he was at Wiley and that his wife [Maggie Browne Daniel] was a very prominent professor of the humanities.  And because--so basically, that's the reason why I ended up going there.  Unfortunately, you know, he was no longer alive by the time I got there.  And then the other thing it was within sixty miles of my hometown, because a lot of people from my high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] went to Prairie View A and M [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and there were a few who went other places.  So I think it was myself and I think there were two females from my high school that went to Wiley.
Story_ID: 624824
Speaker 1: Did you know anything about James Farmer at the time, that he as a--he, they have, the March on Washington had occurred, I guess your junior year--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas].  Did you pay attention to that?  I mean were you focused on that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes yeah, I was very, there were a group of us, and I, in particular, was pretty engaged and attentive to civil rights issues.  And so while I knew the history Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] in terms of some of the people that went on to become engaged in the Civil Rights Movement, but knowing like details, I did not because I was more focused on the fact that Dr. Daniels [sic. Vattel Daniel] was there and his wife [Maggie Browne Daniel].  And I knew that it had a good reputation.  I knew it was expensive, but I knew it was also small enough where I would get the kind of attention that I would, that I wanted.  And by that time, I had made some decision, I was not going to follow the athletic route formally.  So that's what kind of pulled there.  And in the end, I would say that it probably was a good decision in terms of the experience that I had there.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it well known that James Farmer went to Wiley when you--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was wondering if it (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not only he, but Tolson, the poet--
Speaker 1: Melvin Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson].
Speaker 2: --there, at the time, see, you would have had a lot of probably middle class, upper middle class blacks going to Wiley, a lot of whom were from Chicago [Illinois] families, Detroit [Michigan], because they sent the kids back south.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And these would have been people who were in the Midwest and other areas, who were professionals, you know, whether they were dentists, physicians, lawyers.  That was very common at the time.
Story_ID: 624825
Speaker 1: Tell us about Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?  What was, what was it like and, you know, did you like the campus?  Had you ever been there before?
Speaker 2: No, I had not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, never had visited.  It was kind of an interesting place 'cause I knew the two women from my hometown [Tyler, Texas], and there were a couple of other guys I knew who were going; small campus, had a unique experience there.  And this is a historically black college [historically black colleges and universities], but in sociology, it was different.  Half of the students in sociology were white.  And at the time, I think we had one black professor.  He was not a Ph.D. person, I think, who taught--and the reason for that, is that there was a predominantly white college across town called East Texas Baptist [East Texas Baptist College; East Texas Baptist University, Marshall, Texas], but Wiley had the better department of sociology.  There was another kind of unique thing there when I came.  There was one white professor from Centenary College in Shreveport [Centenary College of Louisiana, Shreveport, Louisiana] who taught special courses.  And I'm not sure whether it was an experiment or whatever happened during that particular period, but the time that I was there, they had these professors from other colleges and universities that would come in and teach special courses.  So there was a fellow by the name of Malone [ph.] who was from, I think Southern Methodist [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas], I can't remember exactly.  And then there was Dr. Pledger [W.F. Pledger] from Centenary.  There was another, no, I think the other guy was from North Texas State [North Texas State University; University of North Texas, Denton, Texas].  Then there was a--so these are all white professors who came in, sometimes taught Saturday classes or taught a class maybe on Tuesday or something like that.  And they were specialized courses.  So some of the students thought they were too challenging, but I took every class that they had because of the rigor.  And it was kind of an odd thing to have, at an HBCU, where it was, that part was totally integrated.  And what Dr. Pledger did, he was a very progressive person at the time, got into a lot of trouble with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and people who were staunch racists.  So you could imagine what 1967, '68 [1968], that he sent us all into the research field, black and white teams, to conduct surveys--
Speaker 1: In the surrounding area?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and he was from Shreveport [Louisiana].  And this is in East Texas that, in the Marshall [Texas] area that was still very segregated.  And so I think that that particular experience--he was a very, very challenging guy and that he saw that if you had talent, he promoted, mentored, gave you good feedback.  So I think with him, he eventually wanted me to come, after I got my doctorate, to replace him at Centenary.  Of course, obviously, I didn't end up doing that, but it did have a profound impact.
Story_ID: 624826
Speaker 1: But I think the other thing there, that Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] had a very diverse faculty, extraordinarily diverse for its size.  My principal mentor was from the Philippines, Dr. Bonito [ph.], who was both a Baptist minister and a sociologist.  There was another person who did most of my economics, Prakash [ph.] was from Pakistan.  I had, in English, my, I guess my, I would say my advanced grammar courses were taught by a guy from Egypt.  My French was taught by a guy from Hungary, Karasa [ph.].  And, but there were also a number of international students, most of whom were from eastern Nigeria.  They were Biafras (unclear).  And then there were other student who were from--
Speaker 2: This is in, these are Ibo from Biafra was a part of Nigeria that tried to secede--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and there was a war, a genocidal war going on  during the time--
Speaker 1: It didn't come out well for them, right. Well, my, the dean of the college was Enjacuo [ph.], who was from a very prominent family, Ibo family in Nigeria.  He was the dean.  Now, Tom Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole]--
Speaker 2: What was his name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Enjacuo.
Speaker 2: I mean the dean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was his name.  He was named Enjacuo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Enjacuo.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Enjacuos were a very prominent family over there, and I think they had a small college.  He later left Wiley to go to Rust College, R-U-S-T, in Mississippi [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  So I kind of lost contact with him.  But then there was another person who I took all of my religious studies courses with, Inez Jenkins.  She just passed away a few years back.  She was a very, very bright woman who came there from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] but always had a very strong, black perspective.  She was a woman of Creole descent, and so it often threw people off when they saw her physical appearance, and that she was deeply, some people would even say militantly black.
Speaker 2: So she was very fair skinned woman (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a gifted person in theology.  She I think studying with her had a profound effect because I was able to, you know, to learn a lot about world religions and the tenets of world religions in that there were basically a lot of similarities and that it's when we get into this issue about one denomination or one faith being better than the others.  And there was another person who taught philosophy and logic there.  So I would say that, you not only had those kind of profound teachers, but I think, in particular, having this mixture of white students and black students, and the fact that they, we became very good colleagues.
Story_ID: 624827
Speaker 1: And the fact of the rigor of those courses that I took from people outside of the university, and you know, 'cause I had one course, it was on Saturday morning.  And when you've had your, your dances and all that stuff on Friday, Friday night.  And then you had an eight o'clock logic, philosophy course, or one of the others, you had to be ready to roll, but I think the other thing there was, it was a 3.0 [grade point average] system.  So, you know, you got A, B and C.  And it was not a forgiving system in some ways 'cause if you didn't perform, you were basically gone.  So you would hear these trunks in the middle of the night sometimes, people heading to the bus station or somebody was picking them up.  But I think one of the things that happened is that the school was noted for sending people on to do extraordinarily well.  And as I was about to say that, Tom Cole, Jr. [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], who's the chemist, he used to be president of Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]; well, his father [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] was the president at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] at the time.  So there's been a number of prominent people from Wiley who had finished, but primarily in the sciences and a few of them in the humanities.  So I think my experience there kind of heightened my research interest 'cause I was, I did a, an undergraduate thesis when I was there on comparing the library holdings at three black institutions.  So that gave me some independent experience.  So I already, by coming out of there, I already knew how to write a thesis.  I knew how to develop hypothesis.  I had already taken statistics there.  I had, I was required to do a lot of writing of papers there, and economics, I had developed very strong economic skill sets on how to do analysis, but also to, I mean beyond the formula kind of stuff.  So I think in the end, it turns out to be a very positive experience, and I stay in contact with a lot of people from that particular period of my life.  But I, you know, and sometimes you realize that those opportunities like writing the thesis and--that was just uncommon.  I think I was one of the first students in I don't know how many years in the social sciences had ever written a thesis.  But then I could see when I got to grad school [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], it was, you know, no brainer 'cause I'd already done that.
Story_ID: 624828
Speaker 1: I was asking before, was there a sort of legacy at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] from the activities of James Farmer and Melvin Tolson [Melvin B. Tolson], that people were aware of there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think most of us were aware of the kind of deep history of Wiley, including that because Tolson had not been long gone from Wiley.  And in the humanities, that was part of the, I think not only the orientation, but part of just being there, you knew your, the culture history of Wiley.  And keep in mind that since it was a Methodist school, a lot of the people who came there were from Methodist jurisdictions or churches.  So they were already aware of the connection because in many cases churches sent and helped sponsor the family's children who went there.  So that was very clear from being a student that you had this tradition not only of civil rights, but also of academic achievement and professional achievement.  And for some of these cases, it kind of turned Wiley on itself because when I was there, we helped organize a protest.  This is around the death of MLK, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  So I would say that that was probably deeply held, but I think it began to wane some after I graduated.  And I think the issue about the kind of responsibility for perpetuating that culture of achievement and activism pretty well continued with some of us even afterwards.  But even there, that's when I mentioned Dr. Pledger's [W.F. Pledger] role, you keep in mind that here's this white professor, who was also an activist in the South, and he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell his name?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Pledger, I think it's P-L-E-D-G-E-R.
Speaker 1: Pledger, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I would say that was a very strong part of that, particularly, in sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for some of the people who were pretty prominent grads, they did come back, you know, either to speak or visit.  So you knew, for example, they had a strong tradition in chemistry.  So Henry McBay [Henry Cecil McBay], who was a very prominent chemist and who ended up at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and responsible for about forty something Ph.D.'s, African Americans.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: McAfee [Walter McAfee] in fiber optics.  So you knew your heritage, your cultural heritage.  And then there were some of us who were determined to fashion our own, you know, intellectual expertise and that happened as well.  People did, I would say, extraordinarily well.  So by the time I came along, you had, already had people who were in the industry.  There were a couple, one guy--one or two guys were already prominent industrial chemists.  There were a number of physicians.  So tradition mattered there.  And that was also a time wherein that, a lot of opportunities were coming about around 1968.  I, for example, ended up working for the [U.S.] Social Security Administration and then got drafted.
Story_ID: 624829
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any of the civil rights organizations on campus--
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: --any chapters of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember any particular.  I think I remember NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but I think during that particular time, a lot of the student organizations were very focused on civil rights issues, and in particular, there were people who were more in favor of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] philosophy, and there were others who were more aligned with Malcolm X's vision.  So--
Speaker 1: Were there any active member of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] on campus?
Speaker 2: I think by the time I came through, there were not because that would have been just before I got there.  So that was, that would have been pretty robust because they did have sit-ins.
Speaker 1: So they were there and moved on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, they actually had sit-ins, this is prior to my getting there because a lot of people were focused on Greensboro [North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what I understand--
Speaker 2: --but there were, that was already, had taken place in Marshall [Texas].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, that Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] students were the ones who actually--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--but the credit kind of went to the people in Greensboro.  They had already done that stuff because if you remember from Denzel Washington's film about the debaters ['The Great Debaters'], there was already a pretty robust activism there.  Now, you keep in mind that a number of the students who went there, you know, their parents were professionals and had other resources.  So they were not as vulnerable economically as some others.  But that had always been part of the rich culture there.  So by the time I got there, everybody pretty well knew that your commitment to civil rights, and as I said, we actually had, organized a protest and that I think mediated with the college president [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] at the time, and didn't have to really go through with it, about concessions.  But I would say that probably during that period of time, there was the issue about pride, militancy and a number of other things.  So it was not just things in the community.  We were also seeing ourselves as change agents, and as I said, that part of what kind of stimulated my intellectual pursuits was to be a change agent.  And some of the stuff I didn't quite understand at the time, but I knew, for example, that writing and having something that was research based or that was scientific based, that you use evidence to, and to measure change, was something I know that impacted me 'cause it wasn't about the salary or the income.  It was about social justice and change.  So I think there were a number of us on campus because some of my colleagues, you know, pursued kind of justice areas where there was, being a judge or being something else.  But that was part of the culture.  So it was not something that, you know, people had to remind us of because we knew our history.  We knew Wiley's role.  And so it was almost a part of the fabric of just being there.  We knew what the people had done prior to us.  We knew who they were--
Speaker 1: Was there a formal instruction on this or just part of the culture?
Speaker 2: No, it was part of the culture because you would have not only orientations, but you would have con- you know, church school, like that.  You had required things to attend.  So, we had a number of convocations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --we had events of speakers.  But even in--people would visit the campus, you know, former students.  And so there would be formal and informal things where you'd get a chance to meet with them informally.  And there were cases where they might visit the campus.  So you knew, for example, even though I wasn't in chemistry, I knew that Tom Cole, Jr. [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in chemistry.  I knew that that was one of the prominent departments of chemistry.  So there were prior things like that that were passed on to us.
Story_ID: 624830
Speaker 1: Yeah, there seems to be a real connection between the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.
Speaker 1: --the sociology strain, the Robert Parks [sic. Robert E. Park] strain (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you also, well, if you had, for example, considered that Henry McBay [Henry Cecil McBay] went to Chicago, and you got to keep in mind, I actually write on some of this stuff in some of my work, there were schools that were aligned with some of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  So there were like informal partnerships.  So people went to certain destinations, but by field, and particularly, from Wiley, but it would have been primarily chemistry because you had a number of people who were pre-medical.  And like I said, some of these folks who went to Wiley, their families were from Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], Ohio.  So when I was there, it was just a number of students who were there were from out of state, because in a private school, there's no difference in in state and out of state pay, you know, for tuition.  So, you know, it was kind of a situation where it's a Texas school, but you have these other people there.  But then, if you go back in history, you can see that their parents actually finished Wiley because in the North, it was equally segregated.  So many of the people who couldn't go to--they could go to a day school, just say at, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] or Chicago as undergrads, but not necessarily live on campus and things of that particular nature.  So it was that kind of mixture that was there too.  But I think the other thing you ended up with is that at a private school, that was fairly costly, 'cause keep in mind at the time, you could actually go to a public institution, regardless of whether it was predominantly white or black for about half the cost of going to Wiley.  And so you also had these particular loans that were available at that time.  But I think the fundamental thing that was there, is that you had this kind of academic culture where that people were smart, and they were going to go into different things.  It was not just going into just say public school teaching, some people did that.  But some went into non-academic careers, even within that geographic space.  They worked at chemical companies.  They worked as accountants in the area.  Some worked in banking.  It was at a transitional time, I think, particularly in the South.  But it was also nationally where that there were these more prominent opportunities because when I came along, if you were, belonged to a national honor society, you didn't, you got a waiver on part of the federal entrance exam.  But it was true not just for black, it was anyone if you had achieved like that.  And, but you also had these other kind of, I think, experiences there, where that you were required to take certain courses, as a liberal arts school.  So you couldn't dodge just say the sciences or math or the foreign languages.  You had to take it.  It was part of being a liberal studies student.  So humanities was required by the State of Texas.  Philosophy, logic so you came out being a very well rounded person and I think because of that you had the ability to do other types of work.
Story_ID: 624831
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965] Malcolm X is assassinated.  It's also the year that, I think Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] and Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] proclaim black power--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --on the Selma to Montgomery March.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that effect the thinking of--we were still Negroes then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so how did that effect the thinking of this, you say the people, there were many people that really thought about Malcolm X as a bigger model than Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that, you know, and especially at Wiley 'cause this has happened right after I finished high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], that the consciousness level, I would say that there were some of us more in the camp that if change was going to come, black people had to play a more instrumental role in that change.  You couldn't wait necessarily for somebody else to free you, and that there was probably, I think greater awareness and respect for Dr. King.  But at the same time, I think some of the tenets of Malcolm X, especially when people read more about him, not just the rhetoric, but his vision on inclusivity of people.  And I would say that probably for a lot of my classmates, the issue of our identity of being black and having the pride, Wiley was just--there was already a lot of pride at Wiley, so that was never like a separate kind of issue.  The school already had a history of not only activism and engagement, but we had a pretty clear identity of who we were.  We just happened to choose to go to a racially segregated institution.  We could have gone somewhere else.  But I think part of the other issue was a commitment to make some change.  So there was some responsibility.  So you might have had fraternities, sororities, clubs on campus that did stuff for the community.  So there was an engagement, but there was also, I think, a larger responsibility that people felt, something other than themselves.  So part of that was not only knowing something about you, but knowing something about your heritage.  So I think during that period a lot of reading of these different works, but I think it was also because, keep in mind, we had religious studies, we had philosophy.  So we had a pretty good grounding in not only how we fit in East Texas and the U.S., we had a larger grounding in many cases, those of us who took those courses, that justice and liberation was just not limited to us.  We were part of a broader community of people who had experiences of oppressions and limitations of your liberties.
Story_ID: 624832
Speaker 1: And so issues like liberation theology, for example, were covered under Mrs., Ms. Jenkins [Inez Jenkins].  I wouldn't have had that ordinarily.  So, you knew that the church was also an instrument of justice.  It wasn't just a belief system in Christianity or whatever it was.  I think the other part--
Speaker 2: Was that kind of a different philosophy than you were exposed to when you were living in Tyler [Texas]?
Speaker 1: Yes, in terms of the church because what happened when you actually study theology, it's not just this black and white issue because I read Tillich's [Paul Tillich] works, all the great works, the Cone brothers' [Cecil Wayne Cone and HistoryMaker James H. Cone] works.  So that was the first time being exposed to black theologians and very prominent white theologians, actually reading what they had to say about the interpretation of religious works, rather than just reading the religious works only.  You follow what I'm saying?  And so I think from that, and also taking philosophy and logic, it gave you a platform on how to think, but some students didn't take those courses.  I mean they would take the minimum.  But I think someone like myself, I probably took ec- and the social sciences may have been more of an unusual case because of my own personal interests but also the mentoring that I was getting on how to do empirical work because I was the only student writing a thesis and taking some of those.  So I would also have independent studies.  But I would say that probably in general we were challenged about our own thinking.  It was a true, kind of liberal arts education, and I think what happened, we also challenged each other because our classes were small and that you had a lot of opportunities to engage in debates.  And I, everybody's idea was respected.  I think that just made a difference, and there were some of us who were perhaps more, maybe what people would describe as militant in our thinking than others.  But I would say that in probably the most cases, it had to do with having some strategy for change, but also knowing that there were steps that would come about.  And I think at the same time, the experience there, you learned to write critically and to write well.  But I think probably that for me, it was a discourse among my colleagues that I think was very helpful because you end up--
Speaker 2: So the other students and faculty as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, I think that was a fundamental piece of that.  And I think in sociology, since we had the white students from across town, from that university, you also had an interracial discussion that probably wasn't taking place at any other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] at the time.  It was a unique time in history where you had at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] these very prominent white professors from these other schools, coming down to teach these specialized courses, whether it was on economics, criminology, race and ethnicity, certain forms of economics, labor economics, in particular. That hadn't been there--it was something, like I said, I don't know how it started, but it was a case where some of us took those courses under those professors.  But some of the students didn't want to take them.  They saw that they were very difficult, but the leadership at Wiley made that opportunity possible.
Story_ID: 624833
Speaker 1: Can you sort of tell us what happened on the day that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and what kind of thing did you organize 'cause this was your senior, year, right at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?  This is in April, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --towards the last part of your senior year?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one thing that we were, of course, profoundly impacted by that.  And one of the first thing I think we did was to organize kind of like a vigil to honor what he had done.  But I think out of part of that grew the possibility of marching downtown.  And in part of that, you know, the kind of stuff on campus as well, but it also called into play whether or not the administration at the time was not as progressive in what we were interested in about the issue of protests.  So you could imagine that around that period, we've already read all this literature in both our classes, but also we--people were reading a lot of things on their own about empowerment of black people and about the need to work across racial groups. That was both in our writings about the student movement where you had white students, black students working together, and here we are in sociology as a clear example for that.  But I think the issue of his death was to do something publicly because there was still a lot of stuff that needed to be done.  And so I think from that, that kind of started it to raise consciousness, and I will say that the leadership of the institution met with us and so some of the things we were asking for change on campus were conceded to us to make things different.
Speaker 1: Now, many, you say--how many of you are you talking about?
Speaker 2: There were probably maybe a hundred.  It was a pretty good sized group.  It was a core kind of leadership group.
Speaker 1: Was there a name for the group?
Speaker 2: No, no, it--at Wiley, I think there were times when that, you know, people might have their Greek letter divisions.  They might have some other divisions, but we had a kind of a (unclear) core where that on some issues, people just came together for the collective of what the idea was.  So there was no name and in particularly, no one wanted to have particular credit.  You know, there were just some of us who were on the organizing part.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a particular gathering place on campus for people to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we met on, there's a little area that's in front of the administration building 'cause it's a small campus.  And they did meet with the president [Thomas W. Cole, Sr.] and, I'm trying to think of the--they did meet with us to discuss the stuff.  And so, it ended up not having to be a march on downtown Marshall [Texas].  So that, but it was an issue of at least recognizing the contributions of Dr. King, but there were still things that had not been, that needed to be done in terms of change.  So that was kind of the impetus of what happened.  And I think that you had some people who were more, probably committed to do something, like a march downtown because at the time, we had a few veterans who had returned to school.
Speaker 1: From Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, there were a number of them, and in particular, in my circle there were at least five or six guys 'cause I think my, after my first semester I believe I lived off campus.
Story_ID: 624834
Speaker 1: So when you graduate from Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].  Now, did you graduate with particular honors or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I finished with honors.  I believe I had a 3, 3.5 [grade point average], I guess it would have been maybe magna or something like that.  It was three something that I had.
Speaker 1: So it would be magna cum laude?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it may have been something like that.  I can't remember, can't remember whether it was--I believe when I left I think it was over 3.5, I think.  I can't remember all the details.  And I just remember whatever it was, I was, that's why I was in the, got the waiver for the social security entrance, that exam.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you go right to the [U.S.] Army after graduation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, once I--when I finished Wiley, I actually had intentions of going to grad school.  And my paperwork got, well, actually, my transcript was not sent in a timely fashion.  So coming from kind of the way I was raised, I was always kind of taught to have more than one plan.  So grad school, I applied.  I also applied for jobs.  And I got accepted for [U.S.] Social Security Administration, kind of what they called middle management at the time.  So you had a training program.  So I ended up taking that position in Kansas City [Missouri] with the idea that I was going to apply for graduate school and try to go part time and then go full time.
Story_ID: 624835
Speaker 1: So after, this is 1968, went there, I think in June 'cause graduation, I believe, was in May.  And then in December I was drafted 'cause I had been called a number of, a period before, and I was able to get a deferment because of my academic performance.  So in '68 [1968], there were a couple of us at social security who got drafted.  So I went into the [U.S.] Army in December, I believe of that year because at that time, you couldn't volunteer for any other branches of the service.  They were all closed.  So it was Army, [U.S.] Marine Corps primarily, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were drafted by the Army.  Did you serve in the Army?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know we interviewed someone yesterday that was drafted by the Army and then snatched up by the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Well, at that time, if I recall, they could assign you for one or the other because see, I didn't even know that I was gonna actually be really going.  You could imagine being the only son and the youngest and my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] was not a happy camper.
Speaker 2: Well, wasn't there an exemption for an only son?
Speaker 1: Well, it turns out the fine print, I think, it said if you had someone else who had been killed in service.  Well, the long and short of it was, that when I went to work for the [U.S.] Social Security Administration, and then I got drafted, I had taken a physical exam in Kansas City [Missouri], and being a former athlete, I knew I didn't have any, you know, issues, but I thought there would be a second physical exam.  And so when I got a second letter, I knew that, I said, my plan was that if I do have to go, and I didn't think I would be going, I certainly didn't want to go to Fort Leavenworth in Kansas in December.  So I had my records transferred to Texas.  I figured I'd take my chances if it's Fort Polk [Louisiana].  I didn't wanna go either way.  And in the end, I didn't have a second physical exam.  So I show up at the examination station in Dallas, Texas, and they just put us in a line.  And so some people went to the Marine Corps, some went to the Army.  And so I never got a chance to return to see my mother.  So I went straight from that induction center to Love Field [Dallas Love Field Airport, Dallas, Texas], and from Love Field straight to Fort Bliss [Texas].
Story_ID: 624836
Speaker 1: You, you end up at Fort Bliss?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Fort Bliss is in El Paso [Texas], across from Juarez, Mexico [Ciudad Juarez, Mexico].  It's a missile base.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in the United States Army.  Is it basic training at Fort Bliss or are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, basic training, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did they assign you?  Did you actually have to go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: No, from there, while I was at Fort Bliss, I was fortunate enough to be retained at the base.  I played on the athletic teams there and worked in the Adjutant General's Corps [U.S. Army Adjutant General's Corps].  And so I actually stayed at the same place where I did basic training, and I had made rank fairly quickly.  And so in the Adjutant General's Corps I worked on military regulations and, you know, military behavior kind of stuff.  And we had a championship of fast pitch softball team.  So I did that for a year there, and then, I guess I had an option, the way it was placed, to go to Alaska, Germany or Vietnam.
Speaker 1: So which one did you choose?
Speaker 2: Well, it was pretty obvious to me.  I went with Germany, yeah--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --yeah, (laughter) didn't see the utility in the others, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Alaska seemed a little remote and--
Speaker 2: Well, it was very remote at that time.  And then Vietnam was basically out of the question.  And fortunately, went to Germany and I continued to play on the team and work and work for an Adjutant General Corps.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a baseball team or the basketball team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Germany, I played, they have like a semi-pro football team that plays the European league at the time.  I made that team and then I played, I was on the basketball team.  And then, 'cause in the Adjutant General's Corps, it's like an administrative position.
Speaker 1: Now, had you played any in Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, at, what had happened, after high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], I had a, I guess a thigh injury in track.  So I didn't play football the following semester.  And at that time, we didn't have like the best trainers.  So I had planned to play in, I wouldn't have gone to Wiley.  I was going to have an athletic scholarship somewhere else.  But because I always knew that I was going to college and had an academic commitment, I had made the decision to just focus 'cause I wanted to finish college on time, 'cause I knew I didn't have time to be wasting.  So I played what they call intramural sports.  We actually played against our team at Wiley, the guys who played 'em, tied and actually defeated them.  But when I got to the service, things had kind of healed.  So I ended up playing on the military teams.  So there, 'cause you got a try out period and things like that.  So there was no in- I had no intention to play--originally, if I hadn't any injury I would have played in college.  But because of the injury I didn't.  I didn't think that was wise, if you're already injured to maybe take the chance to get reinjured.  So that's how it ended up.  So in the military, it actually worked out very well because we practiced a half day, and, you know, we had games.  And then I was in an office the other part of the day.  But I think because I had already had these previous experiences, I was already very disciplined, and that kind of carried out with time management and being disciplined, it actually really helped me manage my time.
Story_ID: 624837
Speaker 1: So in the [U.S.] military that kind of continued, but part of my experience at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] about injustice and protests kind of stuff, carried through in military 'cause there was a lot of, in Germany some racial issues with respect to promotion.  And then when we were there, we had one of the largest protests ever held, was held in Heidelberg [Germany].  It was about almost eight hundred people.
Speaker 2: These are black soldiers?
Speaker 1: Yes, and there were other families involved too, but it was during a period where they were called, I think they called themselves the Black Baptists.  They, part of--this is just one little group, and part of their issue was to be able to wear facial hair as a military person.  Later on it was allowed.  But the issues were more around lack of promotion things, and I worked in an office that oversaw regulations about court martials, dismissal from service, promotional kind of things like that.  So it was actually very fortunate and I had unusual circumstances that I was promoted very quickly and ironically by southern whites.  So I was already at the rank of, equivalent to sergeant, it was Spec 5 [Specialist 5], after eight months, after my training and up for another promotion to staff sergeant in my first year.  And ironically, it was denied by a black guy who was a major because I was not gonna be a lifer or, because that wasn't my cup of tea.  I was just in there to serve my time and get out and I actually got early release to go back to college, to get my graduate degree.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was a good experience, I had.  I have to say that.
Speaker 2: Did you, was Germany your first time out of the country?
Speaker 1: First time that far, 'cause I'd been to Mexico growing up in Texas, yeah.  And then, you know, in Texas, you know, where I grew up in the east part, it's over five hundred and some miles going to west.  So I had been to places like, you know--those states, but then Mexico was the only place I had been prior to that.  So Germany was, I would say the first country that was a distance for me.  And then I went to several countries where I was in Germany, but I had a security clearance.  So some places I couldn't go.
Story_ID: 624838
Speaker 1: All right, so when you come back, and you were able to go to grad school, when you come back?
Speaker 2: I got an early release to go to grad school.
Speaker 1: And all right.  So you went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was not where I--that's where I wanted to go because they had an African American theorist by the name of Tilman Cothran [Tilman C. Cothran] because I was gonna go to a predominantly white graduate school, in fact, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  And then I had never studied under a black Ph.D. in sociology.  So somehow, somebody made me aware of Tilman Cothran at Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: I think it's C-O-T-H-A-N, Coc- C-O-C-H-T-A-N [sic.], Cothran I believe.  He ended up going, when I--I got a scholarship, a fellowship under, through him to come to Atlanta University and that just before I got there, he took a job in Illinois at Governor's State [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois].  So I actually never saw him until later on in my graduate career.  So it was ironic that I would have been going to Illinois, and that I get there and he left for Illinois, so never had a black professor the whole time I was there.
Speaker 1: At Atlanta U?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now, that's amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, even at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In sociology?
Speaker 2: --yeah, even at Wiley, I never had a black Ph.D. professor.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a program that was made famous by the great W.E.B. Du Bois--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --E. Franklin Frazier taught there.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: There are even others, but there was not a black professor in the sociology department of Atlanta University (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there was a black guy in anthropology but not in sociology.  Hubert Ross [Hubert B. Ross] was there in anthropology because they had a black studies master's program, but I was in a straight sociology.  So we didn't have a black professor.  So it was just kind of the irony where that here I have gone to these two HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and never had a black Ph.D., and I can't the- but still had a very good experience at Atlanta.  I think because of the time in Atlanta [Georgia].  I had never been to this part of the country before.  So it was a very different experience, and where I grew up, there was a very small black population in Tyler [Texas].  So coming to a place like Atlanta where they had a very large black population, and I met other people who grew up in predominantly black towns, but also predominantly black counties in Alabama and Mississippi.  That was just kind of a unique experience for me, and I think that it was kind of like an empowering cultural experience because it's the first time I had been in an environment where there were so many black people.  And on campus, that was a very robust period of time in history, where you had Institute of Black World [Institute of the Black World, Atlanta, Georgia].  So there were a lot of students from Ivy League schools who came down during the summer or during the academic year to study there.
Story_ID: 624839
Speaker 1: So they had a very strong black studies emphasis, but as a sociologist, you know, being able to interact with that group as well as the sociologists, the people in other departments.
Speaker 2: ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] here.
Speaker 1: Yes, all of that 'cause I had a college classmate who was at ITC.  And then there was another, she was a year behind--well, the person at ITC was a year behind me 'cause I actually finished on time at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].  So there--most of my class did not.  They finished the following semester or the following year.  So at that time, at AU [Atlanta University] in 1970, you've got to consider the time in history.  So it was very rich with very known speakers coming to the center--
Speaker 2: And even at the--you've got [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding--
Speaker 1: Yes, and so you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and Mack Jones and all those people.
Speaker 1: --yeah, you had this really fantastic situation.  And see, Clark [Clark College] was a separate college.  It was not Clark AU [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] as it is now.  Then you had Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], you had Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], you had Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] was still very active.  You had ITC, and then we had partnerships or collaborations with Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], primarily, a little bit with Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia].  So when you had visitors like in religion, M. Beattie, you had Greenleaf [ph.] who came.  You had Gunnar Myrdal who was the Nobel laureate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John M. Beattie, the author of African religion--
Speaker 1: That's right, absolutely--
Speaker 2: --philosophy (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --all of those people came during the time that I was a student, and I got a chance to sit down with Myrdal, kind of like where we are.  And here's a guy who wrote 'The American Dilemma' [sic. 'An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy,' Gunnar Myrdal].  It was that kind of unique experience where a lot of people wanted to come to the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  They had a very famous social work program.  It was a unique, I would say opportunity.  And I think the fact that the professors that I did have in sociology, there was one in particular, Dennis Sims [Dennis C. Sims] from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] who was a very, many people would say that he was a very abstract kind of person.  But what he had introduced me to was computer science.  And so that was very unusual at the time to be in the social sciences, particularly, sociology and because I took classes with him, we ended up doing Fortran [Formula Translation] and at the time, Morehouse had one of these huge computers--in those days, the IBM 360 [IBM System/360].  Now, you can put it on a laptop, but writing programs in 1970 was basically unheard of for black people unless you were a computer science major.  And then, plus what I was working on was experimental social psychology as a master's thesis, but I had, I was doing other work on modernization.  That is what they now call development because that's what Dennis Simkowski [ph.], well, Dennis Sims, but his name used to be Simkowski, he was one of those person who had a Ph.D. in five focal areas from Stanford and ran a business to test his theory in Mexico.  So it was a very unique time where, so even though I didn't have the exposure to taking classes under black professors, this guy and the other whites, you got the skillsets to actually do the work that you wanted to do on issues that may pertain to race.
Story_ID: 624840
Speaker 1: So they were at the cutting edge of the technology part of sociology (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: And now would you agree that sociology is probably the most technical and statistical driven of the social sciences?
Speaker 2: I would say that economics is, one brand of economics and I would say that's econometrics.  In psychology, there's something equivalent with psychometrics.  So I think at the time--see, there was a strong connection between AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], where almost everybody who were seen as going on went there.  I think my group was the first one that broke that pattern for that.  We went specifically to study with different people.  So somebody went to Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa].  Someone went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  Someone went to other places, and I ended up, you know, subsequently going to, when I finished there I went to industry and then went on to grad school.  But I think one thing that was critical during that particular period of me being able to do the kind of empirical work, but it was also in areas that were not traditionally done by black scholars at that time, that is the modernization stuff.  And I was doing some comparative work with Ethiopia and Jamaica.  So there was more interdiscinary [interdisciplinary] kind of things that I was doing.  And that's where I always kind of thought, even though I was in sociology, my thinking in terms of addressing problems was always interdiscinary.  So that's why I had taken the economics and a lot of the anthropology later on.  That, so it, it was a good experience.  It turns out in the end, it's probably good I went there because I had a greater racial awareness by being in a city that had the population that it did and the kind of energy, intellectual energy that was going on in the center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], where it was seen as kind of the beacon for studying black issues, and that, at the time, there was a lot of buzz in social work about working with black communities 'cause AU, and I think Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was the only other place that offered a master's in social work.  And at the same time, there were colleagues in other disciplines that I was able to interact with whether it was the library--the library of science had a good program as well.  So there were people in biology.  And I think the other thing, because of kind of the traditional issues in black higher education where you, just like Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], you were required to take a foreign language, to take either the foreign language or pass a language test, it's all kind of geared toward Chicago.  The whole Turabian style of writing, all Chicago.  And then kind of a symptomatic process of history where that you were not only representing yourself with the race, so there was a write in exam that was required at AU.  There was reading exam that was required, and the language stuff.  These are all things that for some people didn't take 'em seriously and you couldn't get your degree without completing those assignments.  And fortunately, I, 'cause I had taken a reading exam in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas].  One of our speech teachers was one of the first African Americans to get a master's in speech and reading in the state.  So I knew that the test, you couldn't just walk in there just because you could read.  And so that stopped a lot of people, but I think in the end, writing the thesis and having that interaction with other people 'cause one of my classmates, he was a semester ahead of me, is the--he started the black wax museum [Great Blacks in Wax Museum; National Great Blacks in Wax Museum] in Baltimore [Maryland].  Unfortunately, he passed away, kind of like Asa Hilliard [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III], he went to Africa and then shortly after that he got--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of the guy's name at the moment--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Elmer Martin [Elmer P. Martin, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, E-L-M-E-R, Martin.  His wife at the time was Joanne [Joanne Mitchell Martin].  And I believe the wax museum is still there.  But he later on got a Ph.D. in social work, not in sociology, very gifted guy.
Story_ID: 624841
Speaker 1: Now, what was your thesis on?
Speaker 2: Racial stereotypes.  So I did a study on racial stereotypes and it looked at, not only just stereotypes of black students towards white students, but towards other minorities and themselves.  So it was a different twist, and I also had a fictitious group that actually didn't exist anywhere in the world, and to see if stereotypes would be assigned to it 'cause part of my hypothesis was that stereotypes were motivated by a lot of things, not just personal experiences and that what you would find is that African Americans being part of the American culture would hold some stereotypes very similar that whites hold towards other groups, including their own and that they show that stereotypes were just kind of a, part of a cultural issue and that you assign a stereotype to somebody you never even heard of.  So that's what it, I ended up doing the master's [degree].  And that was going to be like a follow up for me to do my doctorial work.  But it ended up changing and put it on a different course all together.  But I would say that my experience at AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was pivotal because of my racialized experience with the city and the type of people I was in school with there because, you know, reading books about all-black towns or predominantly black towns and counties is one thing.  But when I actually met black people who had not interacted on an intimate way, that is a close interaction, with white people until they got to AU was very different.  Because in Texas where I am, you almost had no choice because that's a majority of the population.  So you either have people in work situations or if you're buying stuff, and then, of course, the fluke experience at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], going to school was very different.  So I can remember having colleagues, who, you know, saw that the white professors had different colored eyes, that they had just never been that close to anyone before.  And I think also, at the time, coming back as a veteran, and there were other veterans who were coming back at the same time, we had different experiences that were brought to the table.  And plus, we were also fortunate, we had financial benefits.  And so in my case, having a fellowship and having G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], was very, very helpful.  And I would say that probably that experience served me quite well.  Being, I think just being in Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause a lot of people stayed.  They didn't--they took jobs here, and I had job offers in Atlanta, but I guess at the time my thinking was to try to go to different places and have different experiences.  And I'd already been, I guess, kind of encouraged, don't get all your degrees in one place.  If you can, experience different geographic spaces too.  So that's what happened.
Story_ID: 624842
Speaker 1: So after you got your degree in '71 [1971], you, now, did you, did you go--I know you taught at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] in '72 [1972] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I worked, I went to industry.  I worked for a subsidiary of Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company].  I worked for Kelly Spring Tire Company [sic. Kelly Springfield Tire Company] in my hometown [Tyler, Texas].
Speaker 1: Now, how could that come about?  You know, you wouldn't figure a sociologist would be working for Kelly Spring Tire?
Speaker 2: I think that because of my own thinking.  I wanted to get, like I said, when--the way I kind of grew up is, you know, having always more than plan A and then plan B, but if you could, several plans because you could be more marketable.  And so I'd already had a military experience.  And so I wanted an industrial experience.  So my plan was to have the different experiences.  And ultimately, I wanted to be in a university.  But I had seen professors who had had no other experiences besides going from elementary school all the way through to get a degree.  So I, at AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], when I had applied to graduate school, and they didn't send my transcript on time.  So I had a decision to make.  Do I try to sit out for a semester and go that following semester or go to work?  So I decided that I wanted to have an industrial experience.  So that's how I ended up there.  So when I went back to my hometown, the, I looked at couple of places, and then this offer was made there.  It was in a, what they call quality control division.  So I think I was the, may have been the first or second college grad, I believe, the super- the plant manager was very, very supportive.  And you're right, as a sociologist not, it wasn't quite, you know, how do you end up there 'cause it was mostly kind of engineering like stuff or chemistry kind of stuff.  So I ended up being in that division and getting excellent mentoring and support from the plant manager and really kind of enjoyed it.  The difference was, you had on the staff 'cause I was not an hourly--I was a salaried person.  You had to change shifts every two or three months because you were evaluating people in the plant.  You know, so it might be one of the chemical stations.  It may be the lab, and so part of the idea that psychologically, the company didn't want the same people every month--'cause sometimes you had to write people up if it was deficient in terms of regulations and quality and so forth.  So I kind of got used to that because I actually learned quite a bit, when you work on the first shift, second shift and the third shift, but it also prepared me in other ways because I wanted to have a real experience, you know, because that's the way work was and that, of course, from that point on, I would go to another division where it would be all day shift, day work.
Story_ID: 624843
Speaker 1: So while there, I got a call from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and some other HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] that they had contacted the folks at AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and it turns out some people already knew who I was because in those days, I guess, you know, the community was small enough so the universities kind of knew if a black person got a degree and so forth and so on.  So I was contacted by Grambling, but I had already made kind of a conscious decision that no matter what I was doing, I was gonna work at an HBCU for a span of time, probably not more than a couple years or so before going back and getting my doctoral studies done.  And it turns out that my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] couldn't understand, of course, why would you leave an industrial job [at Kelly Springfield Tire Company] where that you make far more money--and at the time, it was, I'm telling you, it was far more money.  It was just, and some people said, unheard of type of money for our community.  But since I had never been driven by money, and it was an opportunity when you asked the question about the civil rights and those issues, so this is all in sync with me trying to bring the skillsets that I had to teach the next generation of people.  But what I didn't wanna do is to have--I wanted to take the skills that I had actually learned about how the real world of business operated but how thinking analytically and strategically and being able to write well and to speak well, in the sense of articulating your ideas, not just being able to rap.  So I wanted to bring that to the students at an HBCU whether it was Grambling or someone, somewhere else or back to Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].
Story_ID: 624844
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972], now you take the position at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went there after being recruited.  You know, it was, even though I had made--had a personal commitment to go to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] for a certain number of years, since I went to school at, you know, private HBCUs, going to a state HBCU was not on my radar screen, 'cause that was a very different experience, I knew it would be for me.  So the dean at the time, McIntosh [William McIntosh], kind of made a, I would say he made more of a moral issue about coming to bring your talents.  In addition, he was an entrepreneur.  And so he owned a lot of property.  So he, I actually stayed with him, my family and I stayed with him first.  And then 'til they got suitable housing for me to stay at one of his duplexes.
Speaker 1: Now, we skipped past you getting married [to LaRue C. Pearson].  So now, you've got a family.  Now, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: After, when I was in industry [Kelly Springfield Tire Company].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you marry a young lady from Tyler [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, from, who went to school in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that didn't sit, it didn't sit well by not marrying somebody from Tyler.  It didn't sit well with my friends, you know, because some parts of Texas are very insular.  So if you go to Houston [Texas], it's a very insider type of place.  So if you're a professional and you're trying to get inside, it's very different.  So some of the states, some of the cities like that in Texas are very, some people would say arrogant, that we have everything we need in the state.  So you don't need to go out.  So, but that's not what happened.  I didn't marry anyone from there.  And in my case, a lot of my high school classmates and some college classmates were already married.  But in part of my upbringing, my influence had been not to do that very early.  Wait 'til you get out and have responsi- more resources, I guess more of that.  So when I left industry and went to Grambling and stayed with the dean, and then I think after a semester or a year, I think, that's when I moved into the duplex.
Story_ID: 624845
Speaker 1: So I had a fairly, it was a unique experience for me, like I said, having gone to Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] both were private, the student body was very different going to a public institution because it's far more diverse economically.  And at Wiley we had a number of foreign students and a number of foreign professors.  And going to a place like Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], it was very different.  It was mostly African American faculty and very few foreign students and a bit more diversity in some of the faculty, particularly in the sciences a little bit.  So going there, the rigor was not quite what I had been exposed to at Wiley.  And ironically, I walk in the classroom, and there's a fellow in the class who was with me at Wiley.  He was I think a first year student when I was a junior or senior.  So it was kind of an odd situation, me having been to the [U.S.] military after Wiley and then working there, and seeing someone who's your contemporary now one of your students.  And so while I was there, I could see some other opportunities.  And again, it's one of those times in history where that two young women about my same age came to work there, and we had similar kind of issues where we all came out of non-academic sectors.  And we had the same vision of taking our talents and developing this next generation of black students who would have the skillsets, but also have the strategic knowledge, how the world operated outside of higher education.  One was in, well, both--the others were in social work and already when we got there, there was another person, well, two or three other people, we were all fairly young, but I think the three of us who kind of came together were a bit more progressive because we've had--we had different kind of experiences.  And I think while there, I've always kept the same kind of standards for teaching and learning.  And I was fortunate because when I, I think my first year or second year in college, I was a teaching assistant in English.  And that, at Wiley, you know, you have a certain social class group.  At Grambling, since it was more diverse, I had students who were challenged in writing, severely challenged in writing.  They were not only first generation at the time, but had gone to, but who had attended very low performing schools, deeply racially segregated schools.  But I also knew that part of my philosophy, if you keep your standards high and you help bring students up to the standard rather than lowering the standards, you could actually do that.  But you couldn't have standards at a, such high level and not have a pathway for students to meet it.  And it was not gonna be met, you know, after two or three classes.  So you had to sometime maybe do extra stuff.  So the bottom line is that I could see that the curriculum was a problem.  It was in reverse order.  So some students were having difficulty because you had to know some conceptual material before you can actually analyze certain things.
Story_ID: 624846
Speaker 1: So we were kind of successful with the young group of us being able to get the curriculum changed because I was over, you know, I forgot what they call you, but I was over the sociology program [at Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] 'cause we had sociology, psychology and social work, was a joint department.  So it was a fairly large department with most of the students being in social work.  I mean it was a huge number of us.  I can't remember whether it was a hundred or two hundred majors.  And that just wouldn't have been the case in a place like Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].  So the long and short of it was that I developed a club, a sociology club.  And you didn't have to be necessarily a sociologist to major in the club.  But what I also did is develop a newsletter that the students were responsible for preparing.  And then I developed what they call now undergraduate research experience, where the majors would learn to write research papers and some of them would do field work and then write that up.  But then they were presented at professional meetings.  So these two women on the faculty and myself would literally get, what, three cars, pack our undergrads in.  They'd gotten papers accepted, and one of our first meetings we drove to Atlanta [Georgia].  And the students presented at a meeting here, a desegregated meeting in sociology and did extraordinarily well.  And for some of them, they had never been to, like a hotel where, you know, so it taught them something about another type of lifestyle.  The newspaper did very well so we ended up doing a fundraiser for that.  So they had money to help pay for going to the other trips.  And in some cases, if they needed the proper attire, we had resources to do that.
Story_ID: 624847
Speaker 1: Then I think while I was there, I think in my first or second year, I also taught at Louisiana Tech [Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, Louisiana], across town.
Speaker 2: Louisiana Tech, I had never heard of that before but I was reading about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, Terry Bradshaw's school.  So I didn't know anything about it, you know, before going there.  Well, what had essentially happened, they had sent an African American from my program over there, I guess, prior to my arrival.  And he didn't pan out well.  So the provost wanted to rectify the situation.  I didn't know any of this until later on.  So I was the chosen one to go over there and teach.  They were on a quarter system.  Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] was on the semester system.  So it turns out it was, you remember when I indicated that at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], half of the students in sociology were white.  So I walk into, agreed to take the position over there part time.  So I walked over there to meet with the chair who was a very progressive person.  In the hallway, I see this white guy, and we both looked at each other and recognized each other 'cause we had been friends at Wiley.  Now, you could, you have to think at the time, I was the only black professor at Louisiana Tech.  And so some of his colleagues was trying to figure out how can you have been college classmates because they knew he went to East Texas Baptist [East Texas Baptist College; East Texas Baptist University, Marshall, Texas] and that they were basically--and that didn't happen at that time.  So it ended up being a very positive experience and then I had a couple of students there, one, in my class, who were outstanding students.  And keep in mind that when I said early on that, that's when I reconnected with my father's [Willie Pearson, Sr.] family.  They were from Marion [Louisiana].  Well, it turns out that one of the young women in my class, a black woman was from there.  And I guess somehow my father's relatives had her to contact me, because like I said, I had never been in kind of direct contact with them for a long time.  But they had followed my career.  So, and then there was another kid, he ended up, he was a football player, ended up going to the Chicago Bears to play.  He and another fellow were both sel- drafted, but the idea was that the one guy was gonna be the gifted running back and the other guy, Harper, was gonna be the blocking back.  And so (laughter) it turns out, Harper made the team.  The other guy was cut but he was a very decent person, and then I had--
Speaker 2: Now, who was the other guy, the guy that was cut?  I know about Roland Harper 'cause he played next to Walton Payton [sic. Walter Payton] for years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the other guy was like McKenzie [ph.] or something like that, McClinton [ph.] or something like that.  He was the star running back at Louisiana Tech.  But he was not that big of a guy, but he didn't make it.  And then in that same classroom was a young white female, of Jewish descent, Nassas Badero [ph.] that went on--these were all students who became like my little proteges in the class.  I think she became one of the few women who was a veterinarian.
Story_ID: 624848
Speaker 1: So you could imagine, I go over to Louisiana Tech [Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, Louisiana].  It's about 99 percent white.  And then I'm going over to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], it's about 98 percent black.  So you're going between two worlds.  And the resources were very different.  I had a grader, of multiple choice kind of stuff, and of course, I graded the essays myself over at Tech; didn't have anything like that until, at Grambling until much later.  And so things went extraordinarily well, but because of my own experience I knew that you had talents students at both places.  It's just that some of the students at Grambling had more to overcome because of their, the quality of their high school experiences and that I mean it's some fantastic students at Grambling.  So I think my second year, we had the club up and running and students were doing placements, to do their research.  So they were actually collecting empirical data.  Even at the same time, Louisiana Tech didn't have anything like that, but part, if you recall, when I was in undergrad [at Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], see I did a thesis.  So I had a research experience as an undergraduate student that would be more typical of a graduate student, that I was passing on to these students.  And unlike, probably students at most places in the social sciences, they were going to professional meetings and presenting.  That was more typical for students in biology or chemistry that went to all-black scientific meetings.  This was not the case.  So they learned to write articles for the newsletter, showed them how to design the fundraising activities.  So by the end, I was also preparing them to go on to graduate school.  So a number of them began to get accepted to graduate schools, primarily in the North.  Some went to Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], some ended up going to other places, like Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas], LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], some of them went to the Midwest because keep in mind that they didn't have to be sociology majors to be part of the group.  And then some of them went into industry.  So part of my thinking by letting them know about my industrial experience [at Kelly Springfield Tire Company] and so some might wanna go that avenue.  Some might wanna go to others, but at least they would have the skillsets and the tools to know what you might have to overcome because some time you could have the ability but because of certain kind of discriminatory practices that exists around promotion, access to the informal knowledge of the network, you can't let that deter you.  You know, that's one thing you had to figure out, okay, if that's the case, what can I do to empower myself so I can still be competitive because eventually, competence, I believe out rules some of the other things.
Story_ID: 624849
Speaker 1: So after those three years I knew that my time was coming to an end because it was just not possible for me to stay there because if you wanted to do research and write, they didn't have the structure to do that.  So that's when I decided to start applying to grad school.  Now, typically, having been an AU person [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], that would have been Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  This case, I considered there, but there was a person at Southern Illinois Carbondale [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], that I actually wanted to study with 'cause somewhere along the line I had learned that you find the people, not necessarily the schools.  But then I had also the haunting presence of having done this and Tilman Cothran [Tilman C. Cothran] left (laughter) before I got there.  So they had this fellow who actually studied with Parsons [Talcott Parsons] and Bales [Robert Freed Bales] in a project at Yale [sic. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on what you now use as focus groups as a basis for business decision making and how you can influence customers.  So that's basically what I was interested in, small group studies.  So they had a guy who had been on that team as a graduate student at SIU.  Well, lo and behold, I get there and this guy finds some kind of new wave transcendentalism and decides to get out of education all together.  (Laughter) So here I am again, you know, I was at a crossroads because here I am not going to these other places that were better known.  But I also knew probably if I had gone there, I would have been like any other student doing research on what the professors was doing and not necessarily doing my own work and getting the experience that I needed 'cause I was, what, twenty-six or something like that around that time.  So the long and short of it, I got there and, so the guy was still there my first year, but I didn't get a chance to take any classes under him.  So he left, I think the second, the next semester.  So then it was a dilemma, do I stay here or do I transfer?  So I met with the person who was chair of the department who happened to be from East Texas like me.  He came in from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  He had been there, and he was, you know, very entrepreneurial and very successful person.  And so I did decide to stay there.  But by that time, I had done very well with my students from Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] going to different, you know, places.  They had done extraordinarily well.  And fortunately, later on what I started there was actually continued by another person who knew what I was doing.  She took a job there after she got her Ph.D.  And I think she's still there.  So that kind of took me to grad school, and, 'cause I just--first of all, I'd never even heard of Carbondale except for Walt Frazier.  That's the only thing that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Saluki is a--
Speaker 1: Right, I knew, I had--
Speaker 2: What, they won the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] in '67 [1967], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  And so you can imagine that some of my profs [professors] at AU, they wanted me to go somewhere else.  And then Dr. Pledger [W.F. Pledger] wanted me to go somewhere else.  But that's where I ended up.  You know, sometimes things are kind of fortuitous.  So I think by being an older student, and already having an idea you need the tools, and if you get the tools, you can pretty well do well no matter where you go.  Now, some of this stuff, I don't know how I came about it, but I'm pretty certain that along the way, it was mentors who gave (laughter) me different ideas, but when I got there, and that situation happened, I did have a plan B.
Story_ID: 624850
Speaker 1: So after I decided to stay there [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], I was, my primary focus was gonna be on sociology of the family.  Then I had some great fortunes there to actually be kind of chosen as a promising student.  And I don't think at first it was by--you know, it was one of those cases there where, no matter if you had your master's [degree], you had to take a test to see if you were really up to speed to be like their master's students or their, entering into the doctorate program.  So being an older student, I knew that even though the test was supposed to be anonymous, that, but when they got your scores, they pretty well know here are some, here is some student who is kind of ahead of this one and that one.  And so sure enough, after they got the scores back, I started having different professors, you know, recruited me to their particular specialties.  Well, it was already, I think pretty commonly known that I was going to focus on the family and that I was interested in social psychology.  But that game was out because the guy [Tilman C. Cothran] left and I was not interested in any other social psychology, except for just experimental social psychology.  So I took a lot of classes with, and studied with the people in family, Herman Lantz and Lewellyn Hendrix.  So I end up taking one class on sociology of science with Jerry Gaston.  And keep in mind that I'm coming from a, growing up in a town [Tyler, Texas] that had two historically black colleges [historically black colleges and universities] and then within an hour or so there are three other historically black colleges.  So I've seen African American scientists.  So I take this class--first of all, I'd never heard of sociology of science and technology before.  It's not, it's the kind of, more elite kind of specialty in sociology.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a, there was a book by Robert Merton [Robert K. Merton] one of the socio- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, bingo, that's the father of the field.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 1: And that's how I ended up in the field.  So I take this seminar class, and I'm reading this stuff about Robert Merton's work.  And then later on, because my professor was kind of like one of the proteges for Merton, even though he went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Merton was at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  And then Merton's wife was also his student, Harriet Zuckerman.  Well, it turns out, you know, in this class, I'm reading some of these different things we have and then there's one about the lack of black people in science.  So I'm trying to reconcile this.  At Texas College [Tyler, Texas] I saw that there was a black chemist with a Ph.D.  He did cancer research, who went to my high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], who was like a legend in the high school.  And then there were these people in biology and physics and then I'm reading this stuff that that's very rare.  And so being the inquisitive person that I am, I wanted to find out, well, is this the case?  And if so, why?
Story_ID: 624851
Speaker 1: So I wrote a paper on women and minorities in science.  That's what this woman had done, Harriet Zuckerman.  She had a tremendous influence on me going into that route.  So keep in mind that I still had family as my primary.  Then I was gonna do, I did this paper, and so the professor says, "We can get this funded as a grant."  And that was kind of hello time for me.  The issue was how much money.  So the long and short of it was, we got, we wrote a proposal, got it funded.  So now I had a political dilemma.  Do I do my dissertation in sociology of science where I have all this money or do I do something in family and not do this?  So I made a strategic decision that financially I'd better go with this science business since I was gonna be able to have it, and collect interview material, do surveys and stuff like that.  At any rate, what that meant though, I was challenging Robert K. Merton's work.  And keep in mind, he's the founder of our field.  So with his blessings, in fact, he encouraged it.  So I did find some support and then I found some things that did not support what he had advocated.  But it was his wife, ironically, who had the influence on me, and still to this day.  She's vice president of the Mellon Foundation [Andrew W. Mellon Foundation].  And my experience at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] was that I had, I think by staying I had enormous opportunities 'cause I had a number of national fellowships, but I got a lot of research opportunities that I probably would not have at other places.  And this is my own research ideas, not something that a professor had come up with, and was very supportive.
Story_ID: 624852
Speaker 1: Now, I can remember these guys writing all over my paper about this and that and then I would notice that there was another guy, they were not writing as much on his paper.  And so one day I asked, "You know, what's the deal?"  And so he basically broke it down that, "Okay, here's your trajectory.  You're gonna be able to go up here.  This guy is not and that at least he's gotten this far.  We're gonna try to help him get out.  But we know the limitations on his trajectory, and that the expectations for you is much higher.  But at the same time, here--."  So at first, you know, I--'cause then I kind of understood that there's the skillsets that I was getting.  And then they started making opportunities.  So while I was there, something fundamentally happened that was kind of a game changer besides going into sociology science.  They had a special seminar.  It was called Proseminar.  And you were invited to attend the class, so, 'cause it's supposed to be an open thing, but it was only for a few of us.  So it was one woman, one black person and let's see, one, two--either two white males or three.  And that class was special in the sense that you were taught how to do expert testimony.  You were taught how to write grants, proposals.  You were taught how to write book proposals.  You were taught how to do special edited volume proposals.  You were taught how to do some entrepreneurial stuff.  It's something in many ways that you didn't get in a class, but that experience, all of us except for one, everybody became very well known in their individual areas.  The one woman was more of an administrative person because she was older and had returned.  The one guy became very well known in sociology of medicine.  The, and then I, of course, in science.  And then the other guy actually ended up dropping out.  But that experience in that class is something that, when you talk about the value of mentoring, because when you get those kind of intangibles, but they become tangible a little bit later on 'cause you have a better idea of how things operate, but what counts and what doesn't count.  And knowing what counts allows you not to get caught up in doing this because part of, I think, graduate school, you can get into the issue of trying to be perfect, to have a perfect paper.  And then you learn in this particular process, it's no such thing as a perfect paper.  You have to know, as they say, when to put the period there, and go on, because in science, if you keep waiting for something that's perfect, you never submit anything.  And so out of that, it happened one time, didn't happen any other time in the history of that program.  And by having an experience, we were fundamentally different from everybody else.  And coming out of that, it was supplemented with other opportunities because when I was doing my dissertation research, the--I had on my, in my employ, doctoral students.  I had master's students who worked for me and four undergrads because of that grant.  Otherwise, it would not have been possible to do the dissertation that I did.  The professor was progressive, so he allowed me to do my dissertation as a book.  Now, keep in mind mostly it's hypothesis, null hypothesis.  He made it possible for me to do it as a book.
Story_ID: 624853
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera basically about, you said about time you got your Ph.D. you had four publications already?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because what had happened, I think because of my research experience and when I wrote papers for my classes, particularly, the seminars, we were able to revise them.  So by that time, I had only not only revised a couple, but I had co-authored with one professor and then I had done things on my own through an editor (unclear) with my principal advisor [Jerry Gaston].  But while I was there, I was president of the graduate club [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  So I organized the graduate students so they would also collaborate with each other or independent in presenting papers at professional meetings.  So part of what we were able to do is establish a kind of a research environment so you would have things on your CV [curriculum vitae] that may have come way after in your graduate experience.  And so we had people after the second year who were presenting papers at professional meetings.  And then we had some who were able to publish.  So as a result of that one seminar I was mentioning, that invitational thing, we had already an idea and in science, there's what we call problem choice and problem retention.  So basically, you have to know what's a good question, and then you gotta know whether or not, if you keep trying to get the answer to it, whether that's gonna happen or not.  So you've gotta know when to let it go or when to retain it.  So what I was able to see that there were some graduate students who came up with proposal ideas for their dissertations that were not possible to complete, for example, in ten years.  And there were others that it was not possible for them to complete at all because they couldn't read in the original, the primary language.  So if it's in German and you have to read the original documents, well, if you don't speak and read, you know, read German, you've got a problem.  So part of what that seminar did, it gave us a sense of what seems reasonable or doable within a certain timeframe.  But it also showed us how, if you have papers from a class and if the professor says that this is a reasonably strong paper, you had to go back and, you know, do some revisions, but the other thing about that, you had some idea what the process was, when you submit a paper, how long it takes for it to be reviewed, what's a review process and when you get it back, what had to be done.  But for me, more importantly, what you learn is that in science, if you get something accepted or rejected, particularly, if you got it rejected, it's not a personal offense on you.  You looked at the comments.  If they were reasonable, you revised it and resubmit it.  So what I was finding in my empirical research that many times African Americans would get a rejection and they would internalize it as personal and as a result, would not submit anything else to be published or the other thing that became very clear is that in science, particularly, in the higher levels, by the time you submit something for publication, you've had different people to read it.  But if you don't know that, then you're submitting something that there's been no criticism or review by anybody else.  So it's kind of fresh.  But when you have three or four sets of eyes and feedback, what you submit is fundamentally different.  And so part of that is learning how the field operates.
Story_ID: 624854
Speaker 1: So I think during that particular period of time and given the mentoring that I had, it was no reason, no matter where I went, not to have been able to achieve.  Now, I had white classmates and black classmates who didn't have that experience, that mentoring experience.  And a number of them struggled, but in my individual case, it would have just been an excuse if I had said that I couldn't, I didn't make it because of blank, because I've always, I was already well prepared.  And that I think that the, and having the resources that I did and thinking more strategically about where I wanted to go because I knew I wanted to write and do research.  I didn't wanna just teach only.  So that, I would say that they more than got me ready for that, and that I think the rigor that they subjected me to gave me a realistic assessment of where I am, where I was at the time.  And so it really helped me when I went out into the workforce to know what more you have to work on if you want to be actually successful.  And it turns out that staying there was probably the best thing that happened because I was also American Sociological Association fellow.  And then I got some other awards, so when I go to the national meetings, I was able to see that some of my colleagues at other schools had not published anything, let alone haven't had an experience writing a grant proposal.  But I could also see that, in my own program, just like I saw kind of at the end of middle school, you got this sorting process operating.  So I had a pretty clear understanding, it's not just me being unique.  It's the fact that I've had these opportunities, these mentoring opportunities that do give you an advantage.  And so that kind of carried today with me and so I knew that wherever I went I was gonna continue to do what I did at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], is mentoring the next group of people so that they would have these skillsets that you just don't get in a classroom--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because no matter what the profession, I could see that in sports, that if you had--when I was in the [U.S.] military or even when I was in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas], that people who got certain coaching techniques, not just the physical part, but how you had to be a thinking person, that, that made a difference in your performance.  And so I think coming out of, having that experience at SI [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], you, and particularly being president of the graduate club, I also understood the politics and how to--basically, what these guys did, and I think especially since my principal advisor, Jerry Gaston, was an entrepreneurial person, I kind of knew for the first time that you could actually do well as an entrepreneurial because probably when I went there, I'm thinking maybe like one of the relatives become president of a school.  Well, I'd never heard of this category called distinguished professors before.  That didn't ex- probably didn't exist when I was coming through.  And then I remember that the guy at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] was a distinguished professor there, you know, find out how much this guy made.  It was phenomenal.  So now I know there's a different category.  You didn't necessarily have to be an administrator to make some pretty good money, that you could do well doing these other things.  But I would say probably the critical thing for me is having someone like Jerry Gaston who, who's wife is an expert on, I think it's 1930s glassware or plateware, and he was an entrepreneurial person himself.  So they actually had a business.  So I knew that you didn't have to be one dimensional.  If you follow--you could have your own consulting business, plus do this other stuff.  So it, it meant that my experiences outside of academe, I can use those same skill sets to run a business, but also be in the classroom.  They were not something you had to do one or the other.
Speaker 2: Okay, they weren't exclusive--
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 624855
Speaker 1: Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], now, you went to Wake Forest before you formally got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: No, I got, finished my Ph.D. that summer and started Wake Forest at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1981?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we had 'em backwards here.  Okay, all right, okay, so you go from SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] to--did you have any thoughts of staying at SIU?
Speaker 2: I think initially since I had been, like I said, programmed don't stay where you went to school.  And part of that mentoring was that if you do, you would always see, be seen as, you know, Pearson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Willie Pearson, Jr.], the student and not necessarily as Pearson, an independent adult person.  So that came up later on in my career to go back there.  But it was never gonna be entertained, you know.  I mean I think after all the people were no longer on the faculty, was one of the other.  But when I came out of there, I had gotten, like I said, outstanding mentoring.  So one of the things that I had been told, don't take a job where that you are, you have a cross appointment.  Well, black studies in something that wasn't gonna happen anyway 'cause I didn't have a background in black studies.  But in sociology of science, some time it might be typical at that period where you might be in a school of engineering, as like the person who's sociology of science or technology or you might be in a scientific department.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but why did they say not to take a cross appointment?  I've known people who have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what they were talking about at the time that I was coming out, this is a period where you actually had to--publications were kind of more important to get tenure.  See, there was a cohort before then where it was not as common, and, well, it was more common to have these joint appointments.  And there was a period that came afterwards.  So what they were talking about is that, having to serve two masters in a sense, that you had to have publications that would be acceptable, just say for sociology.  And that papers might have to be acceptable for black studies, and typically, papers that were accepted for sociology was a more rigorous process 'cause we have a higher rejection rate.  So what was beginning to happen is that people who were joint appointments were not getting tenure and mostly, a lot of the black people who actually went to very good schools.
Speaker 1: And most of the black studies positions were joint appointments, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: But even some of the social scientists they were too because of the very reason that some of these were programs.  They were not departments.  So what was happening is that for some of the predominantly white schools, they would get someone who could be their psychology, in the psychology department, but jointly appointed with the black studies.  So part of that issue was that, you had few African Americans who were actually in the so called disciplinary department because that was a way, there was a big demand, I think, in the latter part of the middle '60s [1960s] to have more black professors.  So, you know, and obviously different in chemistry and physics, but in the social sciences, there was a demand to have black studies program that grew out of the protests at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and other places.  So, but in science and technology, it was not necessarily, there were--because of the nature of the specialty, most of those jobs are at elite institutions primarily in the Northeast that you would have like a history of science, a history of technology, like Ken Manning [Kenneth R. Manning] who was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  When I come along, see I was the only African American who was actually getting a Ph.D. in the disciplines.  There was a guy who was way ahead of me at a different institution who had some expertise, but his degree was not in that.  So the issue would be if you came to a place like, we'll say SUNY Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York], where that one of my colleagues who was there, I think he's a computer scientist by training, so he's actually in the College of Engineering [College of Engineering and Applied Sciences], but he does, he's in like what they call technology studies.  So in some places, it might be a person who's at, in the college of engineering, but the person may not be a tenured person.  So it might be in the college of engineering and also part time in the department of sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what they were talking about.  And what the issue was, that if you have to serve two masters, it's one thing if they require the same level of productivity.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But if one requires more productivity than the other, you had a good chance, if you didn't keep that in mind, of being acceptable by the lower producing one but not the higher producing one.  So what was beginning to happen is that some people were not getting tenure because they didn't have sufficient number of publications.
Story_ID: 624856
Speaker 1: So the long and short was, is that since I knew that science, sociology science, was a fairly specified specialty, geographical spaces that were more limited, but fortunately, I still had my background in family, which was still very popular.  And I had specialized on divorce and the status of women.  So it gave me a wider range of institutions.  And so when I came out, I was fortunate that I was recruited by a number of schools; and one HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] and the rest of them were predominantly white institutions.
Speaker 2: Who was the HBCU?
Speaker 1: It was Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia], that actually offered me the most money, but, you know, 'cause they wanted to bring more research capability and publishing since I had already done that.  But at Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], it was kind of keeping in line like when I went to Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].  It was small, it was private, but probably the selling point there 'cause I hadn't heard anything about Wake Forest except for the Brian Piccolo story, didn't have a clue, ordinarily would not have been on the radar screen.  But one thing I would say is that I went there, and I could see, for example, you know, versus going to one other major predominantly white school, where I would be a small fish in a big pond, still would have probably gotten tenure 'cause I didn't think--tenure was not gonna be an issue for me 'cause I already knew what I needed to do.  And then going to Wake Forest, where you could be a big fish in a small pond.  But what I also knew at Wake, it had more of a family kind of atmosphere, and at the time they were kind of climbing prestige wise, but the other thing I think that I was impressed with the, the administration there.  And so after my, when I went there, I guess after my--there were two of us who were African Americans on the main faculty, a woman in psychology, later we became co-authors.  And then there was a fellow in the law school.  So we all kind of came in together.
Story_ID: 624857
Speaker 1: And I think my experience there was very interesting because, like I said, I already had published, and having had the experience at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], I already had a real good background in teaching, and I also taught while I was at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] with an independent experience.  But Wake [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] had very good students, extraordinary students, and to this day, I would say, I'd put their undergraduate education experience against any school because you mostly have professors at the time I was there teaching undergraduate, you know, entry level courses.  It's not this business of graduate assistants doing any of that.  But I remember one experience, you know, there, having a plant placed in my class to see how well I was teaching, you know.  And because I, you know, went back to grad school when I was a little bit older, and I had had these other experiences and then my military experiences had to do with some things that are security based.  So I had a pretty good idea of, you know, picking up things like that, was very blessed in having that skillset.  It has served me well.  And so I knew that this one young woman, every time the class was over, she would bam, run down to the chair's office.  And then she started struggling in class, 'cause, you know, as you get through the semester things get a little tougher 'cause it was all essays.  So you had to do a lot of reading.  So finally, it came confession time.  You know, I didn't call her in or anything.  But let the cat out of the bag that, you know, that she was supposed to report how well things were going, and, of course, things were going well.  But this is what I was saying earlier when you've had the kind of mentoring experiences that, as a person of color, and sometimes, especially, if you're the only one or you're the first one, you--and that's true, I think for a lot of people.  There are some things that, even though this is the case, you still have to perform well.  And so you have to know how to, I guess as one of my mentors said, how to pick your battles.  And so I didn't spend any time talking to the chair about that particular incident.  I just filed it away.  One thing I had learned in business and industry is what they call cover your own blank memos.  So I always wrote a memo to self for the file about that particular incident because if you have that, you're gonna have some others, but you just have to document stuff, you know, when it happens.  So it never happened again.  So, fortunately, there--
Story_ID: 624858
Speaker 1: How many black professors are on the campus?
Speaker 2: When I was there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There was, in the--
Speaker 1: Now Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is in North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's forty something K [thousand dollars] to go to school there.  The, in the basic sciences, there was one person in biology when I was there, a colleague in psychology.  There was, at the law school, the one guy.  He ended up leaving--I'm just talking about full time people.  In the business school there was no one who was permanent at first and then they brought in a guy.  That's in the undergraduate business school.  There was nobody in the graduate business school.  There was one person at the medical school.  And I believe that in speech, there was no one at the time.  That person had left.  So, and there was a woman in the English department, and I actually did her eulogy.  She was one of [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's best friends (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It sounds like, without going through all the department (laughter), and it sounds like it was one or less in all the departments.
Speaker 2: When we got there, the show, the core group, we could all go together in a Volkswagen, yeah.  That's the size we were.  And then it didn't change fundamentally in my twenty years there because, it got a little bit larger, but there were people who would leave, and then somebody would come, and then somebody else would leave.  So, but this would have been typical of many of the schools like that.  So that was a different experience, but see I think when I was there though, I got promoted very quickly.  And for, I was the first African American to come in as an assistant professor and get promoted to distinguished professorship.  And that happened in less than, in about ten years, period.  And then Maya Angelou came after my first year.  And, of course, she came in as a distinguished professor.  And then there was another distinguished professorship that was assigned to a program, so whoever is the chair of that program.
Story_ID: 624859
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask about your research and your findings about the social origins of black American doctorates in the sciences.  Now, this was a paper.  Was that the same title as your thesis, I mean your dissertation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, my dissertation was entitled 'One in a Hundred,' and basically, I mean that was the main title.  It's, so I think it's like 'One in a Hundred: A Study of Universalism in Science' [sic. 'One in a Hundred: A Study of Black American Science Doctorates,' Willie Pearson, Jr.].  And when you mention Robert K. Merton, you know, one of the norms was universalism.  The paper that you're referencing is that there was a chapter in that book, but this was a specific paper that I had been asked to do.  And what it typically showed was that, the kind of a demographic portrait of African Americans in science.  And I was very, very fortunate that there were a number of people who were ahead of me, Herman Branson, who was a physicist, studied under a Nobel laureate.  He was, I think he was not at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the time or maybe he was.
Speaker 1: He became president of Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] for a minute.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And then there was Herman Young [ph.] who was at Louisville [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] at the time.  So there were a lot of older guys who were not in sociology, but who were encouraging.  So basically what I had found, I did it--this was the first major study where it was actually a survey, a random survey--a survey of the population.  And so what I basically found that, most of the--and these are all Ph.D.'s.  Most went to school in the South.  Most went to, in the South, it was, of course, the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but I did something that was different.  I looked at a cohort analysis, so I had like from, before 1954 and up to a certain period.  And I was able to demonstrate that there were a decreasing number of these people who got Ph.D.'s who were from the South and who were from HBCUs.  And, of course, the vast majority were men.  That began to change, but also saw that there were striking differences.  Those from the North basically grew up in segregated, racially segregated neighborhoods and went to--so even though they were in the North, they were not in racially diverse neighborhoods where they grew up.  And in many cases, their schools were not either.  But the other thing I was able to see that some things did vary from discipline to another, and that, for the most part, when they were in grad school, they didn't have black professors.  There were some exceptions like Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and there were a couple of others depending on the disciplines.  But I was also able to identify these kind of knows like Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for a particular period of time in sociology, in chemistry, but not in some other areas.  Washington State [Washington State University, Pullman, Washington] in sociology (cough), Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York], particularly, the Teachers College in psychology.  And so I was able to find out that fundamentally, like at Washington State, there was a reason why that existed.  There was a fellow who was at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Charles Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] was over at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And they had a partnership, I mean a friendship.  So when this guy became, I think, like either provost or president out in Washington State, he recruited black students to the soc [sociology] department.  Chicago had a similar kind of relationship, and then at Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], there was a relationship between Brown and Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had a relationship with some of the HBCUs in the center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], and then you began to see that these relationships happened at one point in time, and then at another point in time, they disappear.  And in some of these cases, it was the commitment of the whole department.  In other cases, it was an individual.  So when that individual either died or left, you saw a change.  You also see something similar when Herman Branson was teaching physics at Virginia State [sic.].  The number of undergrads who got degrees in physics and went into physics increased.  When he went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], at Virginia State, they decreased.  So one of the fundamental things I began to learn, it's not just HBCUs that was the production factor, but it was also who was there.  And a similar thing happened in the major schools.
Story_ID: 624860
Speaker 1: The other thing that I was able to find out is, you know, marital status, things of that particular nature.  And so you were able to discover that, and it still kind of exists today, a lot of the women were either never married or that they were divorced, whereas most of the men were married.  And you found religious differences that most of the people were, you know, Protestant, just like for the whites.  There were very few people who were Catholic and any other religion.  But then, so that was just for that particular--
Speaker 2: Very few black Catholics become scientists?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's true for whites as well.  So what you would find, even among whites, mostly Protestants and then Jews were overrepresented, but very few Catholics.  And some argued that Catholicism is incompatible with so called scientist principles.  I don't quite totally buy that, but that was part of the argument that was being raised.  But the parallel was that the black people were functioning very similar to what Merton [Robert K. Merton] had predicted.
Speaker 2: I think just recently, the Vatican apologized for what they did to, was it--you know the guy I'm talking--
Speaker 1: Galileo [Galileo Galilei]?
Speaker 2: Galileo, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and --
Speaker 2: They just recently apologized, (laughter) like five hundred years later.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that, that--but that's part of what was happening though.  And then I think what you also see is that, see this was something that was systematically done in terms of the research.  Before then, what I, what Branson [Herman Branson] and some of the other people did was not systematic.  They didn't have social science skills.  So, but when Branson gave me, you know, sent all of his papers, and so I'm coming along at a time where it's unusual for, you know, and in our community collectively, we didn't have sociologist of science or sociology of technology.  So when you would see someone like Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] writing about humanities or being black and being a chemist, that's kind of, a little solo stuff.
Story_ID: 624861
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah so you're at Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] for twenty years, and there're several, in '85 [1985] you published a book.  Now, this is based on a lot of your dissertation too, right, the book?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Black Scientists, White Society and Colorless Science'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'A Study of Universalism in American Science' ['Black Scientists, White Society and Colorless Science: A Study of Universalism in American Science,' Willie Pearson, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was basically, largely from my dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I was saying, that my advisor [Jerry Gaston] facilitated me in writing the dissertation as a book.
Speaker 1: And there's so many, I guess--one thing that we were discussing before we started again during the break, was the invisibility of the black scientists that are already out here.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So there's a lack of--most people don't know that they exist.
Speaker 2: No, and the sad part of it is that when people construct their museums, their exhibits, they are not aware.  Even sometimes, when one of my colleagues who was at Charlotte [University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, North Carolina] was African American, he was an architect by training, had a whole exhibit on physicists.  There was not a woman nor a person of color.  He had no clue that they actually even existed.  But that means that even in the formal stuff or that school system stuff, they don't really know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I think the U.S. government recently published a stamp commemorating Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian], I guess about three years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did one before then on Booker T.--not Booker T. Washington, but--
Speaker 1: George Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) George Washington Carver, yeah.  Yeah, I was involved with the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] filming for the special on Percy Julian.  We came to Chicago [Illinois].  We did our film shoots there, part of them, very unique person.  And there were some issues because, you know, his private life--I think that's one thing for some of the very prominent, older African Americans that some of them personal issues like divorce, other things that they don't want to have their stories told because they don't want that part.  Now, I explained it to some, you don't have to tell that part.  Unfortunately, some of them passed away without ever leaving their stories.
Speaker 1: Right, right, and that's a feature, yeah, that's the part--you don't have to tell that part necessarily.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And I don't think a lot of people realize that.  They think that--even in this job, you know, people, they don't wanna be interviewed because they don't wanna tell.  But I'm not Mike Wallace though (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know, they can tell what they wanna tell.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've, we've been--actually, I'm on the, co-chair of this ScienceMakers thing with Bill Lester [HistoryMaker William Lester, Jr.].  And I know that, see when some, I think, particularly, when some scientists the kind of generic questionnaire that they sent out from The HistoryMakers, it's a different breed--probably you already know from interviewing some, than from other people, other groups.  And some of them don't want, and what they see as being invasive stuff, because they're used to just talking about their science and not themselves.  But that's part of the challenge where that bringing visibility and for younger people to see because for a lot of the books, it's still George Washington Carver, Percy Julian.  So it's as though science stopped, and that's what some of us have been working on that.  You know, people continue to contribute their creativity.  And I'm thinking that in the--but still the numbers have not changed, you know, as the way they should for Ph.D.'s.  I'm trying to think the whole time I was at Wake, there was never anyone in chemistry--well, we have a situation similar to here [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  And we're an engineering school because while I was at Wake, I did do, what, post-doc two years.
Story_ID: 624862
Speaker 1: Well, in your book, 'Black Scientists, White Society and Colorless Science' ['Black Scientists, White Society and Colorless Science: A Study of Universalism in American Science,' Willie Pearson, Jr.] you list several reasons for the low numbers of African Americans in the sciences.  One reason is a lack of early encouragement and motivation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Another reason is lack of financial support and limited opportunities.  Another reason is limited recruitment and institutional racism.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Four, lack of tradition in science and five, lack--science perceived as too difficult and unrewarding and a lack of role models.  So you wanna talk about some of those?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that's what, 1985.  So that's some while ago, but some of them still remain.  And see, in the 1985 book, that would have include, it would have ended with people who got their Ph.D.'s around 1974.  So some things have changed and some things have not.  I would say that the issue about financial aid, for some of the ones during the earlier periods, probably up until maybe the mid-1960s, they, as a group, didn't come from families that had that kind of wealth.  So some of them were obviously very smart.  They sometimes had even problems getting money for undergrad because the availability of federal loans for NDSL, National Defense Student Loans [Federal Perkins Loan Program] didn't come out until, you know, the '60s [1960s], I believe.  And so for some people who managed to get to college, a lot of whom worked, got their degrees, then they would go--sometime they worked a little while; went back and got a master's [degree], worked for a little while and then went on to get a Ph.D. But in science, see that means that they're gonna be a little bit older than their white contemporaries who had kind of some economic class advantages.  The, so then money became a little bit more plentiful for those who were very talented with some of the programs out of the Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration and the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration and the rise of minority scholarships.  And now those have kind of waned a bit because of backlashes and things of that sort.  So I would say, even in terms of financial aid, it's not like it was before.  It's been cut back and keep in mind that probably personal growth of income has not changed that significantly and what I found is that for many of the black families, I guess of these particular scientists, there's income and there's wealth.  And a lot of them who may have been very well educated didn't have wealth.  They had kind of middle class incomes, but in terms of wealth, that is, whether stocks, bonds, other kind of holdings, was not there.  And if they had a certain number of children, and sometimes, they were responsible for their adult parents.  And in the South, and in some extended families in the North, it may be that a cousin or an uncle was also being cared for.  So, you have a situation where now that the money still makes a difference because if you've taken out student loans as an undergrad, you already have a level of indebtedness.  And we know from the National Science Foundation data that African Americans as a group tend to have a higher amount of indebtedness.  Now, part of that is field related so if they're in the social sciences or humanities, they may have had to borrow more because a lot of the impetus is on so called fields where these groups are less represented, like in the basic sciences or the physical sciences, mathematics or biology, engineering.  But in terms of role models, it kind of gets to the point that we were talking about offline that, if you don't see the visibility there and you, so you don't know exactly what's possible.  And I think when I was coming along, even though I didn't personally know or see people doing what I wanted to do, in my head, I knew it was possible, that someone had to start doing it.  But I knew you had to have certain skills, so I had a pretty general idea that the people I had seen who were successful had ability to write well.  They could speak, but they were hard workers.  But they had other skills, particularly, analytical skills.  And they had a sense of confidence that you just don't quit when things got tough.  And I think that what you have now is that, media is doing a little bit better job, at least electronic media, of showing some faces.  But unfortunately, for a lot of kids who have ability, and whether it's math or science early on, it's not in their textbook.  There are not the posters.  It used to be, I think Nabisco in the late '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s] had posters like distinguished blacks in science and there were a couple of other companies that had something like, like that.
Story_ID: 624863
Speaker 1: But the other factor, I would say that in terms of believing that it's hard, you still have some parents who believe that math is hard.  And they didn't have, just say, necessarily sufficient math background themselves.  And my personal belief is that if we can fix math, that is where math doesn't require equipment for the most part.  If it's high level math and equitable, everybody can at least pick up those skills very early on, in order, if they want to take calculus, they can take trig [trigonometry], they can do that because in some ways, the lack of mathematical ability--and I don't mean ability, I mean the education begins to sort certain fields.  So in my own discipline, if you don't have some quantitative background, you're not likely to be able to do some types of survey work.  You're not likely, for example, to do some work that's in, where the growth areas are for employment.  But it also means you're not likely to be able to move from academe to the private sector that may require some quantitative skills.  So part of the issue is getting over that it's too difficult and it's too unrewarding because for a lot of people in the community, historically, that's changing a bit.  They don't have a clue, for example, that biomedical scientists, if you end up with a patent, your income is gonna be drastically different than for a physician.  Nor do they understand, for example, that under managed care, physicians don't make the kind of money that, historically, that maybe their grandparents or parents made.  It's a different world.  All you need to do is go to some of these clinics, you know, these--I forgot.  You can drop in during the day and you can see the number and demographics of those particular physicians.  They're working basically eight to five [o'clock] type of jobs.  But I think the other issue is that if probably more people can see the wider attributes of doing science, that you don't have to be in a lab, for example.  There are people who do administrative work.  There's science almost in everything.  That I remember for the museum industry that the young black kids in the housing projects or public housing in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] would occasionally get a chance to go to the museum, but they never saw what was behind the exhibits.  So the music, the art, the architecture, they didn't know those kind of jobs.  And so, if you're not exposed to that, it's no difference than I think when you have a situation, I think one of my colleagues was doing music, doing a history of technology.  And that showed, for example, if you take when rap came out, they used to do the scratch.  But that's vinyl.  When they went to digital, you don't see the visibility of those folks anymore 'cause vinyl was one thing, and easy to come by, but the digital requires a level of mixing that's technologically based.  And so you can begin to see the transition of who had those kind of studios or who was being employed.
Story_ID: 624864
Speaker 1: So since 1985, I would say in that cohort, the numbers of Ph.D.'s, there's still less than about 5 percent or around there.  So it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) scientists?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's kind of moved from about 1 percent--that's my book, 'One in a Hundred' ['One in a Hundred: A Study of Black American Science Doctorates,' Willie Pearson, Jr.], to, up to 2 percent.  But then that's everything included.  But then you begin to kind of desegregate for physics and for engineering.  And then even in areas that's supposed to have a number of people like psychology, you take away clinical and look at experimental psychology, the numbers change drastically.
Speaker 2: They go down?
Speaker 1: Yes, go down tremendously.  But I think the--but even at the baccalaureate level, you begin to see some changes, just say, as I was mentioning about some of the, what the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] used to, they used to be over contributing to the scientific and technical pool.  And now that particular number has been decreasing dramatically in terms of the percent of students who get Ph.D.'s in the sciences from HBCUs.  It's still better than some places, but it's been, as more students don't go to HBCUs, that number changes and even the African Americans on the faculties at HBCUs in the sciences, it's declined tremendously over the last twenty years.  So there's still this great need, and I guess basically, what I'm saying is that some of the challenges we saw before in 1985, we have made improvements, but it's not the level of improvements that people kind of expected.  You take, for example, African Americans, about 14 percent of the overall population.  And probably within that, if you were just were to say, probably the ones that are college age level are--take out the younger kids under eighteen, just even if that's 7 percent, for example, and if you're getting only 5 percent of the Ph.D.'s, you're still way under.  That's why the government counts them as being underrepresented in science.  And I think that my view, and it's always been the same, not that I want everybody to go into science engineering, I think having the skillsets allow you to have more flexibility in terms of career choice.  So if you wanna go into the humanities, at least you have an option that if things don't work out, you have, you can go into an area of the humanities, like digital media aspects of that, that you might not have been able to go in if you didn't have those kind of--exposure to those skillsets.  That's, I see as kind of a limitation.  But that's at the middle school and high school level where that occurs.  But you can see the sorting already because if you haven't had a certain level of math, and you find that black kids who think they're good in math, they wanna be engineers.  Well, when their highest level has been algebra, that's not likely to happen.  But there, it's not--I mean they're purely capable of it.  It's the issue that if you have family saying that it's, math is too hard, that they don't understand it.  You know, you have to have a teacher or somebody else to counter that, to show that they can do it.  So that's kind of what has happened since 1985.  There's been progress, but not enough.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, now, just out of curiosity, what is the field that has the, I guess, the most, you know, numerous doctorate level degrees in the black community?
Speaker 1: You mean just period.  It's education--
Speaker 2: That's what I wondered.
Speaker 1: --because one thing that happens is that a number of African Americans who might get degrees, will say in the sciences, including the social sciences, sometimes when they go on to get a doctorate, they switch to education.  In fact, I was just returning from the largest educational research meeting in the world, and it's always amazing because I see a number of sociologists who are there, but their work is primarily in education.  And so some of them are on faculties of education.  But you would also see some people who get their degrees in math.  So they won't get their Ph.D.'s in pure math.  They might get it in math education.  So that's what kind of skews that particular fact.
Story_ID: 624865
Speaker 1: Now, in '86 [1986], you became the president of the Mid-South Sociological Association.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I guess, now I suppose that's the sociological association of, it's a branch of the American Sociological Association?
Speaker 2: No, it's a regional, so you're--in sociology, just like in some other disciplines, we might have the American Sociological Association, but each region, geographic region may have its own.  So there's a Midwest sociological association [Midwest Sociological Society].  There's an eastern one [Eastern Sociological Society], there's a southern one, there's a Mid-South, and there's a Pacific [Pacific Sociological Association] one.  So the Mid-South is its own regional sociological association comprised of usually states in the Mid-South, but there are other people who are from the, Nebraska and other places who belong to it because some of them went to school in the South.  But the makeup is generally from that particular region.  And I think when I became president, I was the first African American to be elected.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--in what ways might the Mid-South Sociological Association be different from the overall body?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one thing that's a little bit different is our, the founding of the organization.  Equity was built into the kind of organizing principles.  And what I mean by that is that you, until very recently, there would not have been many women or people of color, male or female, president of the American Sociological Association or playing prominent roles, whereas in the Mid-South, there was the women's caucus and a minority caucus that in part of the founding, they were members of the governing body.  So that was something that was, felt instructive so it was always kind of inclusive.   And part of that was because of the kind of demographic structure that people saw in the Southern Sociological Association [Southern Sociological Society] and in the larger American Sociological Association.  So part of it is also, I would say a difference is that the Mid-South--I haven't been able to go in the last few years because of conflict, but it has always been a more of a welcomed place where that, it's more like (unclear), so it's more community, kind of oriented.  So it embraces graduate students, people from small schools, and that's probably one of the reasons why a lot of people like to attend it.  And sociology when I was coming along, it was very typical, kind of unlike maybe chemistry and to some extent psychology and other fields.  It was typical if you gave a paper, we would have what they call the discussant.  And discussant basically was seen as the person who'd try to tear down your work, rather than being complimentary.  That's changed quite a bit.  So in the Mid-South, it was always an issue where that, that was not the role of the discussant or people in the audience.  It was more of a place where you could get some critical feedback, but not be attacked.  And typically, in these early years, it was an attack on your methodology, particularly, if you were not quani- you were not rigorous enough in terms of quantification.  But now the American Sociological Association is far more inclusive too.  So in a sense, how the Mid-South continued to be inclusive and started off that way, now, the Mid-South--now the parent organization, I guess, in many ways, the American Sociological Association has had a black woman to be president.  It's had at least one black male or two.  And historically, the early one was E. Franklin Frazier, but, you know, even in that case, he went to Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but wasn't acceptable to the white wives for him to join the faculty then.  My allergies are kicking in a little bit.  But the issue is that they've all kind of come along a little bit differently sociology because of the demographics, that is you have more people of color, particularly, more Hispanics now.  So that's kind of reflected in the organization, but when you begin to look at certain disciplines or certain specialties, it's very different because if you were to take a look at my so called specialty group which is called SKAT, it's science, knowledge and technology it's still overwhelmingly white, very few people of color.  And probably if you go to one of their quantitative sections, you'll find something very similar.  That's the major difference.
Story_ID: 624866
Speaker 1: You served as editor in '87 [1987] of Contemporary Sociology.  That's the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the editorial board (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, on the, okay, as an associate editor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's one of the top--you know, the American Sociological Association has a certain number of journals, and that's one of them.  It does a lot of book reviews.  At the time, there was the issue, where not many African Americans being on the editorial boards for the American Sociological Association journals.  So at that time, I think, I'm not sure of whether or not there were any other African Americans on that journal, but that has also improved.  They were just not on there.  But that was, I would say, typical of some of the other disciplines as well.  You know, it's only been recently that there's been more representation because part of it, supposedly, you're supposed to have a scholarly reputation yourself.  But if you recall, I was saying that for a number of people, they finished from top programs, but they didn't have publications for a lot of reasons, not necessarily owing to them personally, but for not getting the proper mentoring.  But that's changed I think, a little, at least considerably over the last twenty, twenty-five years.
Story_ID: 624867
Speaker 1: In '88 [1988], you were awarded a congressional fellowship from the Office of Technology Assessment, and that was to--was that to complete work you'd already started?
Speaker 2: No, this is--the Office of Technology Assessment, also known as OTA, was a kind of, the think tank for [U.S.] Congress.  It no longer exists.  Under one of the Republican, I believe, when they were in, and the administration eliminated some of the federal programs, that was one.  So the Office of Technology Assessment had to conduct studies, and a lot of times, they'd be secondary data analysis, on a particular topic.  Just say, if one topic may be whether or not communication towers emit radiation that cause cancer, just making up something.  So typically what they would do is a study to see if there's evidence.  And so they couldn't tell Congress that you need to do this.  What they would say, here's some options you have to deal with this.
Speaker 1: Okay, in a hearing setting?
Speaker 2: It could be a hearing, but to give you probably a little bit better flavor, when I was there, I actually worked with two groups.  I was involved in the workforce study.  And then there was another thing where that, there was a big issue about, otitis media.  It's the inner ear infection that usually impacts babies.  And so there was the controversy of whether or not one of the famous scientists was making the case that a particular type of medication, but it was produced by a particular company, was more effective in treating an inner ear infection than the generic type.  Well, later on, it turns out that he was employed by the company as a consultant and to speaker, but he had not disclosed that.  So one thing that's come out of that is disclosing conflict of interests.  So this one thing I had to go to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and listen to a hearing and then come, then write a technical memo for the agency so they would know what went on.  For the other study that dealt with the workforce, it was an increasing issue where that U.S. competitiveness, that we were discovering that a lot of our young workers and entry level workers had serious problems with alcohol and drugs and were not productive and that for a number of them, their numeracy skills were limited.  So what in essence it was causing is the U.S. workforce not to be competitive, for example, with Japan or China.  And what we were discovering basically is that people were finishing high school, but didn't know how to make change.  And you'll see it occasionally where that if you purchase an item and just say it's a dollar and one cent, and just say, you don't have to have a penny.  And you give the person a dollar and five cents or a dollar and ten cents.  Sometimes they don't know what, how to cash, how to do that transaction because many of them, they're used to what we call the, what they call dummy down technology, where you look on the screen, and it tells you.  If you've got a dollar, you punch in a dollar, and if the item costs seventy-five cents, you punch it in, but sometimes, when that's either down or you don't have that, they don't know how to make regular cash transactions.  And what was happening more and more as students were coming out who couldn't do that, or if they had to, you asked them to leave a tip of 10 percent, they didn't know how to just move the decimal point over, whereas people in other countries, the workforce was much more qualified to do things like that.  So, essentially, for Congress, we realized that there was a problem that, the preparedness of our young people.  So if you're putting together a car, and you can't read a blueprint, but the workers in Japan can, you can obviously put the car together much faster, and it's likely to be a higher quality.  So we did studies like that.  We did one, another one that actually dealt with, what we call citation patterns.  So if you wanted to find out who was the first person to make a major contribution, we'll say, in what is now called nanotechnology.  So there's a way to find out who did that study, who did the next one, who cited whom, so you can identify communities of people.  So that agency was expected to advise Congress, and it was a bipartisan.  So there was one Independent, I think, on the board, and then it was divided equally between Democrats and Republicans.
Story_ID: 624868
Speaker 1: In 1990, you were, you were a panel member for ethics and values studies in Science, Technology and Society for the National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is this your first, I guess, active association with the National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: No, I actually started being involved with the National Science Foundation when I was a graduate student [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] because the research that I did for my dissertation was the first major type of research like that.  And so at that time, the government didn't have that much of an idea of how many African Americans in particular were in science, and what they were actually doing.  So they began to develop a database, and so I was involved with, kind of advising on some of that, for different areas of the National Science Foundation.  But in this case, it had more to do with, increasingly there were ethical issues raised about the scientific discoveries, and technological kind of issues in terms of inventions.  So this was an inter- a cross disciplinary group at the National Science Foundation.  So we began to have more people wanting to study ethical decisions and it kind of varied.  Some of them involved computer science issues.  For example, if you had, in the real estate industry, and they began to show virtual buildings, but that may not be a true representation of what the building was.  So there were ethical issues.  There were also more and more cases where, and some people argued because of the pressure to get publications, where people fabricated data.  So there was an effort to kind of study these things because you could imagine that if someone had fabricated data in the biomedical field for a particular medication, and it turns out that it was not true.  So you can have injurious problems for a massive number of people, you know, if they're injected with something.  So there'd been, so that particular panel was more or less reviewing research that wanted to look at some of those questions.  And again, you know, you have the same issue about diversity 'cause I was typically the only African American on there.  Then we got another guy from engineering who did some ethical, did work on ethics and engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Part of that was not the fault of the panel.  It was just in my field more generally, if you look at the philosophy of science, history of science and sociology of science, and a little bit of psychology and anthropology of science at the time.  You didn't have people of color because a lot of us never even knew it existed because it was typically on campus where a lot of our communities didn't go to college, yeah.  So, you know, it's one of those kind of awareness things or exposure.
Story_ID: 624869
Speaker 1: Now, 1992, you were a consultant for Project MOSAIC for the American Association for the Advancement of Science [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a project, was actually trying to bring diversity to the museum community.  And specifically, the scientific and technical museums that are part of the ASTC association [Association of Science Technology Centers].  So the idea was that some of these communities sometimes were in close proximity of minority communities, but the minority community was not engaged in any fashion.
Speaker 1: I think a clear example would be the Detroit museum [Michigan Science Center, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago [Illinois] too, as well.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And, yeah, exactly, and also out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  That museum was not too far from one of the public housing projects, and yet, in some cases there was a cost even for the school kids to come.  But part of the issues when the kids would come, they would see no one who looked like themselves, either in terms of pictures or videos or anything else 'cause a lot of the docents were not diverse either.  So Project MOSAIC was trying to reach out to the museum community and do something about the issue.  So my other hat is doing evaluation, program evaluation as a consultant.  So I have a group that we've been doing this for a long time.  So one of the issues that, you go to the museums, I think we had the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.], the California museum [California Science Center, Los Angeles, California], the Charlotte museum [Discovery Place, Charlotte, North Carolina], and I think we had--I can't remember if there was one more.  But at any rate, you would go and you saw that the staff was very limited too because a lot of people hadn't had museum studies or curator studies.  But even at that, there was not a conscious effort to, for internships and things of that sort.  So in the long and short of it, we ended up, there was a publication about it.  So the community's a bit more diverse now than what it was.  But it still has a long ways to go, and if your next generation are these kids who are Latino, who are black, who are Asians, and in many ways they don't see themselves.  So they can go to a museum and see some of the museum pieces and things like that.  But if you don't even identify that you could work at a place like that, and for some of them, this is what I was saying earlier, behind those exhibits are people who construct those.  They're writers, they're historians of science, historians of technology, but they're invisible.  And so the only way you make them visible is for kids to go behind the scene to know that here's a job where you can be a historian and you can write the story, the back matter that's used for that, and that there are now exhibits I know for the National Academy of Sciences [Washington, D.C.].  They have what they call African American series.  So there're a couple of us who are in the social sciences are profiled in that.  And it's both an exhibit and electronic version of that.  So kids can click on and see what your career would have been like and see who you are.  And I know for some of those, we'll get inquiries sometimes for kids writing a term paper and they want to get the stuff.  But the basic idea is that in some of the museums, you know, they've made some progress but many of the science and technology museums, there's still a way to go.  That's what it was about.
Story_ID: 624870
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994], you co-edited a book, 'Will--,' 'Who Will Do Science: Educating the Next Generation: Diversity in Science and Technology Centers' [sic.].  Now, you and Art Fletcher [sic.] are co-editors of this.  And Art Fletcher [HistoryMaker Arthur Fletcher] is the father of affirmative action.  Is that the same Art Fletcher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's not?  Okay.
Speaker 2: That should be 'Who Will Do Science? Educating the Next Generation' [eds. Willie Pearson, Jr. and Alan Fechter].  The one about diversity was associated with the Project MOSAIC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Alan Fechter was--
Speaker 1: Oh, Alan Fechter, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Alan Fechter was the director for the Office of Scientific and Technical Personnel [sic. Office of Science and Engineering Personnel] at the National Academy of Sciences.  He passed away shortly after we did that book.  And one of the issues that we were concerned about is that not only for African Americans, but it was pretty clear, a lot of American kids were not going into science like they used to.  And so that book kind of focused on who will do science in the future.  And if your increases in population are coming from Latinos and from some other groups and they may have historically not participated in science, and if the number of white males who were participating in science is decreasing for birth reasons, for other reasons, then that leaves you with populations like women, people with disabilities and some minority populations that heretofore did not engage in science at those levels.  So that was the basic effort to pay attention and that science has had these different issues that you really didn't need a lot of people.  You just need the most, you know, a small group of very talented people.  And so part of that was also a challenge that if you take that model, for example, and you only need the most gifted ones, then what if you're wrong.  And so what began to happen at the Ph.D. level that has still caused some controversy, is that as the number of white males began to participate at a much lower level, we have had a practice in more recent years of bringing in foreign students and foreign professional.  So this has created, unfortunately, some xenophobic reaction that they're taking jobs from folks which basically is not true because if you don't have Americans in the jobs in the first place, and the jobs have to be done, they're actually filling a void.  Now, from an economic point of view, it's been raised that by doing that, it suppresses the salary scale.  In other words, you can pay foreign professionals less money than what you pay the typical American scientist or engineers.  And so the argument is that because that suppresses the wages, you now can't attract Americans to go into those jobs because it's not worth putting in all those years to get a Ph.D., we'll say in chemistry or physics or math, and that's all that they're gonna make, monetarily wise when you can actually, by having a foreign person who may take ten or twenty thousand dollars less, you can get the same work.  So part of the controversy has been that we've paid more attention in developing foreign talent in this country than talent from groups that are not presently represented, like Latinos, African Americans, women and persons with disabilities.  So there're actually federal policies trying to get more people from those groups because some jobs you cannot do if they are federal jobs that relate to national security issues.  You have to be a citizen.  So we literally have in some of our graduate, some of our universities where a person may be head of the department or may be a dean, but cannot have access to the lab because they're not citizens.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 624871
Speaker 1: Now you, in '98 [1998], now tell me if I'm jumping ahead too fast, but in '98 [1998] you received a grant from the National Institute of Justice--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what was this for?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time I was on the, I was at Wake Forest University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and on the sociology faculty, but I was also an adjunct at the medical school.  Janet Reno was in office at the time, and they developed what they called this five city project.  And the issue was that there would be five cities that had serious social problems.  Some of them would vary, just say in one city, like Memphis [Tennessee], there was the issue about sexual harassment, rapes.  In Connecticut, it may have been gun shots.  In Portland [Oregon], it may have been, let's just say homicide, where the case may have been in, we'll say in, say the Midwest.  In Atlanta [Georgia], I mean excuse me, in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], the issue was youth violence.  And so what was happening, Winston-Salem is kind of a medium sized city.  I guess maybe at the time, it may have been a couple hundred thousand.  And there was the increasing issue of violent crime escalating among the youth population.  So in this case, the grant was given to each city.  And I was the research--well, actually, there was a person before me, and he wasn't working out well.  It probably had political issues why he was there from the first place because he didn't have research skills.  So we were asked to take over.  So we actually rewrote the proposal and got funded.  And we had Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] involved, the Wake Forest University medical school [Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], the main campus.  We had the sheriff's department, police department, all the social services from the court system to mental health and the schools.  So the basic idea was to try to understand why violence was escalating among the youth.  And keep in mind that the police department and the sheriff's department didn't have sufficient criminologists or criminal justice people or social scientists permanent on board in their employ.  So for a lot of them, they thought that the crime was just being, you know, being rampant.  We're talking about, you know, the use of weapons.  So I did some back of the envelope kind of calculations and began to understand that it was only a small group of juveniles who were committing violent crimes.  There may have been like a total of, I think a hundred and something.  And then out of that hundred, there were, well, maybe sixty-five that were actually involved with some element of crime that classified as serious.  But, in general, there may have been something like, you know, thirty or forty who were hardcore youth involved in shootings, cuttings, things of that particular nature.  And then the other thing we saw that we had the rise of gang activity, but the law enforcement was in denial that you didn't have gangs, you know, in a place like that, even the graffiti was there and the folks from California were very clear.  But it's--'cause to accept that you had gang activity, and you didn't have a gang unit, so things were getting bad.  And then the shootings were becoming problematical.
Story_ID: 624872
Speaker 1: Well, the other thing that was turning out though too is that for the people in the social work, in the mental health area were not prepared to deal with kids who had serious mental health issues resulting from crack cocaine, from when they were born to mothers who were like that.  But also there were some who were not born to a mother like that, but whose parent or parents had serious habitual problems with drugs and were dysfunctional and that we had this rise of grandparents who fell into two categories, the traditional age of grandparents who might be in their sixties and seventies and then these fairly young grandparents who may be forty because they had kids when they were very young and their kids had kids when they were very young.  So the bottom line was that for some of the older grandparents, they had no clue about drug issues like crack, and that for some of the younger ones, they were still working, but to take time off to go see the school system about their grandchild meant that they actually lost income.  But there was no particular service or support group for grandparents--existed there.  So one, after seeing the need, we explained what was going on, so they actually created something because during that particular period of time, if you were on federal housing assistance and someone in your apartment committed a crime, you could lose your housing there.  You had to move out.  And so you can imagine that if you've got people selling drugs or doing this and that the family may or may not be aware of that, but then you don't have any housing.  And then the issue is, then where do you go?  So that project ended up, I think they established a center for community safety.  I left not too long after that, but that's what that particular project [five city project] was about.
Story_ID: 624873
Speaker 1: We were able to demonstrate that what the law enforcement thought was fact, was not.  It was, they didn't have any--it was no evidence to support that.  So now they were able to focus on what was actually fact.  And it was just a small group of kids.  I think the other thing 'cause the ministerial groups were involved too, that a lot of them didn't know, that is, law enforcement didn't understand when kids have mental health issues that shouting at them and trying to scare them straight doesn't work.  So we had warned them about that, and then they had this kind of lineup where they brought in all law enforcement, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], every component and they had the kids who were hardcore kind of on a, in the audience.  So you had this panel of law enforcement people each talking about, you know, the problems and the dangers and so and so and that they need to get--and there was help available, you know, whether it was mental health, whether there were ministers and so forth and so on.  So we had warned them that there were a couple of kids who would be in their group who had mental health issues and they wouldn't understand communications on a fairly sophisticated level.  So I remember that, I guess one of the sheriffs or something like that was speaking and some kid was kind of laughing inappropriately.  And so the guy kind of went off, "You think it's funny," and so forth.  Well, this kid had mental health issues, and had no clue about the level of severity of this and even though we had warned them.  So they finally got the fact that you can't use that method with kids who may be, have serious mental health challenges 'cause that's not the way to happen.  The other thing we saw is that there were class and race issues.  So when kids came in contact with the law for criminal offenses, if you were privileged, you got what we call diverted from the system.  So you didn't actually go through the courts.  You may be sent to a special counselor or privately or something else, where your name never engages in the juvenile system, whereas for kids who were poor, regardless of race or ethnicity, are contacted with the juvenile court.  You now have a juvenile record, and in North Carolina at the time, if you were sixteen, you would be tried as an adult if you committed a felony.  So that means from sixteen on--I think there were only two states like that.  So we were able to show that, what inequities were within the system.  But that was something very different from what I typically did in terms of my research.  But the whole time I was at Wake [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], I had been involved with community kind of issues 'cause in many cases, they couldn't afford like a consultant.  So they couldn't afford me on my own, but you did voluntary work.  So, 'cause I believe fundamentally that you have to give some stuff back.  So that was, that was kind of that whole project [five city project].  And things, they did finally recognize that there were gangs.  It turns out there was an Asian gang, Latino gang, and that was also during the period where some of the Jamaican gangs were very visible in the kind of violence that they were doing.
Story_ID: 624874
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think we seem to live in an age today where there's increasing--there's a call for a lot of government cutbacks on programs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and a trimming down of the very programs that seem to work to prevent crime or programs aimed at preventing--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --the cause of crime.
Speaker 2: --and see there would be real consequences for that though too because, you know, the people are gonna go somewhere.  They are not going to just go away and hide in a hole somewhere that if they don't have access to means to survive, they're gonna take it from people who do.  That's the nature of the beast.  And that we always felt, because being on these different advisory boards, there were not many of us on the faculty because a lot of people, like I said, they had--later on, the people I think in the law school [Wake Forest University School of Law, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], more of them did.  But it was more or less maybe two or three of us who had practical research skills so, because a lot of times in the academic community, they want to study something and study something and keep studying it, where in the real world, if there's a problem where increased violence, you can't keep studying it because you got people dying each period.  And so we found out, for example, what they call now, the GS system, that was just being tried out by government, by the feds at that time.  So there was both a plus and a minus for the GS system because the ethical issue is that now, I can on a map identify where the predators are at this house, but I also know who lives next door.  And so there were issues about privacy.  But one thing the system did allow is that we could pinpoint, for example, a lot of criminal vandalism activities.  Robberies took place around areas that didn't have proper lighting.  So if someone had shot out the streetlights or the streetlights had just never been repaired, so you could literally see where that was occurring.  You could see the crime rates there.  And I think the other thing that we found that was probably the most disturbing thing for a lot of people, sexual predators who were seven and nine years old.  And the social work and mental health people were not prepared to deal with that at all.  But then you look deeper, some of those kids were molested when they were two or three.  So they were growing up to act out that same way.  In economically depressed communities, you know, when the young couples wanna go out to a club somebody has to babysit.  And so sometimes, they would have like the older kid, being nine, in the family.  So it wouldn't necessarily be the family of orientation, but that kid would be like the babysitter.  And so that, that instance that we were talking, that I'm talking about, the kid would molest the younger kids.  And even though the family knew that that was a high risk, but they wanted to go somewhere, they would still leave the kid in charge.
Story_ID: 624875
Speaker 1: And the problem, the other issue was that for a number of the young black males were being put out of school, middle school and high school, early high school.  But what I discovered, you know, doing some of the analysis with my team is that there was a system where that there, if you had an offense and if you had a weapon of any sort whether it was scissors or a piece of knife, it doesn't matter, you were put out of school.  But it was for a calendar year, not an academic year.  So you have a misalignment.  So the kid is now out for another three months or so, and it depends on what time you get out, so you didn't get a chance to come back to school until after school had started.  And I think for some of us, if you are a male, you have been retained, and so you can't read well.  You can't--you're not necessarily good in some other academic things, and the teacher calls on you, you know, to read a passage or something like that.  Well, what's the likelihood since the person can't do that, you have a great probability for some kids to, to become clowns or to talk back because it's a way of deflecting that.  You follow what I'm saying?  And so for some of those kids, by talking back, that's an inappropriate middle class response.  So they get sent to the principal's office, get sent to detention.  And I think in some of the other cases--so they were more likely to be put out of school.  So you had this tremendously high rate of young black males being put out of school.  And now you had a growth industry because there was development of kind of nonprofits that had after school and school settings for kids who had been put out.  So there was a separate kind of funding that had to go to those.  Otherwise, you have an issue where you have a band of kids out of school and not under supervision.  And then I think the other ones was the mental health issue where some of those kids would be put out like that, some had mental health issues, so they'd be sent to a mental health facility.  And I think in one kind of glaring case, it was just, I think off the chart, where a kid went two hundred times.  Well, obviously, if you're going that many times the therapeutic model is not culturally specific to that kind of kid.  So it didn't--I think the kid went out 240 times.  And so when I'm looking at this stuff, that obviously something is not working here.  And he was not the only kid.  But when you're using a model that's been normed on a different population, it was just not appropriate.
Story_ID: 624876
Speaker 1: All right, 2005 you published 'The Role and Activities of American Graduate Schools in Recreating, Enrolling and Retaining United States Black and Hispanic Students' [sic. 'The Role and Activities of American Graduate Schools in Recruiting, Enrolling and Retaining United States Black and Hispanic Students,' Willie Pearson, Jr.], and that was an--that's a standalone book--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's edited--
Speaker 2: That was a project that was funded by the Graduate Record Exam Board, while I was at the Educational Testing Service [ETS] in Princeton, New Jersey.  And what that particular study was about was primarily what factors enhanced or limited the participation of those two underrepresented groups in graduate education.  And so there were certain schools that we visited.  They were anonymous, and they represented schools on the East Coast, Midwest and other places.  And it was also a survey.  So it was a survey plus there were focus groups.  And the idea was to understand what individual institutions were doing to enhance the participation of Latinos and African Americans at their institutions.  And these covered different fields.  I think psychology was one, criminology was one, I think biology.  And we had learned a couple things.  One is that at some schools there were no Latinos who were born in the United States who were in the Ph.D. program.  And people who were at those schools were very apologetic so we couldn't use them.  But the bottom line is that we saw basically, just to cut through the chase, that departments that valued all students regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, disability or sexual orientation, in those departments all the students did well, regardless of their group affiliation and had positive things to say.  In some institutions, the African American students were less likely than the white students to have research experiences, that is the sense that it led to a publication or a presentation.  And in some cases--and these are all top five schools, and in some cases, were not even aware that their classmates, that their non-black classmates had published with their professors.  And then we knew that in some schools, the enrollment or some programs were cut out, not the ones we were looking at, but they were cut out because too many African Americans were getting Ph.D.'s.
Story_ID: 624877
Speaker 1: You know, when you hear this kind of thing, I mean I just, as a lay person listening to this, I just wonder, we seem to still in the year 2011, live in an age where people really don't understand the value of social science.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And there's, it's a disbelief sort of, or you can't, it's hard to--even though you have the data, you know, people don't accept it as easily as you would think they would, you know, after seeing actually the figures.
Speaker 2: Well, I think there may be different things because, for example, social science literature has been used and social science scholars have been very effective in court cases about discrimination, very effective.  In the last two court cases that grew out of Michigan, the--so there's a strong history there.  I think one of the other things sometimes for lay people is to believe that some things continue to exist.  But in the domain of the legalities, it has to be evidence because you can have, something can be mistreatment but not necessarily be discriminatory.  But you will have also I think issues where it's the credibility of the findings.  For example, at least in my line of work, I can't speak to some of the other areas that some of my friends call junk science, you know, where people would produce a book every couple of months.  That's not what some of us do.  So I think there are the issues that within the area of expertise, we can demonstrate, for example, in science that here's a group that's not represented.  And here is the issue that there's a loss of talent by not having them.  But sometimes there's a loss of scientific discovery.  I'll give you an example because for a lot of us, a lot of the challenge we have in this country are pitched as technological or otherwise, but they're social in nature.  And what I mean by that, you have, I guess some while ago, the National Academy of Engineering was saying we were so, the United States was so far behind because China was producing eight, seven hundred thousand plus engineers.  And we were only producing seventy thousand.  Well, these were primarily engineers.  But the sociologists were able to demonstrate that was not correct because a lot of the seven hundred were not even engineers, the way we classify engineers.  The challenge has been that we've had a decrease in the number of engineers who are U.S. citizens getting Ph.D.'s for a lot of reasons, but sometimes that speaks to the attractiveness of the field.  But it also is the case where that, their research can demonstrate, for example, when a lot of the biomedical regiments were focused, we'll say on heart disease, but the patients were primarily males that it was being normative, normed on.  But a lot of the conditions were women had high rates of heart attacks, but the medication that you prescribed for them was entirely different.  But the issue was that they were not even in the clinical subject trials.  That didn't just come out of the biologists.  That came out of a social science type of study.  But you would also have I think where some of the things become problematical if there are things that we always talk about social science, you see becoming sensical, but they're not.
Story_ID: 624878
Speaker 1: And so if you have a situation like, I think less so kind of in science, but in some areas of education.  I have some specialty in sociology of higher education but not at the other grades.  But I know for example that there's a relationship between teacher quality and student performance.  But also we know that teachers who have great ability to teach and to learn are not in those schools where kids need most of those kind of teachers.  So from a policy point of view, how are you gonna correct that?  And then you have other complications, for example, in math and science.  There is a notion that if you want more teachers in math and science who are trained, you have to pay them more.  And so that comes to another issue then, if I'm a English professor or teacher, then does it mean the value of English is less than the value of math, whereas, in reality, in a market economy, it's demand driven.  So if you don't have a sufficient number of mathematicians, if you want to get more and you want to hire one, you have to pay more.  And so we have some things that kind of, I would say, are not quite as commonsensical, but that's why I think that for some of us who have policy oriented research, we try to make the research rigorous by how it can actually be used.  And if it's too much of a hypothetical, it's very difficult for some people to see how you can actually apply it because my own view is that when you begin to look at certain math and science issues, most kids, regardless of race, gender, ethnicity, when they first started off, they loved math.  You'll see 'em with the big pencils trying to put two and two together.  You would see them, for example, they're fascinated with animals and bugs to some extent as long as nobody tells them that the bugs are icky.  You would see some kids you, males and females, who liked to mix stuff and come up with different colors.  Well, that's discovery, but the longer they stay in the system, that switch gets turned off.  There's nothing wrong with the kids.  That's something about the structure in which they're being educated.  And so that's something we can do about that, but I think, unfortunately, there are a lot of people who expect the teachers to do all of that.  And what you don't hear a lot times with the conversation is the parents or parent surrogates who are responsible.  And since I was involved with another major program and these were basically college educated people, we saw first handed--first hand on that particular project, that even though the mothers and fathers were all college grads, and in some cases fathers had a professional degree, guess who worked with the kids on their homework?  Not the fathers, even though the fathers sometime had the more technical background, but the fathers were not engaged with the homework.  It was the mothers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Still the mothers.
Speaker 1: So I think that's one of the things that's kind of still--
Speaker 2: So relationship trumps--
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: --knowledge (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 624879
Speaker 1: But I think also you have in part of this process is that, I think people who are more concerned about the wellbeing of the larger entity--I'm not sure how common that it because we're still a capitalistic country.  And there's still a--resources aren't evenly distributed.  So while I might be able to have my kids go to a private school that may cost blah, blah, blah, I know that there might be another kid who's just as gifted, but because of lack of resources, the family may have to make a decision.  Do they borrow this amount of money for the kid to go to this school, and then they have this long line of indebtedness or is it something where that there is something in between where a person is knowledgeable to know that sometimes it's not whether you go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or whether you go to Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] or whether you go to Cal Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], there may be a school in between where if you go there, you do well, you come out with similar kind of opportunities at a lower cost.  But if no one is advising you of that, you have a different situation.  That's where I think--so you don't have that kind of dissemination of knowledge.  And I think, unfortunately, and sometimes in the social sciences, we might have--you put--and it's not whether it's race or gender based, sometimes we might have, like in some of the other sciences, some things that are esoteric that people are studying without explaining that it actually has some real world implications because you might remember that in [U.S.] Congress, when Congressman Dingell [sic. William Proxmire] used to have the Gold Fleece Award [Golden Fleece Award] for what he called bad science.  And there was one on the gnawing of teeth.  And so he thought it was a silly experiment, but not realizing, for example, that that's a major issue for a lot of the population where you, when you gnaw off the enamel, you have other problems, but sometimes it's related to other problems, not only with the jaw but it's (points to head), there're other health related issues that it's a sign of and for some people who are stressed.  Or if you had some of the ones that dealt with the impact of marijuana because when I was at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], there was a big study on there.  But that particular study used it with pornography.  Well, we now know that marijuana has some medicinal purposes and particularly, for certain cancers.
Story_ID: 624880
Speaker 1: So I think the more it's removed from the public understanding, and quite frankly, we now have an issue where public understanding is becoming more and more problematical on simple issues like the difference between astrology and astronomy.  (Laughter) The difference between, I think when I worked in industry, there were people even at my company [Kelly Springfield Tire Company] who worked out in the plant who didn't believe the United States landed on the moon.  They said it was in Arizona or New Mexico somewhere.  So, you know, we still have issues, but I guess I'm one of the persons who believes in the--that the people in this country are smart enough and there's enough hope that if you provide information in a certain way that it's understandable, and it's meaningful, and it can be used, people connect with that.  But if it's presented in a way I think that's not connected to reality, I just see that as being one of the problems we still have to overcome, not just the social sciences, but I think that's true for some of the other sciences as well.
Speaker 2: What I hear you saying too is that the, one of the missions, if not the mission of the National Science Foundation is to promote education in the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: That's what they're trying to do now.  They're trying to put a lot of money into that, and they're also trying to expand the number of students who ordinarily might not get a high quality education.  And that's in sync with the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration on the mission to have more college grads, but also have a better focus in math and science performance.  I'm on one of his advisory boards [White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities], and I can tell you that one of the challenges when I go to China, and I see kids--and I'm talking about mainland China.  And as some of the students told me there, when you have seven thousand people waiting in line behind to take your job, you're pretty focused on working as hard as you can.  And what they also saw that what they began to do, these--'cause one of the young Chinese students was our guide--this was a scientific meeting, she spoke English extraordinarily well.  But she didn't think she spoke it well.  So what they were doing is pairing the science students with, by in groups of native speakers.  So for the English group, the students who were taking English were paired with us, for the French and for the Portuguese and on down the line.  Well, we don't quite do that.  And then you had, that young woman was a tutor to middle school and early high school kids.  And she was just in her first year, a biochemistry major.  So I think that NSF is trying to improve the quality of education in math and science, including the teachers and the students.  The, I think the challenge is that we still have a skewed distribution of wealth.  And so you have kids who are bright all over this country, but if I'm a teacher who's gone and gotten a very good education, and if I'm looking for a challenge, I probably wanna go to one of those institutions, but you'll find in some cases, they might go and stay for a short duration, and they're gone, but not a permanent--.  And so, and what I'm saying is that, when I was growing up because of the segregationist structure, those good teachers didn't have too many options, you know, in that environment unless they went to another state.  And so one of the consequences is that kids, regardless of their low income status or other status, got those good teachers.  So in a sense some of them could overcome their own class disadvantage, whereas now that's a little bit different.  When I go back to my hometown [Tyler, Texas], those kids are more likely to be in the underperforming elementary schools and junior high schools.
Speaker 2: Is it more difficult for them to get out now than it used to be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, well, you see, even I think it's more difficult for them to be able to pursue certain kind of jobs because some of those jobs are no longer there, the low skill, low knowledge jobs are not there--
Story_ID: 624881
Speaker 1: And my hometown [Tyler, Texas] still has a very diverse economy, but in a depressed economy--and you might have college people who have taken jobs that ordinarily non-college students would have.  So the system is pressed kind of down, 'cause you have adults taking jobs at McDonald's, which means then where do the youth find their jobs during the summer or after school?  So I think part of it is that, from what I've seen and even in this area [Atlanta, Georgia], and I saw it before coming here, a lot of people don't have children, and so they don't necessarily see the value of paying more taxes on the schools because they don't see that as, whereas I, as a citizen, see that whether I have children or not in school, it's to my advantage to try to have opportunity because these are the kids who eventually you want to pay taxes at some point in time.  And so when it doesn't happen, that's--so it's not, I think necessarily, it's not a silver bullet, but I think those of us who are doing research on certain critical issues or consulting on critical issues, we can do better than what we have, and sometimes it doesn't take more money.  What it does, I being able to do things smartly rather than the way we're doing it because obviously some of the things we're not is not, just not working.  And that's, you know, the way I see it, and sometimes I think evidence based, which the government requires more of now, will take us kind of in that period because I would rather see money going to people who can demonstrate that their programs are working than to programs that doesn't have any evidence.  And it's just, you know, take my word that it works.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So social science can be the handmaiden to success of the natural sciences and vice versa (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when, there's a division of that too.  It's called social behavior and economic sciences at NSF [National Science Foundation].  I think what happens is that some things are stove piped there just like in the real world.  So you have the education and human resources as a place that does some of the things that you're talking about.  But they're not a research division whereas the social behavioral sciences is a research division, and they may or may not be doing anything about education 'cause they might be trying to do some other issues, yeah.
Story_ID: 624882
Speaker 1: Well, in 2001 you join the faculty at Georgia Institute of Technology [Atlanta, Georgia].  Can you tell us about that?  Now, you joined as chair of the School of History, Technology and Society?
Speaker 2: Yes, I came here as an administrator because I thoroughly enjoyed my experience at Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And I got a call one day from one of my, I guess in a sense, she's a mentor.  I had the great fortune when I was at Wake to meet some of the older women when I first came.  And so I became--and one guy, and a couple of guys too.  So I became like, I guess their chosen son in some ways.  So I get a call, and she says that, "Well, you've been here twenty years.  You can actually retire, you know.  You won't necessarily get benefits, but you can retire 'cause you have enough time in and you are old enough, barely."  So I saw that as a transition period.  The whole time I was at Wake, I think after my second year I was recruited by another major school.  And then a year after then, because the more I published, the more opportunities.  So I think in the end, my wife [LaRue C. Pearson] was head of women studies there, and it was a period where that I was already a distinguished professor, and the likelihood of becoming a dean at Wake Forest on the academic side at a southern institution like that, it wasn't gonna happen.  They were not quite ready for that.  They could do sports, student services, but not on that other side.  So and it was also, I think  I saw it as a challenge so I asked my wife to come down since I was recruited and take a look at the place and make a decision.  So if she didn't like the feel and what they were offering her then it wasn't gonna happen.  So I came here and the appointment was for five years, and you could stay on for another five years.  It was an interesting experience because first of all, I didn't know that there had never been an African American chair of a school in the history of Georgia Tech.  I knew something about the Georgia Tech because I was a student in the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I knew the racialized issues here were an issue back then in terms of representation of the faculty and some issues in athletics.  So I think when I got here, it was just--it was an interesting experience.  And I, and the reception was quite overwhelming, especially from staff 'cause I had people literally from custodians and you name it, showing up at my door, saying, "You know, anything I can do for you, just let me know," but also because I had been in environments where that I was the first person or the only one.  So I understood the challenge and the issues of undermining, because I knew that there are people who still don't like to report to people in positions of authority of a certain racial background.  So I was not, I had been prepared, I guess, to deal with that kind of stuff.  And it was present here.  It was deeply present.  But still, you've got a job to do so it was done.  And, fortunately, I think at my second or third year, there was another person now.  So I was determined not to--well, I guess it'd be my fourth year, I wasn't gonna not do it until I find someone else.  Unfortunately, I was losing money by being the chair, from consulting because the more grants I brought in, since I was a twelve month person, I could not--so you couldn't pay yourself more than what you were making.
Story_ID: 624883
Speaker 1: Now, in 2002, you became a member of the Graduate Records Examination Board committee on--the Technical Advisory Committee.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's the TAC, as they call it, is a statistical advisory group.  And remember I did a post-doc at ETS [Educational Testing Service].  So I was familiar with the people there.  So I think I had two terms on that board, but it was more or less to advise the GRE on some of this statistical or technical issues.  And so it was very different.  It was not just the GRE, it was more or less like design or response rates, new directions because in particular I had hoped that they would do more in terms of subtests for science and technology areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2005 we have that you published another book called 'Beyond Small Numbers: Voices of African American Ph.D. Chemists' [Willie Pearson, Jr.].  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to focus on chemists in this book?
Speaker 2: Well, that book grew out of some of my early experiences, and as I said, I had kind of, in many ways, a unique experience as a social scientist.  When I was in school in Carbondale [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and did my dissertation, my dissertation was on the scientific community.  And it included African Americans as well as European Americans.  So I ended up, by virtue of what I was doing, meeting a lot of people in different disciplines.  But also, kind of early in my career, I was on some advisory committees at the American Association for the Advancement of Science [Washington, D.C.].  So the combination of having interviewed very prominent scientists who were of an age, particularly, African Americans, I listened.  I found out a long time ago because a lot of my friends are older, to listen.  And I knew that some of the things that were told in history were not aligning with these guys.  So I found, for example, that there were African Americans in industry in the 19--early 1900s.  And there were two brothers that finished at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], in particular.  There were people who worked in the distillery industry, some who worked in the automobile industry.  And then I became pretty close to a fellow who's now deceased.  And so it became a personal quest, but then one of the things that happened out of this, I discovered that there were three blacks at McGill University [Montreal, Canada] at the same time.  And so this wasn't making sense because, you know, (laughter) with the records because what happened is that major schools in the United States still had a quota, and what that meant is some of them, they would only take maybe one black or two blacks each year.  And then when the other one graduated, they would do some others.  So this was very unusual, so I ended up--this was just a personal interest I had.  So the long and short of it, I ended up going to McGill.  I met the first Jewish Canadian--he finished from McGill but it wasn't possible for him to work on the faculty because he was Jewish.  So he had a distinguished career in Canada.  And then as kind of racial, ethnic issues changed he joined the faculty as a distinguished professor.  Also, I think the first woman finished from McGill.  So as a result of learning this kind of historical stuff, I did these things during the summer.  And so finally, I got kind of pressured from some of my colleagues in chemistry to tell, to do a study because I'm a member of the American Chemical Society as well, maybe one of the few social scientists.  So I ended up from interviewing these much older guys to getting a grant to do a study, a cohort study, and I think I forgot how many I've interviewed across the United States.  And that's how it came about because of a personal relationship with some of the older chemists.
Story_ID: 624884
Speaker 1: Yeah you wanna say that again?  That's an interesting point to make about the chemists and--
Speaker 2: Well, I was just saying that sometimes when you had, you know, in that particular study, there were actually people who were the first in their families to go to college and then the first, of course, to get a doctorate.  So they went to very top rated schools because during that period, it was more focused on issues of affirmative action.  But you could imagine that for some of these folks, they ended up at research universities, you know.  They had no history at research universities, and in many cases, didn't know how those cultures worked.  Now, their classmates in graduate school did because some of them were second generation Ph.D. students.  So they had a pretty clear idea how research universities operated because some of the people that I interviewed actually finished from smaller, private liberal arts schools.  So in some cases, they were not necessarily appointed to the department by the faculty because there was not a search in the sense that the department advertised and then brought people in for interviews.  In some of these cases, they were strictly hired by a senior administrator and then placed in a department.  Then you had a kind of a transition where that there were more efforts on the part of departments that they had so called targeted opportunity hire, where they could hire a person of color.  We had more of that, but that, you know, those transitions occurred at different points in time.  But you could imagine that if you are a first generation person and you have no idea about tenure, about promotion, about salary and depending on what kind of mentoring you had in graduate school, it could well be that your mentor didn't, your advisor I should say, never mentioned about, you know, what you should negotiate for or what you could expect.  And I know in this one guy's case, his whole research was dependent upon a certain amount, certain type of equipment.  And he finished at one of the top schools in the country.  Well, he was told by this senior person that they would get that instrument for him.  But it didn't happen in his first five years.  So he was basically not, he was delayed for tenure.  So he was there for a very long time.  And then you had some people who, not so much in this particular study, but there were some as you interview people, had very painful personal experiences.  And that's kind of what you get.  It's different than when you do a survey 'cause when you do the interviews and you're going back on family history, there were some people who were physically abused.  There were others who were not, who were very, very bright but were not encouraged by their parents.  They were expected to drop out of school and work on the farm.  There were others who were, you know, had situations where they were called racial epithets in their, you know, personally in their experiences and that were not prepared for those kind of personal challenges.  That's just not something that had happened to them before, and there were others, probably the more younger cohort, that some of them believed that if they went to the right schools that they would have--and what I mean by the right schools, at the top tiered school, maybe the top 10 percent, that their opportunities were gonna be very different than people who came from just say the middle group.  And then they found out that when it came down to race, they were starting at the same place in industry some places, as some people who went to less prestigious institutions.  And some of them really had some personal issues on how to deal with that.
Story_ID: 624885
Speaker 1: So, but there have been changes.  I would say that if you look at, in that particular study, things improved over time, but you also had I think people who were not as psychologically prepared for the competition in chemistry as some of the older cohorts because chemistry is a very competitive field.  And I think that for--because I found also gender differences that in some cases, the women were constantly teaching more students in the general chemistry than the men.  But there're also, I think the bottom line was that this was a study that had people in industry.  And what I found is that they were the least happy people because some of them had not moved up in the company very much from their first appointment.  And so part of the disenchantment with, you know, after twenty-five or thirty years and you are still basically only about one position above.  And I know one guy was in the position for the whole thirty years, but at some companies, it varied from division to another.  At one company, one guy had achieved a senior status.  At another division in the company, not, because it had a difference in the leadership in the divisions.  So that that was kind of the nature of that particular.  Then I got requests, people wanted me to do a similar study for the other sciences, but that just wasn't gonna happen.  You know, by that time, I was in administration and it was not very much you could get done in administration at that time.  That's why I didn't renew because since we didn't have a socio- the department is not sociology [at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  We had sociology track later on.
Story_ID: 624886
Speaker 1: How long did you do administration at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five years.
Speaker 1: Five, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I think previously the longest time was four years, but I did it for five years with the option of doing it five more years.
Speaker 1: So, as a, in 2006, you began to just teach at Georgia Tech, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I actually went back to the faculty.  Now, when I was chair [of the School of History, Technology and Society], I did teach, you know, a limited amount, but then I went back, because I had graduate students as well, doctoral students.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: So that was, so even though I was chair, I still had research projects, and I had the students being supervised.  And then one of my students won, became the first Georgia Tech to win the Mellon award.  He should have finished Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I think, either this year or last year in anthropology.  And I think he's post-doc in maybe in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, it's the what award?
Speaker 2: The Mellon Foundation award [Andrew W. Mellon Foundation].
Speaker 1: Oh, Mellon Foundation, okay, all right.  Okay, now are you still teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you, what do you see in the future?  How long are you to continue to teach, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, what I would really like to do, I have one of my--my first student, Ph.D. students at Tech, is on the faculty at the Stevens Institute of Technology [Hoboken, New Jersey]. So I currently have--well, in fact, they're all women, come to think of it, I have one who will maybe get out this summer.  Then I have two others.  And so I pledged to them that I wouldn't leave until they finished.  So they're probably standing in the way of me and retirement again.  So my hope is that within the next two to--two years, they should be done.  I don't have any plans to take another doctoral student.  And ideally, I would like to probably go back to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] and teach either pro bono or teach part time now to take my skill sets because no HBCU has a curriculum on science and technology studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that would be probably what I'll end up doing here, but I think for a lot of us who are senior professors try to hold on 'til we get a replacement, that is, get another black person or another person of color to replace us.  So that would probably be the other thing that, but in my field, that's very limited because there're not many people who are, have a Ph.D. in the field.  So in my case, it may be for someone like the young people that I have produced here will come back or if it's someone else we can get who has the commitment, that would be, be it because I plan to continue to do some research and continue to do consulting work with my group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's kind of the plan.  So within the next three years that should be kind of the end of it.  So I don't see it exceeding in five years.
Story_ID: 624887
Speaker 1: Now, have you sort of prioritized teaching your skillsets and your particular focus over another research project or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have one now that's an international project.  It deals with the status of women in computer science, mathematics, statistics and chemistry.  And so we just had a workshop at the National Academy [National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.] last week.  So that study is actually coming to an end.  So there would be a book.  So at first, there's like a report that comes out.  It was sponsored by the National Science Foundation.  Then we have a book that is expected to come out.  So the plan for that project was to go to other disciplines after that.  So, we might do psychology, economics or physics.  So that's kind of the plan.  I guess in terms of other issues, two things, and my, let's see, first year of being on President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] advisory board for historically black colleges [White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and Universities], and--'cause I still have a strong commitment for those schools, even though my doctoral career was not at those institutions, but I still see the value of those schools.  So I'm working on a subgroup for science and technology and my colleague at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Evelynn Hammonds [HistoryMaker Evelynn M. Hammonds], is on the committee as well.  And Ken Tolston [sic. Kenneth Tolson] who is the grandson, I think, of the Tolston [sic. Melvin B. Tolson] who was at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas].  He does commercialization of technology.  So ideally, I would like to do some, one final project on the contributions of HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  A lot of folks want me to do something on my experience in establishing the specialties I have because what we've been able to do is to get research done on the contributions of African Americans to science and engineering.  And fortunately, I've had a number of other people 'cause there are some Latino scholars who followed what I've done, and they've done the same thing in their communities.  And then I have another person who did something on native people, done something on that because from the very beginning, since I've always been inclusive, so even in my early research you see that women are included in the scholarship.  And so I've always tried to develop for the other groups that are underrepresented.  But I realized very early on, you can't do everything and actually be good in it.  So that's probably the other piece that I might end up doing is, like a legacy piece on--and some people just want me to do something like a autobiographical stuff.  I doubt if I would do that.  But what I would like to do is to see where the scholarship started and then where we are and what needs to go forward.  And that would be something in retirement.
Story_ID: 624888
Speaker 1: And I think the other piece would be, you know, assuming good health, is the family history stuff because that takes more--that's a full-time job.  I have a cousin in Fort Worth [Texas] who's been retired for a long time, a school teacher.  And he's collected some things, but, and that's just on one side of the family, having to get that because what I discovered is that things are not as simple as going to Ancestry.com and clicking on something.  It may be better now.  But there's also the stories that you get from family people, but in my family there were not a lot of storytelling, and it's kind of interesting 'cause there was not that old--it would be like my brother, so and so or my sister, so and so, but none of that kind of woe is me kind of stuff that these bad things happened or these positive things.  It was just more or less kind of getting on with life and not looking so much backwards, but looking forward, so it was somewhat different I think like that.  I'm trying to think in neighborhood because some people still had grandparents.  And see, by the time I came along, my mother [Odessa Price Pearson] being thirty-three as I mentioned, that my grandparents--I remember the ones in Louisiana.  And then, and the one that was in Texas, they were already pretty much up in age when I was born.  So that was not something where I got to spend summers and things like that, you know, like, so it might be a visit to them.  And, but even there, it was on the more immediate, what was going on then.  It was not like sitting down and that this was back in the 18 something.  You know, when they took me to the cemetery in Louisiana, it was showing the ancestral burial place.  And I think there, I haven't seen it anywhere else, the fact that they had pictures.  So you could see how your ancestors actually physically looked.  That was (laughter) very, very unique.  I'm so certain now whether or not, given the kind of vandalism that you see where the people have chiseled off, you know, the pictures, that--
Speaker 2: Had that happened out in the graveyard that you were--
Speaker 1: I don't know.  See, I haven't been back, and once my aunt, my last surviving aunt passed away, I really haven't kept in touch with that, the remaining relatives except for maybe--'cause some of them are, one is about my age, maybe a little bit older.  And then the other ones are younger.  And for the property that we had there, I sold some property that I have and then we had mineral rights.  So my aunt was kind of like the matriarch of the surviving family.  So she paid all the taxes and stuff like that.  So what I did, because I figured that I, my aunt had done this for years.  So I signed over my rights to mineral property, primarily natural gas in that area to her, to distribute to the relatives.  So once she passed away, that was kind of the--that was my strongest link there, was her, 'cause that's, when I would go and visit, that's who I would stay with.  And we would visit the, you know, her kids.  But I think on the other children's children were a little bit older.  So they were either older or much younger.  So it just wasn't there.  And then I think on the--'cause even that family was not that large.  You know, it's just that, and I'm trying to think in Texas, I have a niece who's still there.  But our family was very small too, and so my sister [Vassie V. King] only had two children.  So we're basically kind of down to where I'm actually the senior person now.
Story_ID: 624889
Speaker 1: Now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have two.
Speaker 1: You have two, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a son and a daughter [Ladessa Cunningham Pearson].  But I'm saying nobody basically had large families, whereas probably historically and at the time, more recently, that was very unusual to just have small families like that.  I have no idea why they were that small.  I just knew they were smaller than the typical family at that time, and that that next generation was made even smaller by that cohort not having many children.  So unlike some families where there's like a bunch of cousins, I don't have that situation.  So, and then my niece doesn't have any children.  My nephew has two boys.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said your father [Willie Pearson, Sr.] got a chance to see you become a Ph.D. in sociology [from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, not my father.  He was deceased by that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your mother [Odessa Price Pearson] did?
Speaker 2: My mother was, yeah, she got a chance, yeah, because she didn't pass until I did a post-doc at OTA [Office of Technology Assessment].  She died while, actually while I was there.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, was she, I know she thought, I guess that you should have stayed with the industrial job [at Kelly Springfield Tire Company], I mean at one point.  But did she, what did she think of you receiving a Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I think once I got out and she could see my own happiness and fulfillment and that I had actually gotten back to the state.
Story_ID: 624890
Speaker 1: After, it took me about, maybe ten years to get back to the salary that I had in industry, but the difference was that intellectually I wasn't as stimulated in industry, except by a couple of people because the time I was there, just a short period of time, my options were to stay there and not--until I went back to a Ph.D. program.  And that's when the thing about the intervention with Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling Louisiana], but I stayed in contact with everybody who was at the plant, the manager, Paul Serbon [ph.] for a long time because he left the door open, said, "If you ever wanted to come back, you can come back."  So I was very, very fortunate to have had a very positive experience there because for social scientists to even be considered was just basically out of the question and that he understood why I was going to Grambling because that was part of a commitment, actually, a driving commitment for that next generation.  And I knew if I didn't do it then, it would not be done because, if I had stayed at the company [Kelly Springfield Tire Company] and my next promotion would have--'cause even though I was there for like a year, my next promotion was coming up 'cause I had done fairly well, and I would have been in a technical unit, even more technical unit because one problem I didn't have since I was not a trained engineer, and that some of the engineers--I remember one young guy who came in about the same time or came in the next year around the same time, came from Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas].  But he struggled mightily because you still have to learn the system for the company, which is not the same that you get in school.  And because I had no preexisting education or training that interfered with me learning new things, it was easier for me to be trained because it was basically on the job training at that point.  And so what you basically needed was analytical skills.  And so I think when I left there and had the opportunity to go back, my mother [Odessa Price Pearson], I guess had more difficulty because that was very uncommon in my hometown [Tyler, Texas] for someone to be black and a college grad to be in that situation because blacks who were there had to work kind of like from the bottom all the way up.  And the company was in the process of hiring college grads for more salary, advanced salary type of jobs.  But I think the fact of the kind of money that was being made was actually unheard because when I was at social security [U.S. Social Security Administration] we were, I would say above the medium nationally in terms of income, so I had a pretty good salary, but nowhere like in industry.  Industry was very, very different.
Story_ID: 624891
Speaker 1: But I think the only thing that, when you have the calling that was part of my experience at Wiley [Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], but it started prior to going to Wiley.  It started in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] when we were activists for civil rights and social justice kind of issues, 'cause I think it was just part of a cohort effect where that there were a group of us who were, we just thought like that.  We can't never remember a time when we didn't think like that.  So part of it is family kind of conditions.  The other part is the people that you kind of grew up and interacted with.  And I think to this day that small group still maintains, well, I guess what you would say that we were people who were not afraid of courage, to stand up for what you believed because I think we had a pretty good understanding that when you do things, there are consequences.  So you had to decide there were some justice issues that it was worth fighting for or standing up for, even if you were gonna lose your job.  But I think as, with maturity you learn, at least I did, that you can't go and fight every day and that you couldn't fight by yourself, and that you had to end up in a sense learning that friendships crossed all kind of lines, and but you didn't need to have a whole lot of people you called friends, that you only needed a core group of people that no matter what, you could count on.  And I think that served well.  So I never had this issue where that friendship, betrayal or conflict, none of that.   And I think I'm very thankful that I was raised not to be jealous, you know, for your friends.  So you were raised to be happy 'cause your friends do well because they are your friends.  And I think that was, that has helped me quite a bit.  I think that's why some of us are still in contact to this day from elementary school [W.A. Peete Elementary School, Tyler, Texas].
Story_ID: 624892
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I think just some things.  I think in high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] I probably would have taken probably more math and science courses, just would be one thing.  But I think fundamentally, because when you look in the past, the education was always there because the metric system I learned in elementary school [W.A. Peete Elementary School, Tyler, Texas].  It's just retaining it since it was never used.  The, so I can't see things that I would do very, very different.  I've been a very fortunate, some people would say blessed, that there were people--I understand, I guess, long ago when Merton [Robert K. Merton] talks about on the shoulders with--of giants, but I've understood very early that you learn something from everybody.  And when I mentioned about that custodian that, because I could have just ignored what this guy said, but I just remember that every day he would tell us that.  And it was always in a positive, kind of motivational way, kind of an unassuming little guy, but he was clear what he placed the value on.  And I think that, I can't think of anything I could see that was perhaps, would do over.  I think on reflection, I think because I've always thought about somebody other than myself, and that I fundamentally I believe in what, at the time I met Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] that the more you do for other people, you actually get it back double.  And when I, everywhere I've gone to teach, I can say that I have proteges that have done well professionally and in life.  They've all done extraordinarily well.  And that's kind of like a bonus because, to see that you had that effect, a small part of that and it's come full circle for them.
Story_ID: 624893
Speaker 1: We were talking about your legacy, and I just wanted to ask you, in terms of young people, you know, who are aspiring to be, to get involved in the social sciences or to study the trajectory of black scientists or any other scientists, what advice would you give them?
Speaker 2: Well, I think first of all, I have some of them already that I'm training now and educating, and that for a number of them, it's the issue for me about telling the story of groups that haven't had their stories told.  And so, fortunately, my international students are doing something similar to that because the one that was at Stevens Institute [Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey], that's from Shanghai [China] originally, a Chinese student, her expertise--this is on underrepresented groups.  So I had, and I think for the other ones coming along 'cause I get these calls all the time, I think what I'm seeing is a lot of them who get their degrees in chemistry and other places, they are leaving those fields and they want to run programs to increase the number of, we'll say African Americans or Latinos or women in science.  So we actually have kind of a disconnect where that in some of the students' core research fields, they are not getting the kind of socialization that retains them in their particular fields.  And what they're finding is that some other fields, where they could use their science, their engineering, their technology and the social science skills, they're gravitating more towards that, one cohort of students.  So I think part of the issue is for the younger ones who may be coming along, we desperately need replacements.  So I don't really have someone who looks like me whom I can say is trained to do what I'm doing.  I think in many cases, the people who can do what I'm doing are European American students.  There are some Latino students, some African American females.  I think that this is not atypical for some of us because one of the persons I kind of saw as maybe taking on, carrying on the legacy is Evelynn Hammonds [HistoryMaker Evelynn M. Hammonds] who's the dean of Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], an African American woman.  Well, it turns out she's, you know, age wise, she's up there, and that she has her hands full where she is.  And we have to make sure she's successful in her administrative post.  She's a historian of science, not a sociologist.  So I think at this point, there are a number of us around the country who are at a stage where we could retire, some for the first time, some for the second time.  And I think for us, we would encourage the younger people to continue to develop the scholarship because the scholarship is still underdeveloped.  If you were to go and try to do a search on Google, or Google Scholar and see what you can find on African American scientists, and what you would typically find is very few empirical studies like the ones that I've done in sociology.  In the historical side, you might see, like the quality of work done by Ken Manning [Kenneth R. Manning].  You're not likely to see much of that or by Evelyn Hammonds.  It's just not that much.  There were very few of us from the very beginning.  And I think that in my case, I had genuinely hoped that someone would take it to the next level.  And it's been some of that, but I think what has happened, sometimes when people see, in some communities when they see the word science or technology, they kind of back off and their research is not on that.  But I can see now in the field of education, when I went to that conference, there are people doing stuff on math education, science education.
Story_ID: 624894
Speaker 1: So I think the message is we still need more literature, develop more scholarship, but you have to be prepared to do the level of scholarship.  And I don't think it necessarily had to come from a black person.  And from what I can see now, it's not because there's just not many people who are trained in the programs.  And part of that problem means that sometimes the scholarship comes from people who are not trained.  I wouldn't necessarily call it scholarship.  I would say sometimes the literature comes from people who don't really have the training or the skillsets.  So some of that material can actually be more problematical because it's not based upon fact.  So it can actually be misleading and it can be probably more harmful.  And so I think--
Speaker 2: Is there--I don't wanna interrupt you, but is your process as social scientist the same as a physical scientist in terms of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very similar for a research method, particularly--
Speaker 2: What are the steps that you--
Speaker 1: Well, I think for those of us who do more quantitative work because there's a hypothesis or research question that drives the method, and you have to collect the method in a systematic way.  And the reason for that is that anyone who goes behind you using the same material or the same method should out with something very similar to validate what you've done.  And I think that at this stage there are a number of young, white women who are doing some pretty good research in this area because I think that you have to keep in mind that with the specialty, it's not everywhere.  And so we have, just say at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], but we have only one African American has ever finished the program, the Ph.D. program in over ten years.  And she was kind of a hybrid between more historian.  And so we have two African American women in the program now.  One is probably--so neither of whom are actually--only one other is working under me.  And she's doing something on virtual communities.  And then there's--so it's not there.  And then the two guys who were there didn't complete their works.  So if you take us as an example, in almost fifteen or twenty years, we have produced one African American in our program.  And maybe during that time, maybe a second one.  And if you go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and some of the other programs, you have more in history.  But in sociology, it's not the case.  So part of that I think there're other people who are doing work, good, young people, but it's not necessarily the same race.  But what matters is that they're extending the scholarship base because what you don't want is to have work that is not rigorous.  But you also wanna have, I think as a scholar, I wanted someone to be able to rigorously move from what I've done to what's the next level.  It's--and it's much akin to, you always try to hire someone better than yourself.
Story_ID: 624895
Speaker 1: So it's time for that next generation to be critical of what I've done and then to kind of build on that because that's how science advances.  I think unfortunately, when I was coming along, because I was a rarity in what I do, then, you know, people look for me to do this next step.  But it was never the issue, for example, that I would do everything.  So doing the study on chemists, and then people in biology wanted me to study on biologists, my doing the study on chemists is maybe to stimulate someone else to do something on another field.  And when I did the study on, like who will do science, we actually did a follow up to that in terms of a workshop.  But the issue is for other people to come into the community and do the research.  So it was not seen as something that I'm protective of or want for myself because I don't think science, in this particular case, advances.  So it's never been the case where I wanted to have everything to myself.  So I'm one of those persons who likes to distribute the ball.  So I have this group of people over here who are Latinos, and one has actually done work on both African Americans and Latinos.  And then there's another place over here so someone does it because the problem, if you become insular and doing it only yourself, something happens to you, then that's the end of it.  But if you have not inspired for that group, and fortunately, I think out of what I've done, we had this whole area called broaden the participation [broadening participation].  That's not what I called it when I started off, but it's the same idea, is to--there's talent that results in all types of communities, and we need to assess that by providing skills, opportunities for people to contribute in those particular areas.  If not, the country is gonna have some more serious problems in advancing itself 'cause you can't afford to do that.  So that's been kind of the philosophy I've had with young people.  But I've also had the ability to take some people, sometimes they're my contemporaries and bring them over to do research.  But the other side that I do is the consulting on program evaluation.  And see, we were underrepresented in that too.
Story_ID: 624896
Speaker 1: And so I've now been able to bring in that kind of next generation.  They work with me for a while.  They, they don't get paid for it, but they wanna learn the skillset.  So they, eventually, you get paid.  And then they've now developed that skillset.  So there's different things going on.  There's the research, and then there is the applied aspect so people who are trying to do some of the things that the research is guiding them to do is whether or not they're actually doing it?  Are the programs successful?  Are they effective?  Because this has turned out to be for many people about money.  So to have a program means you get funding for the program, but the end goal should not just be the funding for the program.  It should be about developing talent.  So, and there's quite a bit of money at stake, you know, quite frankly.  And I think that, it's nothing wrong with that, that I see.  I would just like to see the commitment to be something other than the budget, that the commitment is actually human beings who have had an opportunity to enhance their skillsets and to be, you know, what they really want to be.  That's why I'm saying it was never my goal to try to influence everybody to go into science, but I know, for example, like one of my colleagues that does work on environmental equity and environmental racism.  See, ultimately, the proof or the challenge is the science, not the social science that, when you have to sort out, for example, whether or not it's human behavior, diet, living conditions?  Is that the issue or is it these chemicals (cough) or if it's some other field, that if it's in, you know, say higher ed [higher education], and people are not getting tenure.  It's the--my allergy stuff is gonna kick again--
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: --'cause it's still coming in from the outside.  So what I'm saying is that there are some things to make our story more credible.  You have to have some level of evidence.  Sometimes it's scientific evidence, sometimes it's legal evidence, sometimes it's other evidence, and I think, for example, when you begin to have a more comprehensive approach, you can have a, make a stronger case that if it's not--I'm trying to give you something concrete.
Story_ID: 624897
Speaker 1: Just say the case I was talking about in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] about the youth violence.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a concern that people have about in every black community in the country.
Speaker 1: Yes, but the issue is that you now know that there're only a certain core group of kids who are actually shooting people and doing all that.  But when you also know that there are kids who have mental challenges, are being manipulated by older men who know, for example, that these kids' mental ability is not that great.  And so you can commit a crime and just give the weapon to them.  They get caught, and then you know that in some cases they will go to juvenile.  But if they're sixteen in that particular state, you're going to prison because it's a felony.  So now when you get out, you can't vote.  There are a lot of other things you can't do, your ability to get hired.  And so when a community is armed with that kind of information, then you can pretty well know that you have to also go after these older guys.  And when I say older they were like in their twenties, who are perpetuating this on the younger kids, particularly, the kids who have mental health challenges.  And, so there's some issues that the system itself has to be conscious of because if you have a mental health problem and sending you to prison or to juvie and you don't get treatment.  And then you're released.  The cycle starts over.
Speaker 2: So are you, you're basically saying that you're concerned that we're not using, utilizing social science enough in solving problems (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, solving social problems.  I think we're using it more now because, as I said, I think some of the scientific and technical problems are not, they're socially based.  The fact that you have black people or Latino people or poor whites not being well represented in science is not a technical issue.  It's a social issue where they might not be getting prerequisite math skills or science, nothing wrong with the kid's abilities.  But if you haven't had access to that, I'm talking at a high quality level, not at a superficial level.  If you get the best kind of access to that, you'd have skillsets that you can take in more than one direction.  But if you don't have that, and you've been told that math is difficult and you can't do it, basically, when you go from middle school to high school, you're not taking any more advanced math.  And as you go up the system, that means that anything that involves some manipulation of mathematics, you're kind of ruling yourself out.  And the same thing for science stuff, the same thing for ability to write well because you can be articulate as you want verbally, but if you can't write well, you're still limited.  There are just some things that's not gonna happen.  You can't do.  I mean there was a time where that maybe that existed but in a service oriented, intellectually, property driven area, that's not gonna play.  And so what I'm saying is that, it's not just the social science literature, but in particular, the social science skills can help understanding some of the fundamental problems.
Story_ID: 624898
Speaker 1: And when I came into this business, see, some of the so called physical scientists, biological scientists assumed that they had the answers, so they had projects or programs where they were gonna increase the number of people with those kind of backgrounds.  But what we were able to do empirically to show that that could be just by chance.  So if you were to talk to some of those people about their science, it was that, "Here's the evidence.  We have proof that it works."  But when it came down to producing student interests, they couldn't tell you whether or not what they personally did as the reason why that person went into physics or did not go into physics.  So it's by happenstance.  So what the federal government and some private sector was saying, "Now, show me the evidence that what you're doing actually works."  And so if I can show what I'm doing is working and then here's my contemporary who cannot demonstrate, having received money, it's actually effective.  So why would you wanna continue to support that and especially as money becomes more difficult to come by.  I think it's not just NSF [National Science Foundation].  It's kind of in general, that companies have always kind of had something like that.  When I was in industry [Kelly Springfield Tire Company], it was about performance.  I mean either you, when you went on your routes to do your inspections, either your stuff was technically sound or it was not.  And if it was not technically sound, there was a cost to the company for making errors.  And I think that now, I think social science is used far more often and in critical areas, I think that for some in solving some of our very pressing social problems, I think it could be used more.  But it has to be the kind of research that's rigorous enough to be validated or replicated by someone else to show that it's actually effective because you're dealing with kind of human issues.  But I think the other piece of that when it comes down to certain social issues, for example, test after test would show that African American student do less well on math tests, standardized tests.  Well, it's not because the kids can't do it, but if you don't have someone teaching that and know what they're teaching because it turns out that a lot of the people who teach it in inner cities and other situations like that, math is not their initial training.  So in some cases, they might be perpetuating that it's too difficult whereas, the same kids, I guess the way I kind of saw it, and I lived in Washington, D.C., and we had, it was snow or ice or something happened.  I lived on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] so I go home, and I see this kid out here, this is ice on the ground.  He has a basketball, and he's shooting goals out in the cold weather, has his coat on and the other stuff.  Well probably no one even made the connection with that kid that there's actually a science to making it go through the hoop, it's physics, but just imagine if that that same kid had been equally dedicated to being at home or somewhere after then studying his lessons, that's what I'm talking about; there's a difference.  So it's not that any of this stuff I think is any more difficult than one other thing because I think most people know there are people who might be good in physics, but not good in English or maybe good in English but who are not good in doing history or political science or economics.
Story_ID: 624899
Speaker 1: So I guess my fundamental issue would be that you could use some of the social science just like you use other science to help address social problems.  But I think that it has to be rigorous and solid.  And I think more of that is being used now.  What I do have concern about is that the representation of people who are actually doing that because if African Americans as a group are not increasing in their representation in the different fields, you end up having to hope that other people who go into those fields would be sympathetic or empathetic to your community needs.  If not, you end up with something like I was explaining in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] where a kid goes to a therapist two hundred and something times, and it's pretty clear that there's no change in the behavior.  So it should be readily apparent that that particular therapeutic model is not culturally sensitive.  And then you have other kids go to the same therapist; no change in behavior.  So that there's something wrong with that.  So I don't think you have to be black therapist to be able to solve the issue, but what I'm saying you have to be conscious that a particular therapy that's been normed on one population doesn't necessarily mean that it can fit all populations whether it's class based or raced based.  That's what I'm suggesting that, where the social science can be used in quite a different way.  And I think it's been used fundamentally to raise some questions like the whole thing in environmental justice clearly showed that there were unequal distributions of a pollution and that there had been cases in the justice system, and there's a thing called critical race theory that show that the law itself was racist.  Critical race theory didn't exist before someone put it there.  That was kind of a social science basis out of the legal industry.  And even in the case of social science being used for, in the medical health issue, so it's there, but I guess personally, I wouldn't just focus on social science alone.  I think it's the collectivity of disciplines whether it's in science or not in science at all because I don't see--I guess with someone like myself, even if you had the scientific focus, you still have a humanitarian issue that you're dealing with.  So sometimes understanding human conditions, whether its humanities, whether it's social work.  And ultimately you have to communicate that.  So if you can't communicate it electronically, you can't communicate it in writing, it's a problem.
Story_ID: 624900
Speaker 1: When my daughter [Ladessa Cunningham Pearson] did high school, I guess she may have been a sophomore or junior, and she did an internship at the medical school and co-authored a paper with some of the people in her lab.  But then she did, I think she did a second one and look at the literature, the little pamphlet that they have.  And she kind of saw right away so many people came into that clinic where the level of literacy was uneven.  And so the pamphlet was pitched at a level that was higher than the people, the clients who came into the unit.  So she was able to talk to them that the communication was written at a level that exceeded the ability of the people who came to that particular clinic.  So it was just written a different way so they could comprehend that.  That's what I'm saying that there are some things that people--
Speaker 2: You don't need a study to solve--
Speaker 1: Right (laughter), right, or if you do, if you do see certain things, you can use that to make adjustments.  That's what I believe, and I think in science, we can make science accessible because if you have people in your family with diabetes, and that's a growing issue.  So having an understanding what's the basis of that 'cause in this area of the country, and some other areas, we know about morbid obesity, you know when you've got people who are eleven and twelve and they weigh two hundred and some pounds, that there's some consequences of that.  And when you ride public transportation and you can see young people that are morbidly obese and have ambulatory kind of issues--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think one of the studies that has, I guess, been surprising to a lot of people is that, you know, in an undernourished community, the African American community is the fattest in the United States--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: --statistically, I mean, you know, based on studies.
Speaker 1: Right, and the issue is, is what they eat, and then, and for a long time in the South, you know, for some of the child rearing things, you know, fat babies were seen as healthy babies.  And, you know, so I could just remember, I mean even though I lived in the, kind of the city part, but I do remember some people on the more rural type of communities encouraging the kind of overeating and the babies would be fat, but as adults, they would still be fat, but that was seen as being healthy, where now we have more of a crisis, but I think you have a situation where I think we can still reach people because like you understand that this is a community that's been kind of under, you know, in terms of food.  But, yet, how can you be overweight, so clearly, you can understand that it's not what you--you know, it's what you actually eat that's contributing to this, but you might have other cultural conditions.  And see, I think when I was coming along phys ed [physical education] was required, what they call PE.  But I think now when I moved here [Atlanta, Georgia], I saw some obese people when I was in North Carolina.  But since I've been here I've been really struck by, we're talking about extreme obesity in very young people.  And so the life expectancy is not gonna be that long, but if you have kids, then you have another issue that you're passing along.
Story_ID: 624901
Speaker 1: All right, is there anything I haven't asked that we need to cover before I ask my last question 'cause I have a--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think the issue is that in the sciences more generally, just not the social sciences, there is what we call a systematic way of collecting evidence, and part of that can either be this hypothesis testing that I mentioned earlier or in some disciplines, it's called asking a research question and that, you know, in my field, there's sometimes a debate whether or not using quantitative methods, that is using methods very similar to physicists, chemists, the kind of traditional natural sciences, is that method more, is it more rigorous and result in more information and more systematic information than someone who uses what is called a descriptive approach where they might interview people, where they might do field observations and not necessarily have data, that is quantitative data.  That's been somewhat of a debate.  I think to me the issue is that if it's systematically collected, and there is a verification so even when people do focus groups or do fieldwork, if people are doing it in a systematic way, there's a method to it, and then there is a way to follow that.  Then someone else can follow the, kind of the sequence of events and see if they come out with something similar.  And if it's not similar or not replicated, there might be explanations for that.  So I think at the core, it's using, and at least for the social science, to make certain that we have tools, but you don't have to be like a physicist to be able to able to address social challenges.  But you do need to have some fundamental analytical and methodological tools that you use to investigate because otherwise, how are you gonna know that you have evidence that addresses your question or your hypothesis.  So I would say that.
Story_ID: 624902
Speaker 1: But in terms of I think any other question, I think one of the things sometimes is whether or not there're barriers that you have to overcome.  And I think given the nature of science, particularly for submission to journals, and part of that process you get, either your paper is accepted or rejected.  Sometimes, they're accepted and you have to go back and revise them and resubmit them.  Sometimes, there're minor things that you do, sometimes there are major things.  But I think that you have to understand the nature of that process, that while you might not agree with the review comments, you have an option to either challenge those reviews, but you have to make a sound case for it.  But the other issue is that if you come from a community, as I was telling you before, if you have no history about how that process works, and you get a rejection where there're all these things wrong about what you did, if you take that personally, as an indictment against your own intellect, that's different than understanding that this is part of a process where everybody at some point in time may get a rejection.  The issue is that either you sit down and read it--you may be ticked off when you first read it, then you go back and read it again when you're much calmer about it and to see where there's any legitimacy in the criticism, and can you address it in an expedient way.  And if you cannot, it may be either you forget that particular study--that's what we call problem retention, or it may be where you submit it somewhere else.  But I think the fundamental issue is that if you had not been mentored in a way where you understand the profession, and I don't think it matters what kind of profession, you have to have some idea how things work and that, if for example, I'm coming into an academic community at a research one, tier one school, and it's pretty clear, you make more money there than you do at a smaller school, but you're also expected to produce more.  So if the norm is to produce two articles and referee journals per year or produce four, and you're producing one, it should be some reality that the probability of you getting a permanent status is not looking good.  So you have some notion at some and time, you have to evaluate that situation.  Is it likely that I'm gonna be able to kick the productivity up or is it the case where that I have to think about something else.  And that's what I'm saying.  That's why the assessment, your personal assessment helps.
Story_ID: 624903
Speaker 1: But if you have other people who are part of our mentoring community, they can take a read of it or they can take an examination of it and tell you whether or not they think it's ready to be submitted.  See, I see that no difference in the social science than my colleagues who are in photography, where they know if they've taken a series of shots, you know, you have some judgment yourself whether or not it's of a quality to go in this particular studio.  Or you can have colleagues, who maybe being more experienced, can give you kind of a reality check that, "Look, this is not ready to go."  And I think that, I know when I started out doing some very technical abstract writings, I had one of my friends in the English department to read it and then for him to tell me what he understood.  And when he told me that he couldn't understand some of the more complex stuff because it was written in a more Germanic kind of style, very abstract.  See, I knew that the audience that I wanted to reach would be people who were like him who could read it and understand it.  I didn't want to just reach a narrow strip of people who would understand the complexity and that's it.  That was not my goal.  So I think that that was actually something as overcoming to learn how to write to reach different audiences.  So it may be an audience that I'm writing that's more technically, so I can use certain terms.  There are other ones that would have no clue what you're talking about.  So I would say that, as something that was not asked, that would be one thing, I think you have to know the audience (cough) excuse me, when I was at the Office of Technology Assessment, since it's policy oriented, you had to show how, what policies may be available to address that particular issue.  (Unclear) was not, I need to go do some more research.  It was that, what you have found from the research you're doing, what policies need to be implemented to possibly address that.  So you couldn't say do, policy A.  It may be that to have this outcome, here's a policy you might need to have.  To have a medium impact, you might need to have this policy, and the lowest impact may be this type of policy.  But the issue is that you're providing a menu of things in which a policymaker can select to try to resolve a particular issue.
Story_ID: 624904
Speaker 1: Now, could you--I know I asked you about your family.  You say, you're still married, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your wife [LaRue C. Pearson] is a professor of women's studies.
Speaker 2: No, not here.  She's in the School of Public Policy [Georgia Institute of Technology School of Public Policy, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Public Policy, right, all right.  And you have two children, two daughters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  I have--I've remarried.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have a daughter [Ladessa Cunningham Pearson] who has a master's in divinity from Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and she teaches at a technology school, a high school.  This is a biotechs [biotechnology] high school.  And then there's a son who is a physician.  And so my wife is in the School of Public Policy here.  So when she was at Wake, she was in women's studies, but here she does research on women and underrepresented groups in science.  So it's not quite the same that I have.  She started doing that more that we have been married, but her work is primarily in work and professions, sociology of work, sociology of professions.  But she's in a department that's pretty highly ranked nationally here.  It's in the country, but we're not in the same unit.  When we were at Wake Forest, we were in the same department, but when we came here, we don't have a sociology department at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  So you'll find sociologists in a different department.  So that's where she is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we kind of have independent professional careers, which is the preference, but consulting we do some things together.
Story_ID: 624905
Speaker 1: The last question that we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I guess primarily, you know, when you think about it from my perspective, since it's always been a focus on leaving a place in a little bit better shape than what you found it.  So for me there would be a couple of things.  One, that the literature is much more robust than when I started, and secondly, that I've produced more students who've gone on to be successful and productive and healthy individuals, and they are also making contributions.  And I think the other thing that I had asked of all of my students--these are my research students, not students who you just have in class.  So I've been very fortunate, about twenty something out of Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] went on to get professional degrees, and then out of Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], about a hundred.  And since I've been here [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], it's been a little bit different since I was in administration.  So one thing I've asked of all of them is to do pro bono work, to give something back.  And fortunately, I think all of them have done that, whether they're lawyers, whether they're doctors, whether they're accountants, university people, they've all done that.  So I think the legacy is that, that I think is the fact that not only leaving it in a better shape, but they are also leaving it in a better shape, but they're also taking their skills and sharing those with the larger community.  And that's why I'm saying that when I left industry [Kelly Springfield Tire Company] and went to Grambling, it was never about money.  It was about making, having change.  And that's what I was saying from high school [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas].  I don't know where all of it came from, but I knew I wanted to make a difference, and the difference was not just for me.  The difference was about fundamentally changing some of the structure and changing some of the things about human conditions.  And I think that has happened.  I think now, at that, I'm at the point where it's basically all about kind of legacy.  There's nothing else to prove.  I think, so I've been able to establish a scholarship fund at SIU Carbondale [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  I get letters from the young people who benefit from that.  So that's what I, I think you have to leave things better.  And I realized that even early on, you don't have to be extraordinarily wealthy to start a fund or opportunities that can benefit other people because a lot of times you're gonna use the money in some other way, so leaving that and hopefully that those young people who benefited from that scholarship at SIU will, in their lifetime have an opportunity to do well financially and then establish something like that.  That's the legacy I would like to see that, you know, you've thought about people other than yourself, and you've produced other people who think about people other than themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's enough for me.  I don't have to be a billionaire or anything like that.  I just wanna see it left a little bit better than the way I found it.
Speaker 1: All right, well, I'm sure it will be.  And thank you very much for your story.
Speaker 2: No problem.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
