Story_ID: 55686
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and also Larry Crowe is the observer and I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay my name is Harry Porterfield, H-A-R-R-Y, P-O-R-T-E-R-F-I-E-L-D.  Date of birth August 29, 1928.
Speaker 1: And can we have today's date and our location and your profession?
Speaker 2: Today is May 21, 2002, profession reporter--television reporter.  What else do you need?
Speaker 1: And the location, it's the HistoryMakers--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 55687
Speaker 1: Now I ask five questions of everyone that are People Magazine-ish.  Just--I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: What my favorite food is, oh my gosh I hadn't even thought about that--see if I do have a favorite food.  Well you know I like barbecued chicken sandwiches, I love barbecue chicken sandwiches.  Among my favorites--I don't think I have a favorite food; I have a number of favorite foods.  I like a combination of cottage cheese and pineapple, I like--oh my gosh I like tacos.  Just a variety of things I enjoy.  There isn't a favorite, I just love a menu that's--has a lot of variety in it, it's hard to single out one food.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color would be blue, blue goes with almost anything that--it matches anything you can think of.  So I think it would be blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is springtime, particularly in the Chicago [Illinois] area.  It's nice when you see a transition from winter to spring and suddenly the flowers begin to grow and gets warmer and you can anticipate what it's going to be like in the summertime.  I think I like springtime, yes.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Ooh, well I used to vacation in Florida and there is a place called Destin, Florida which is very, very nice.  I used to have a townhouse there.  So I rather like that as one of my favorites.  And then another place that I enjoy because living in Michigan, we were kind of close to it, was Idlewild, Michigan which is a very nice place and my brother has a place there and I used to as a kid spend a lot of time in Idlewild.  So those are the two, I think.
Speaker 1: And a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, oh my gosh here again there are so many of them.  When I talk to people I like to say, particularly the kids, I like to tell them when I'm trying to motivate them to stay in school, to work hard, to study.  I like to say, "The only place success comes before work is in the dictionary."  I guess that would be one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: That's nice, you know I hadn't heard the--we haven't had a barbecued chicken and I like the cottage cheese with pineapple.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  You're making us hungry.
Speaker 1: Oh that's great, it's a wonderful combination and it's not fattening and these are the kinds of things that I think I've come accustomed to.  As I wean myself from hamburgers, I like a good fish dish along the way, a Chilean sea bass, I love Chilean sea bass and now I heard today that the Chilean sea bass population is facing extinction.  So here's my favorite fish (laugh) and it's drying up, I don't know, what can I say. Chilean sea bass.
Story_ID: 55688
Speaker 1: Okay, I want to start out by-I'd like you to first talk about your mother.  Is it Vida?
Speaker 2: Viola.
Speaker 1: Viola.
Speaker 2: Viola M. Porterfield.  M stands for McKinley, she was from a very religious family and she grew up in a number of places and the family finally settled in Zion, Illinois and her father, my grandfather was a Baptist minister.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about her growing up and her background?
Speaker 2: From time to time she did.  She grew up during the war years, I'm talking about World War I years and she had a number of sisters and two brothers and from time to time she indicated it was a very close family and a very loving family and there was rarely any dissention among them which is kind unusual.  Very very close, that was the sense although she didn't tell me that specifically.  I gather that from the way she talked about her sisters and her brothers, she was always concerned about them.  I guess that's the thought that always came through to me whenever I talked to my mother, what a close family they were and the kind of experiences they had although they didn't have a lot of money, practically none because he was a minister and he moved from Kentucky to Tennessee and finally ended up in Zion, Illinois.  They still were happy and I gathered that although she never told me that.  You just always got that feeling from her when you talked to her.
Speaker 1: Now did you know if your grandfather's roots-were they in the South?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: Do you know where?
Speaker 2: Tennessee, I think it was from Tennessee.  My mother said his mother lived to be or her grandmother lived to be 1one hundred plus.  So they were a hardy lot and they were intermixed with Indians and his name was Pleasant McFarland, the Reverend Pleasant McFarland but a nice guy.  I knew him very briefly and I gather that they came from Tennessee.  But he was a "fire and brimstone" preacher.
Speaker 1: Now was he of the Baptist tradition?
Speaker 2: Baptist, yes very much so.
Speaker 1: And did your mother-what kind of person was she?  Was she quiet or was she--?
Speaker 2: My mother was very outgoing at times.  Mom had grown up in this tradition, this tradition of adhering strictly to her faith.  She didn't believe in dancing and that went over well with me.  She didn't believe in playing cards and in growing up in Zion [Illinois] she didn't need anything that was support product and she would always ask me to get beef bacon, it was always beef bacon.  And in Zion during the period that she lived there and no drug store, no liquor store obviously, no theaters and no doctors and it was founded by a very strict person, his name was Dr. [John Alexander] Dowie and these were the rules that he laid down and the way his flock was to live and they did for many, many years.  For a long time Zion didn't have a drug store or a doctor.  They believed all things were done through faith.  But that of course changed through the years.  But this was the kind of environment she grew up in and the kind of thing she kind of passed along to me and we would have issues over it.  That was then and then I was coming up when that was then and we had long discussions about these things.  I remember when she always told me about dancing, dancing is sinful and I said "why?"  And she said "men don't dance with one another," I said "yeah okay."  But she was always against that and another thing to she didn't believe in going to a theater on Sunday, no shows, no movies on Sunday.  So this was the kind of thing I lived with as I was growing up in the family.
Speaker 1: So it was a pretty strict household in many ways?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah.
Story_ID: 55689
Speaker 1: Now your father, can you describe him and give his name?
Speaker 2: Well his first name was Harry, I'm junior, he's senior [Harry Porterfield, Sr.].  He was born in Ohio and his father, my grandfather was a miner but he was quite an entrepreneur, I gather.  I didn't know him very well or very long but he started as a miner in West Virginia as I remember and then he saw there were some opportunities for people who had a mining background for blacks in Saginaw, Michigan.  So when he moved to Saginaw from West Virginia he discovered all these job opportunities there and he brought with him and sent for a number of his friends from West Virginia and that's really how the black population in Saginaw, Michigan got started was through him, through my grandfather.  He had three sons and a daughter.  My father of course was one of the sons and apparently he was quite the entrepreneur because he set my father and my uncle up in business.  He built a garage for them, a pretty good size building and for years that was the livelihood of the family.  They were all mechanics; they fixed cars and did everything you could think of and quite a very nice facility to work in.
Speaker 1: Do you think your grandfather was originally from West Virginia, you think that was his origin or he ended up being employed there as a miner?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I really don't know.  I never talked to anybody in the family about it, West Virginia is all I heard and I remember my uncle telling me that one of his sisters was a McCoy--I'm sorry one of his sisters was a Hatfield because I remember--I know my uncle telling me about seeing his aunt, Mrs. Hatfield back in West Virginia and it turned out she was one of the Hatfields of the "Hatfields and McCoys".  Now I don't know how that connection came to be, I don't know but I heard that a couple of times from my uncle.
Speaker 1: Now your father, what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: Well he was a very studious guy.  He always wanted to be a lawyer and he bought law books but he never--I don't think he got through the eleventh grade.  I think that was about it for him, he had to work.  He was a very industrious person too and--I can never remember that I ever beat my father out of bed.  He was always up in the morning and every time I'd look up no matter how early it was, he was up doing something.  We had at that time--I remember a furnace and you had to shovel coal in the darn thing in the winter time and I remember hearing him at five o'clock in the morning shoveling coal in that furnace and sometimes even earlier than that.  He'd work in the garage and spent many long hours there pumping gas and fixing cars.  It's hard to describe him because he was so devoted to his work that we kind of had a tough time developing a relationship.
Story_ID: 55690
Speaker 1: But there were some other problems; there were really some other problems there too.  This family could have been mistaken from some other folks.  My uncle and my grandfather looked like Indians.  I don't know who my grandmother was, I really don't know.  I'd see pictures of her in a--her name was Ida, I really don't know what she looked--I'd see her and when I came along, I didn't look like the rest of the family.  So we kind of had some problems with that--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Were you the fairest?
Speaker 1: I was the first grandson.
Speaker 2: You're the first but were you lighter than the others?
Speaker 1: No, I was darker.
Speaker 2: Oh so everyone was fair skinned, so fair skinned that they could pass because you're the darkest?
Speaker 1: My grandmother could without a doubt.  My uncle could be mistaken for an Asian or a Mexican.  My grandfather looked like an Indian or a Mexican or an Asian.  They were very fair and straight hair and I think the Indian influence but that was the family.
Speaker 2: So they considered themselves black though.  Was there any discussion about that or was it--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I don't know what they considered themselves.  I don't know if they really considered themselves black.  I'm not sure, I don't think--I don't know how they thought of themselves.  There were friends, they had many friends but they were all pretty much like them.  It was kind of a close coterie of individuals who all looked and thought alike and then came to the same place.  That's a very hard question to answer.  I don't know that they really were terribly sympathetic with other black people.  I know they are republican, always voted republican right down the line and I don't know if they had survived into the age of the Civil Rights Movement, how they would have fared.  But those were the kinds of issues that I began to face when I got old enough to realize there were some differences there in the family.
Speaker 2: This is what I think is really fascinating about this project.  Those people who I can engage in conversation about color you know you get some interesting responses.
Speaker 1: It was a color and hair thing, I mean you've probably heard that before but it really was and it--I didn't know how to deal with it and when I began to realize what was happening, I really didn't know what to do.  It made for some awkward moments, some uncomfortable moments and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Do you think you were the union of some--that there were some other things happening with you?   You were the darker--you know different things, different genes.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, sure.
Speaker 2: So the household--was your father religious as your mother?
Speaker 1: No, not at all and he was as irreligious as she was religious.  So they were diametrically opposed as far as their church going and religion is concerned.
Speaker 2: Now you had one brother, right?
Speaker 1: One brother, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay and he was younger than you?
Speaker 1: He was younger, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay how many years?
Speaker 1: Three years.
Speaker 2: And his name?
Speaker 1: Leonard, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now was he the same coloring as you?
Speaker 1: No he's a little lighter than I am, yeah.
Story_ID: 55691
Speaker 1: Now what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I remember my grandfather and I remember riding in a wheel barrel with him and he took to me.  I remember he took to me and I couldn't have been more than--oh my gosh three but I remember my grandfather got along very well, his first grandson.  But I don't remember much else.  I remember his funeral and it was held at his house, they drug the casket into the house and they had the casket sitting there in the living room and I remember that and that's all I remember when he died of a heart attack, he had a heart problem which was about 1933 as I recall.  I remember visiting the Chicago [Illinois]--it wasn't the World's Fair--yes it was a Century of Progress [1933], I remember that.  Oh yes I don't tell anybody that but I remember the century of progress and I remember there was a--they had some gondolas that were stretched over Lake Shore Drive and you could take the gondola ride and my mother didn't want me in the gondola she said oh they might fall but we took the ride anyway.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you during the [World's Fair] Century of Progress because that was 1930 [sic, 1933]?
Speaker 2: '32 [1932]/'33 [1933] so I was about four years old then, yeah I remember that Century of Progress.
Story_ID: 55692
Speaker 1: You were born in Saginaw, Michigan but when did the family go to Zion [Illinois] or did they?
Speaker 2: No they didn't, we've always lived in Saginaw [Michigan].  My mother is from Zion [Illinois] and when she married my father she moved from Zion to Saginaw.
Speaker 1: So how did she meet your father, do you know how that happened?
Speaker 2: She was visiting an aunt, she was visiting her sister who had somehow come to Saginaw [Michigan] and married a fellow by the name of Emerson Berdin (ph.) and my mother came to visit and I guess while she was visiting Saginaw [Michigan] met my father and that's how it worked and this was a--the Berdins and the Porterfields were quite a clan and they all looked alike.  They were all very attractive people with flowing hair and Indian like features and it was a--I guess they were really quite the thing in those days.
Speaker 1: But they weren't passing so to speak sort of but they were their own little society.
Speaker 2: You might say that, yeah that's a good way of characterizing it, yeah.  They weren't passing; they weren't trying to be anything but themselves.  Now if somebody mistook them; they didn't do anything to change their mind; that was it.
Story_ID: 55693
Speaker 1: It was a lot of that going on, even white people in some respects (laughter).  So tell me what was Saginaw [Michigan] like during those years, do you know, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well Saginaw [Michigan] is an industrial town.  There are five General Motors plants in Saginaw so everyone I knew and most every African American in town worked at one plant or another, pouring iron.  There were no supervisors at that time, no one worked in banks; everybody worked in the factory and that was it.  It was usually the toughest jobs that were available, the factory.  These were General Motors plants, a couple of foundries and a couple of parts plants but it was all (unclear) labor.  As a matter of fact, one of the high schools offered a course in high school which most of my friends took.  It was called foundry science and it was to prepare you to work in the factory-General Motors factories.  So it was just a big industrial town and I can remember knowing had a lot of money but everybody seemed to be quite satisfied with their status.  Everybody had a car but it was old.  It was just kind of a dull place to be and I guess as a kid I began to realize that; everybody did their own thing and nothing exciting ever happened, life was very uneventful.  You'd go to school, you'd go to church, come home, you eat the same thing every Sunday, do it all over again the next week.
Story_ID: 55694
Speaker 1: Not city living?  If you would take yourself back to those days, can you describe to me what sights, smells, sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I think I can remember the smell of the foundry when the wind shifted, that was a very distinct thing and we didn't live in the area far.  We lived on the Westside of Saginaw [Michigan] which was predominantly white and the foundry was on the eastside which was predominantly black or where the black population mainly lived.  But when the wind shifted, you could smell that foundry and that was one of the smells that I can remember.  Other than that there was a lot of open space at the time we lived there.  I can't think of anything that was distinctive that would--that I could remember making an impression upon me at the time other than that, the smell of the foundry.
Story_ID: 55695
Speaker 1: And tell me other things about your family life in let's see your neighborhood.  You said you lived primarily in a white neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Predominantly white neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I mean what was the block like around your home?  Who did you--I'm just trying to get a sense of-(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't have a lot of friends; of course all my friends were white because they were kids who lived in the neighborhood within one or two blocks of where we lived.  I think my grandfather was the first settler in that area, he built the business there and then everybody else moved in.  They happened to all be white as it turned out so they ended up living in a white neighborhood.  Before realizing there was a really dramatic difference, I remember doing all the things everybody else did.  We played ball together, have ice cream cones together, once in a while we attend church together.  There was a guy a couple of blocks away who was always recruiting for his church.  So we'd study the bible together and that sort of thing.  Play basketball together.  It was a--I'm trying to think--it was a kind of life that wasn't threatening and it didn't offer a lot in terms of excitement.  What I looked forward to is Christmas, I loved Christmas.  Summer vacation--I loved summer vacation and then school, I had a great fondness for recess.  I didn't think real hard about back home and what it was like but generally was just an uneventful kind of existence.  Kid growing up, going to school and doing things other kids do.
Story_ID: 55696
Speaker 1: Now who were you like as a young boy?  Were you introspective or were you rambunctious or were you curious?
Speaker 2: My cousins told me I was rambunctious, I was very difficult to get along with that I was always doing the things that I was not supposed to do, very unpredictable and I was given to tantrums some time.  I remember my aunt lived on the other side of Saginaw [Michigan] which was something like four or five miles and I was seven or eight years old and I decided to get on my bike and ride to see them and it was a surprise.  You mean you rode all the way across town just to see us, I said yes I did that.  I pictured myself as something of an adventurer.  I don't--I remember once I got that bike--I used to ride everywhere I could think of or just ride and ride and ride and find myself ten or fifteen miles away from home and turn around and come back.  My cousins still say that I was probably a one of the most disorganized, unpredictable youngsters that they ever met when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Unpredictable in what way?
Speaker 2: Well I never knew what I was going to do because I was always getting into trouble and not the kind of trouble you go to jail for but just kind of things with the family.
Speaker 1: Mischievous
Speaker 2: Mischievous.  I used to bake cakes and they would always fall and mother would come home and find all this mess in the kitchen and as I remember I used to experiment a lot with stuff and usually it didn't work but I kept on doing it anyway.  I worked in the garage and I would start driving when I was about nine or ten years old driving cars.  I used to park cars when I was at that age and wash cars and I would sometimes try and take them apart and that didn't work out too well.  So I remember I had a curiosity about stuff and I was always getting into trouble because of it doing things I wasn't supposed to do.
Speaker 1: So you were very interested in how things worked, really?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's change tapes.
Story_ID: 55697
Speaker 1: Now when you went to school--was it Fuer--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Fuerbringer, it's a German name, Fuerbringer Elementary School [Saginaw, Michigan].  I remember the first day I went to school, 1933.  I remember going--I just couldn't wait to go to school for some reason that it stuck with me all these years going to school and I attended kindergarten in 1933, my first day in school kindergarten.
Speaker 1: What do you think excited you about that?
Speaker 2: Something different, well I was a five years old but it was just--I was really--and that memory has stuck with me.  All these bits and pieces of history come out--they stick with me and that I do remember very vividly.  Getting up and my mother walking me to school and that was the beginning of a lot of things.
Speaker 1: (BRIEF OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Now what did you--was there any teachers in school that influenced you or that you remember particularly?
Speaker 1: Yes I do remember--I remember several teachers who influenced me.  One was Mrs. Lowman and Mrs. Lowman and why I remember her name I don't know but I totally failed her class.  But she seemed to be very understanding and the other teacher I remember was a biology teacher and I told her, I said "I'd like to be a doctor," and she said, "You'll never be a doctor, you could never do that," and I never--and I remember her name too, almost and I never forget what that woman said to me.  It was the only two teachers I remember in high school and in elementary school.  Why I remember Mrs. Lowman, I don't know.  She was just very nice and she seemed to understand because I was failing everything.  I failed math, I failed English; I just failed everything.
Speaker 2: Why was that you think?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  It was some pressures there, I'm sure there were some social pressures there of this all white school and I think it may have something to do with.  I failed, I went right up to grades failing every grade practically but I got through.  I didn't--I got to the point I didn't like school very much and I kind of hated going to school with those kids because they couldn't--there were differences that were becoming apparent and differences that were deepening the older I got.  I remember I had a conversation with one of my classmates, it must have been in fourth or fifth grade and she insisted--she insisted that I liked chicken and I never cared for chicken.  One reason I never cared for it was because we ate it all the time.  I got sick and tired of chicken so I hated it and she said, "Oh no your people like chicken, so you like chicken."  I said I don't like chicken.  "Oh no, no, no you do like chicken."  I mean she could not accept my answer, she could not accept the fact that I didn't like chicken because all black people liked chicken so I had to like chicken.  That's a conversation that I can remember (laugh).
Story_ID: 55698
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first realized that you were different or you said it was sometime in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Probably well I have to go back to maybe fifth or sixth grade, maybe approaching junior high or the seventh grade.  I think it was--I began to realize there was a difference when I sensed there were a lot of social activities going around me but they are going around me and I was never a part of them.  I began to realize that there was something different about me that kept me out of this mix, it's hard to pinpoint.  I began to develop really awful inferiority complex because I remember thinking there's got to be something wrong with me that I don't have these associations other people have and I think that's one of the reasons that I began to hate school so much because I didn't seem to be able to get myself into any social situation.  And if I had a friend, he was usually the school pariah, a kid that comes from a family so poor they couldn't afford shoes or something like that.  But that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: So you really didn't feel a sense of place in many ways?
Speaker 2: No I really didn't.
Speaker 1: But what was occupying your time then and attention?  What were you finding your sort of outlet?
Speaker 2: Well I used to fantasize a lot and one of the things I always wanted to do, I got the bully model airplanes as a kid and that was one of my outlets and then I pictured myself as a radio announcer.  I used to buy these records and pretend--my brother and I pretended we were on the radio and we were introducing these bands.  So I spent a lot of time just pretending to be someone else and being some other place.  That's a very good question, how I occupied my time.  But I didn't think of school very much only when I was there.  Yeah that's what I did.  I remember I used to buy those model airplanes news and there was popular science, I loved popular science because you could see all these wonderful things in there.  There was this article on a boat and it was a model boat and it gave the plans and I thought you know if I built this model boat and if I build it big enough, I can get in it and go someplace, I never forget that (laugh).  Well it didn't come to anything but that was one of my dreams.
Speaker 1: So in the family there wasn't much explanation about what was going on in school.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 55699
Speaker 1: So what about music; was music a part of your household?
Speaker 2: It wasn't a part of the household until my mother decided that I should take violin lessons.  I was eight years old and so I started taking violin lessons and that became another thing.  Well I hated the violin, I hated to practice and--but I was forced to study the instrument for a number of years.  It was only until I got into the orchestra--I guess that was eighth grade--seventh or eighth grade that I began to appreciate having that ability to read music and to play the violin and then it took on a whole new perspective for me.  I was suddenly part of something that's very creative and very satisfying and I was as important to the orchestra as everyone else.  So that's when music began to, I think, come into my life and I guess it was the family to because we would--there were the concerts--the junior high concerts that everyone had to attend and I was usually playing in the orchestra and things began to change when I started taking music lessons.  I sing too, I did a lot of singing as a kid and I was in a couple of choirs and did a lot of solo stuff in school with thoughts of maybe being a professional singer one day that didn't--but I gave up on that idea.
Speaker 1: Was there any singer that you admired?
Speaker 2: Yeah Frank Sinatra that was the year when Frank Sinatra was really making it big.  Frank Sinatra, Perry Como and there was a singer and his name was Buddy Clark and Buddy Clark just had a wonderful way with a song and I remember trying to imitate him all the time, Buddy Clark.  Buddy Clark was a lawyer but he excelled as a singer and he was in an airplane in 1949 flying to, I think it was California to see a football game and there was no seat for him and he was sitting in the aisle and the plane had a forced landing, it didn't crash it had a forced landing as a consequence he was killed and why this sticks with me, I don't know.  But I do remember Buddy Clark and I always enjoyed listening to this guy sing, that's the late '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 55700
Speaker 1: And radio when you were a child, what radio did you--you had radio--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we had radio.  What radio?
Speaker 1: Yeah would you listen to the radio?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, yeah.  We listened to well WJL was a big station in Detroit and we picked up Detroit pretty well, I guess about the only station we listened to.  My father had a--I loved the music and I liked the big bands then, my father liked to listen to this rebel rousing priest, Father John [sic, Charles] Coughlin from--let's see he had a church in Royal Oak, Michigan.  I'll never forget that--why he liked to listen to that guy and later I learned this guy was a racist.  I mean he was as radical as anything you'd come across but my father really liked him, he liked to listen to this guy, Father John [sic, Charles] Coughlin from Royal Oak, Michigan.
Speaker 1: But he wasn't--This priest--but he wasn't religious your father.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But that guy did not preach religion, he was the--okay what can you liken him today; he was maybe the Rush Limbaugh, more radical.  He was like a J. [Jerry] Falwell of his day, very radical guy.  But I didn't realize that until later, until it began to sink in to me what this guy was saying.
Speaker 1: So your father is listening to big bands and you have--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: No he's not listening to big bands; he is listening to Father [Charles] Coughlin.
Speaker 1: You were listening to big bands, your father doesn't believe in dancing?
Speaker 2: That's right (laugh).
Story_ID: 55701
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I want to add another thing so the blacks did live on the other side of town; all you knew was that they lived on the other side of town?
Speaker 2: That's what I knew.  We used to go to church on the other side of town and it was called Christ Community Church as I recall; a little house.  I'd see a few folks who were friends of the family.  But that was my only interaction at that point.  So I was too young to drive and I didn't get around that much, stayed in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So music provides an outlet and you said, and music whether it was with the violin or also singing.  So is that where you excelled in high school or did you--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I excelled--well maybe so.  I think I excelled in singing, I could out sing anybody else.  As far as playing the violin, I was probably mediocre fiddler player. I ultimately became a concert master of our little orchestra, I think in ninth grade.  But it was the singing which I liked a lot and that gave me a lot of satisfaction.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that you wanted to be at that point?  I mean I know you had dreams of leaving but what--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think--let me think, give it some thought--I don't think I had any thought at all.  I don't think I knew--I don't think I even thought about it.  One of the things that was always on my mind was the fact that the family operated this business and it was a pretty successful business, they fixed everybody's cars, they pumped gas and had a pretty good clientele and in the back of mind I thought that will be my destiny; I'm going to be a mechanic, I'm going to fix cars, I'm going to pump gas and that's going to be pretty much it.  There was nothing else out there that I could see that would inspire me to think differently.  It appeared to be a good way of life and at that time even when I was in junior high school, I was working in the garage doing a lot, I told you I was driving, I was changing tires, I could breakdown an engine, I cleaned spark plugs, I mean I did all these things with cars and so I never thought about a future beyond that garage.  Really there was nothing else out there, we had a couple of doctors in town and that was it in terms of professional people and maybe a dentist.  But no one doing anything else, everybody else worked in the factory, the plant, foundry making cars, making parts for cars primarily in Saginaw [Michigan].
Story_ID: 55702
Speaker 1: So when you graduate, you went to Arthur Hill High School [Saginaw, Michigan] and you graduated is that when you went to Bay City Junior [College, Michigan]--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I went to Bay City Junior College after I graduated from Arthur Hill, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was your thought then, I'm just trying to understand?
Speaker 2: Well in high school I got the thought that-I think having been exposed to some science courses like chemistry and (unclear) and I finally got the thought that maybe I wanted to be a doctor.  I wanted to go into medicine and I took biology and I didn't do very well in biology.  I took a lot of math but somehow and I can't tell you why I got this thought, I thought you know this is what I need to do.  So when I left--graduated from Arthur Hill [High School, Saginaw, Michigan] I went to Bay City Junior College [Michigan] and concentrated on these courses.  These were pre-med courses.  The biology, the chemistry and--did I take physics--took some language because language is important, German I told them it was very important and I don't know how it came to me that I wanted to--maybe somebody in the family.  Maybe it was my mother I think who thought that I ought to be thinking about something besides that garage, work in that garage.  It was a combination of a lot of things and I can't tell you where that influence came but I remember distinctly when I was in the eleventh grade, that's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to get away from that lifestyle and I could see it in medicine, in science and so that was the way I kind of aimed myself in that direction.
Speaker 1: What does your father think of that, he may not have thought too much about that, did he?
Speaker 2: I don't know it was hard to know what my father thought, it was really hard to know; I didn't talk with him that much.  I guess as a father and son we had a relationship but I don't know that it was a good relationship.  It was a relationship; we never talked about it really.  The only time that he really showed a spark and real interest, I mean really fatherly interest in me was when I participated in the soapbox derby.  I was in the soapbox derby it was 1940, I nearly won it.  It was a fast car, a real fast car and they had all our pictures in the newspaper and I had this helmet and the car still exists after all these years and I nearly won by the soapbox derby and then he just seemed to take an interest in me then and then that kind of waned.
Speaker 1: You said the soapbox--the car that you raced in still exists?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I nearly won.  That was a big thing, soapbox derby.  Oh yeah I had a neat car, I almost built it myself.
Speaker 1: You were good at building things.
Speaker 2: Well I built things, I don't know how good I was, it was something to do.
Speaker 1: So when you went to--you got your actual--you went for two years before getting drafted is that when you were drafted?
Speaker 2: No I was drafted after the University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: Oh after the University.
Speaker 2: I went to--well actually I had a--I was named to a scholarship.  I was (unclear) a scholarship which I didn't get because the person who was named to it took advantage of it.  But I was kind of proud of that (unclear) a scholarship to the University of Michigan.  My grades were pretty good coming out of Bay City Junior College [Michigan].  I was able to concentrate, I had to go back and take some things over again but I was able to raise the grades up and went to the University of Michigan.  I failed miserably; I got kicked out of the University of Michigan.  They wouldn't let me go back, yeah I lost.  I remember sociology did me in but embryology, I did pretty well in embryology. What else did I take, some really tough courses, physical chemistry really these hard things and I survived that but sociology just knocked me out of the box.  So that was it, they wouldn't let me pay (laugh).
Speaker 1: But how could a person who really didn't like school, you know decide-- you're saying there was a decision that you were going to be a doctor because you didn't want to work in the family business and so you don't want to work with cars so that sort of motivates you and gave you a sense of place or direction.  Okay so you get kicked out?
Speaker 2: Yeah
Story_ID: 55703
Speaker 1: Okay and then what are your thoughts then?  Is that when you get drafted?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's when I got drafted.
Speaker 1: You got drafted into the U.S. Army, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and where did you do your basic training?
Speaker 2: I did my basic at Camp Rucker, Alabama and that was a culture shock for me.
Speaker 1: So yeah because that's your first time-had you been South before?
Speaker 2: No I had never been South before.  Oh that was really something and I really got a taste of segregation because I was in the last segregated unit in the army.  It was the 293rd engineer construction battalion.  We were all black and we had all white officers.  So that was kind of-that was kind of an adventure for me because it was the first time away from home, significantly and it was my first exposure to that kind of segregation and it really hit us, it was the back of the bus kind of thing.  I would say because I had learned typing in the ninth grade, I was assigned to the "S3" office and I had to--they called me in to do some autopsy things when they were doing a--it was a coroner's inquest.  I had to take notes at a coroner's inquest and I remember it had to do with one of our guys who went to town and some white guy shot him in the head, just shot him in the head.  He said he was being threatened and he just shot him in the head that was the end of him.  So those were the kinds of things I had to experience.  I remember taking notes at that coroner's inquest, that's the only time I had to do it but it was kind of a shock and then to see a pregnant woman pulled off a bus.  I think I saw a woman murdered one night.  I was in Dothan, Alabama and it was white fellow and he is beating up his girlfriend, I think he murdered her there in the street.  I just kept walking, just walked away from it.  Those were the days.  I remember a buddy and I were--we shouldn't have done it but we hitchhiked from let's see it was Camp Rucker to we wanted to go to Montgomery [Alabama] because they had the college--there were a lot of girls in Montgomery, yeah.  We were in a small town, we were hitchhiking and we actually got picked up and I was surprised and we didn't know how dangerous this was.  We got to one town and the cops came up to us and said boys keep walking, just keep walking so we kept walking (laugh).  We didn't stay in that town and we went to one place where they added the jukebox and it was Sunday and wanted to play a jukebox and they said no you can't play jukebox, they said the white folks in this town will not let you play jukebox on Sunday, now you can play it any other day but you cannot play it on Sunday.  So I really got a good taste of the segregated South, a really good one, good indoctrination.
Speaker 1: And how old were you then?
Speaker 2: How old?
Speaker 1: How long, you were in your twenties?
Speaker 2: Yeah [twenty three], I was there in basic training, I was there about ten months.  I was able to--because I worked in the office--the "S3" office I found a way to assign myself to a school--to training so I signed myself to surveyor school in Virginia.  So I sent myself to Virginia and I got the job because nobody else could type and they were looking for typists like crazy.  So I'm doing all these--typing out all these orders and I figured it would be nice to go to Virginia and I got another shock, a friend of mine we got together and went to Washington [D.C.] and we were in a coffee shop and there was this black waitress that came to us and she wrote on this napkin we do not serve colored here.  Here I'm in a uniform and the Korean War [sic, Korean Conflict] was going on and we could have been shipped out any moment and I'm looking at this napkin, we do not serve coloreds here when we're sitting at this counter.  That's kind of a jolting experience.
Speaker 1: All this is new to you in some respects.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had never been South before, never been to Virginia before, never been to Washington D.C. before and it was all new, all new.
Story_ID: 55704
Speaker 1: Now when did you get shipped to Germany?
Speaker 2: Germany about--it had to be the latter part of 1951, yeah.  The latter part of '51 [1951], I think it was December.  I was in Germany for almost a year, about a year.
Speaker 1: Did you like that experience?
Speaker 2: I liked it a lot.  One of the reasons was because I had studied so much German at Bay City Junior College [Michigan] and again the University of Michigan, I had a pretty good grasp with the language so I could go places these other guys couldn't go and really get around.  I could really talk to these guys out there.  So it was another experience for me and it was pretty obvious that the attitude of people in Europe, the Germans was much different than the attitude of whites in the United States, it was entirely different.  Even though they had been defeated and even though you could sense the bitterness among these people because it was just after the war, 1951 the [World] War [II] was what six years old or something like that, still their attitude was different.  It--you weren't the same kind of person in their eyesight as you would have been in the states, I really liked that and I traveled.  I went to Switzerland, France and other places as much as I could to see the sights.
Speaker 1: This was pretty good because you always thought of trying to get away and experience things.  So what were your thoughts then about what you wanted to do after you were out?
Speaker 2: Well I was--I think I was more interested, more resolved to go on and try to do this medical thing and I had the GI Bill coming for the time I spent in the service I thought maybe I'll utilize that and try to pursue this career in medicine if it's possible.  It just kind of solidified my resolve to go ahead and do what I had hoped to do before going into the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 55705
Speaker 1: And so you get back and you--how did you end up enrolling at Eastern Michigan [University], is that because--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well for a couple of reasons.  They wouldn't let me back at the University of Michigan and my brother--my younger brother had attended Eastern Michigan University and I thought that's as good a place as any.  So I enrolled there, they accepted me and went back to school and I think it was then that it became pretty apparent that trying to pursue this medical thing was going to be really difficult.  The grades weren't bad, I made a Dean's List, I was very happy at that and then I--then to graduate I had to have a course in physical chemistry.  The only place that was giving it in the area was the University of Michigan.  Well Ypsilanti [Michigan] and Ann Arbor [Michigan] are close together, only about six miles difference.  So I went to the University [of Michigan] and I enrolled and I was taking a course in--one of advisors said how did you get back in here?  I was supposed to have been kicked out for life but therein they were surprised that I was able to come back and enroll for a--I took one course.  That was the course I needed to graduate from Eastern Michigan University.  So I was gratified that at least for that I was able to get back in that place.  But I kind of gave up the thought of going into medicine.  I don't know what happened, I finally got out of school and I was intellectually numb.  I wasn't sure where I wanted to go and then I had a thought about going on to work on an advance degree in chemistry.  It seemed to be my strong suit but I didn't have any money and I just kind of dropped out, I did nothing when I graduated.  I didn't have a job.  I think it must have taken a lot out of me just trying to get through school.  I used to have a buddy and we'd sit on his back porch and Larry was just a brilliant guy, great voice, good looking guy, brilliant mind, he didn't do anything he just sat on the back porch and I would go to Larry's house and we'd sit there and talk about what we were going to do.  Can you imagine I'm twenty--
Story_ID: 55706
Speaker 1: You were talking about your friend, you were just saying that you would sit and talk--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I would sit and talk and fantasize.  I can't tell you what was motivating me at that time, not very much.  I hadn't applied to any school and I was existing on jobs like cutting grass, washing cars that kind of thing and you know as I remember, I really at that point, I really didn't want to do much else, you know just kind of exist.  I had saved some money while I was in the U.S. Army so I was able to buy a car.  So at least I had a car but I wasn't doing anything and I really didn't make any effort to follow up on what I had hoped to do and that is getting this advance degree.  We used to spend a lot of time--Larry and I used to drive to Idlewild [Michigan] and pretend to be big time whatever.  We'd dress up and didn't have any money and we would approach the ladies and try to do our best to develop relationships but they quickly saw we didn't have anything and that ended that.  Idlewild [Michigan] was really a rip roaring place at one time.  At the Paradise Club Bill Doggett was big on the organ at the time.  Who else was there--I don't know if [HM] Nancy Wilson made the Paradise Club, it may have been a little bit before her time but as I say most major black artists at one time played the Paradise Club.  So it was really the place to go and a lot of gamblers--a lot of people from Chicago [Illinois] had their homes in Idlewild.  A lot of very professional people, doctors and lawyers, dentists, Detroit [Michigan] but mainly Chicago [Michigan].  For some reason Chicago people predominated in Idlewild [Michigan] and it's a very nice place to go, I met a lot of very nice people when I had money, when that ran out that was the end of it (laugh).
Speaker 1: And you say it was established, you were telling some about it was established by the Pullman [residents, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: From my understanding, yes.
Story_ID: 55707
Speaker 1: Now how did you go and--well how did you go to WKNX [WHHQ, Michigan]?  How did that come about that doesn't--see you and Larry were hanging out--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: We're hanging out right.  Well I had a friend who was on the police force at the time and he came to me one day and he said, "You know there's a radio station downtown looking for a part time disc jockey for two weeks and they need somebody who can fill in for two weeks and I thought of you, would you be interested?"  I said, "Well, yeah I've never been at a radio station before; I don't know anything about broadcasting."  He said, "Why don't you go down and talk to the guy."  So I went to the radio station, WKNX and talked to the general manager, Howard Wolf and he hired me and he said you know there have been fourteen candidates who have come in here looking to fill this two week spot that we have, you're the only one I can understand who didn't have an accent, patois.  So I started on Valentine's Day, February 14, 1950- probably 1955, I think.  Went on the air with the show, I remember Nat "King" Cole was one of the records I played.  Nat "King" Cole thing and a couple of other things and that went on for a couple of weeks and I figured it would be over and then they came to me and said you know the guy who was supposed to take this job is not going to be able to do it.  As it turned out the guy who had worked with the station and had convinced them that there should be some black programming on the station had wrote some bad checks.  But he had been writing bad checks before he went to jail, he'd come out of jail, he wrote bad checks so he went back to jail, that was the end of it.  So they asked me to stay.  So I did this show every day, it was a half hour show called 'Sounds from the Lounge' and the name came from Eastern Michigan University.  Because I remember above the entrance to the music school at Eastern Michigan in Ypsilanti [Michigan] was sounds from the lounge pertaining to the lounge where everybody practiced--rehearsed.  So that's what I called my show and that show went on, I guess it lasted for nine years--doing that show.  It was a jazz show; it was the only jazz show in the northern part of Michigan outside Detroit.  I used to get--jazz promoters used to just pile up the records for me.  I had my choice of what I wanted to play and it came--it was I guess a well listened to show.  It was a lot of fun and I think during that period I began to change my mind about the direction I wanted to take.  Chemistry was going further and further from my mind and this whole business about medicine.  I could see that it was kind of fun to sit there at the radio behind a microphone and just dream up stuff and play records and create your own little environment there.
Story_ID: 55708
Speaker 1: So I think during that period I began to change my mind about a lot of things.  Along the way management asked me if I would--if I was interested in being a continuity director which I didn't know what a continuity director was, when you write commercials.  So I used to write commercials and I used to do this radio station show and then they had a TV outlet too.  WKNX TV and so I thought well you know TV is becoming a thing maybe I should learn something about TV.  So I hired on as a station hand and a cameraman, I would stand behind a studio camera and do a lot of stuff and a little voice over announcing at that point.  That went on for quite a while, for about nine years and then I realized that I was not making any money.  I was really destitute, you work three jobs and you're destitute, it doesn't make sense.  I had an opportunity to utilize my background in chemistry.  A new nodular plant was being built in Saginaw [Michigan] by General Motors and a friend of mine had--who was with the union had discovered that they were hiring people and he thought that maybe I should apply for a job.  I said, "Yeah I've got to get out of this broadcasting business because I never make any money in this thing."  So I applied for a job and they said, "Yeah we'll give you a job."  Well one of the reasons I didn't take the job that was offered to me was that they wanted me to work on an hourly rate basis.  Now in the newspaper they were advertising for people who had two years chemistry, they put them on salary and the people I went to Bay City College [Michigan] with and others were on salary.  I wanted to know why do I have to be hourly rated with my background in chemistry which was almost five years in chemistry, why do I have to be an hourly rated?  Why can't I be on salary like everybody else?  He didn't have an explanation for me so I said, "Forget it."  So I went back to the radio station, I never really quit but I continued with broadcasting.  Just give up this whole idea of pursuing chemistry.
Story_ID: 55709
Speaker 1: Now with--what I want to ask you is when you start (unclear) the show--you didn't mind the--you it's isolated a lot of times people say when they are on the radio.  You didn't mind that?
Speaker 2: No because I was in my own little world.  I total control over it.
Speaker 1: And were you selling commercials as well as writing them?
Speaker 2: I sold one or two commercials, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No I was not in sales, no.
Speaker 1: Okay and you've been talking something about how you were--that you had even thought about composing sort of, this may have been on hind side.  Because the way you approached--you did something unorthodox?
Speaker 2: Well I did--they had a service at this station that was one of these huge vinyl disks and it was a service of background music to standards like 'Camptown Races' or 'Old Kentucky Home' or--what can I think of, some of these really old time things that have no--that no longer require having to pay a royalty, eminent domain stuff.  So what I used to do was I'd take the background music and put my own little words and make up my own melody to it and I used to write jingles and commercials that way.  I was doing very well; they got to the point that they were selling these things you know.  They would come to me and say can you come up with a jingle and I said yeah give me a background.  You get the gist of it, "boom boom boom," guitar, piano and the drums, "boom boom boom," and I'd make up a little melody and puts some words in it and that would be there jingle.  I did that for a while, that was kind of fun, something to do.
Speaker 1: And you found you also had a facility for writing, you didn't know that either, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess.  I don't know whether I had a facility for writing or not but whether I did or not, I did it.
Story_ID: 55710
Speaker 1: This whole thing-when you start working at WKNX [WHHQ Michigan] you know because you said that was to learn more things and you were interested in this whole thing called TV and you actually-did you work there for like nine years?
Speaker 2: I did
Speaker 1: Okay and did you enjoy that experience?
Speaker 2: I did, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Were there--let's see at that time--that's still--the cameras were pretty heavy weren't they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well studio cameras.
Speaker 1: Okay that's different.  TV was different than--so tell me what happened when you're--but wait a minute you're there but how did you get to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: By accident.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: After nine years and after this experience with-not getting a job at Nodular Steel I was thinking about going back to school.  I said I've had enough of this stuff.  I'm not making any money; working three jobs in 1963 I was making sixty-five dollars a week.  My friends who had graduated from high school and had taken jobs in the steel mills, in the factories, in the plants making parts for General Motors cars were making three times as much.  I said there is something wrong here and I've got to do something, I cannot keep this up and I was visiting here in the city and I had at the time a number of relatives who lived here and I was telling a cousin, "You know I've got a do something," and she said, "Well I've heard CBS is looking for a news writer."  I said, "Yeah, okay," and she said, "Why don't you apply for it."  "Oh come on, you've got to be kidding."  "No why don't you just apply," this is 1962.  So I--I said okay and she really dared me to do it.  I said, "Okay okay, I'll do it."  So I drove by the building and I looked up and all these people were walking in and out and I drove up Lake Shore Drive [Chicago, Illinois] and parked near the lake and I sat there for an hour.  I said, "No I'm not going to do this; I can't walk into that place."  I mean I'm a small town person, they will eat me alive and I turned around and I finally got the courage to walk in and apply for a job and the guy who interviewed me was very nice.  He asked me all these questions, you know where do you work, what do you do, he took a lot of notes and I said, "Hey there may be something to this."  And I didn't hear from them in a year.  One day back home [Michigan] after I had forgotten this whole experience, I'm on the air and I get this call from John Madigan who is the news director at WBBM [TV, Chicago, Illinois] and he says, "You still interested in working for us?"  I said, "What?"  "Do you want to come to Chicago [Illinois] and to work as a news writer?"  I said, "Yeah."  It had been such a long time since I applied for the job.  So he arranged for a physical examination to be done right there in--at home in Saginaw [Michigan] and I was hired right on the spot.  The same time, believe or not, within twenty minutes of that call from John [Madigan], I got an offer from Channel 26.  I don't know how that happened; I don't know how my name got around.  But I was hired; I started working January 27, 1964 as a news writer at Channel 2 [CBS affiliate WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], that's how it all started.
Speaker 1: That's sort of amazing.
Speaker 2: It is.
Story_ID: 55711
Speaker 1: There's a different time in TV that's still amazing.  Now the other question I have for you is what was it that [HM] Daddy-O Daylie and--when he had his program on--was that Channel 2 [CBS affiliate WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I don't know, Channel 7 [ABC affiliate, Chicago, Illinois] probably, 'Black on Black'?
Speaker 1: 'For Blacks Only,' it was [HM] Warner Saunders.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I don't, I remember there was a show--There was a show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Maybe it was around the same time.
Speaker 2: It was--it was [HM] Daddy-O [Daylie] and who else?
Speaker 1: [HM]Daddy-O Daylie and [HM] Warner Saunders, [HM] Vernon Jarrett he was doing writing and there was one other-[HM] Herb Kent.  So you go in--it's like you go in and you are a news writer.  Where did the news writer fit in--in the pecking order back then?
Speaker 2: It's the bottom, its right at the lowest rung on the ladder and I was new and something of an anomaly there.  I learned later that it was the pressure from The [Chicago, Illinois] Urban League that caused them to want to look for a black news writer, I can't prove this but I think that's what caused them to do it because they don't do things spontaneously.  Wendell Smith was on the air then and one other black reporter who had been there went on to network.  So it wasn't a matter of getting someone to put in front of the camera, the pressure had been to put somebody--hire minority for the writing staff, behind the scenes sort of thing.  So I was it, I guess and I guess the credentials I had having written all these commercials and done similar work on radio convinced them that I might be suitable for the job.
Speaker 1: So you were really-okay well you said there was pressure too-were there other black people at CBS at the time?
Speaker 2: Only Wendell Smith.  I was the only black writer.
Speaker 1: What did you learn during those early days?  Did you learn about-I mean that was when journalism was really on the job training too.
Speaker 2: Well yeah and I needed it because I was not a journalist.  I had written commercials and that was my writing background.  So I had to learn the job and what I did was I could see that there was a challenge there and if I was going to stay and make this big money, one hundred sixty-five bucks a week, I mean wow I couldn't believe it.  I had to learn to do the job so what I did was after the ten o'clock news, I would go in the wastebasket and I'd pull out all these scripts from the show and then I'd go back to the Y[MCA], I used to live right down the street here at the YMCA Hotel and I'd get the [Chicago] Suntimes and I'd get the [Chicago] Tribune, the [Chicago] Daily News was being published then and I'd sit them down and I'd look at the major stories we covered and the major stories that the [Chicago] Tribune and the [Chicago] Suntimes and these other newspapers covered and I'd try to see how the stories were written for broadcast purposes as opposed to print purposes.  What do you have to do to translate this story into broadcast terms?  So that's the way I learned to write.  I would practice going to the newspaper and I'd take a newspaper story and I would write it in broadcast fashion without a lot of adjectives, short sentences that sort of thing with visuals in mind, that's how I learned it.  I guess they thought I was crazy digging into wastebaskets every night looking at all these old scripts.
Speaker 1: That was very methodic, no one told you to do that. That was just your approach to learn it.
Speaker 2: Well I could see a difference and I said yeah that's one way of learning it, yeah.
Story_ID: 55712
Speaker 1: So now when you--so tell me what your--you start out as a news writer and you moved.
Speaker 2: I moved.  I started at probably one of the most turbulent times in our country's history.  You had Civil Rights activities in the South, you had a lot of crime activity here in Chicago [Illinois], just a lot of stuff was going on and I spent a lot of time at the station.  I would go in early and stay late because I knew I had to learn the job.  After being there a short time, the news director [John] Madigan made me a short producer and one of the reasons was the guy that it was assigned to initially was a very lazy guy.  He saw this colored kid here-colored guy and so the producer and the writers assigned to the producer of the show is supposed to share the duties, they are supposed to share the writing chores but this guy gave them all to me.  So I ended up writing the whole show.  Everyday Larry [Maroney] would come and so okay you're going to write this and he would pile this stuff on my desk and I would say, "Okay Larry."  So I would end up writing the whole show-it's a news show, fifteen minute show.  One day our news director came out and said-he'd been watching this process and he says, "You're the producer of this show."  So that's how that started and it turned out that the guy who anchored that show is John Drury.  Later we got together at Channel 7 [ABC, Chicago, Illinois].  Well anyway that was the start and I found myself doing-contributing to some of the other shows.  I ultimately ended up being the ten o'clock news producer and they never made a big thing of this.  As far as I know, I may be the first black person in the city to produce a major news show.  I mean that's not a big thing now but at that time--the middle '60s [1960s] it was and there were the two of us.  There was a fellow by the name of Larry Maroney and I and we'd sit down and write that show every night.  Fahey Flynn was the anchor, P.J. Hoff was a weatherman, Bruce Roberts was sports and we used to sit down and knock that thing off every night and I produced it because Larry [Maroney] didn't like numbers, he just hated numbers and you have to time the show because you've got to give space between commercials so many minutes between commercials.  So many minutes of news, then a commercial, so many minutes of news then commercial, so many minutes of sports, so many minutes of weather.  And we would have to hit the network with something like ten, twenty nine, thirty or ten, twenty eight, forty five, or ten twenty eight thirty.  You had to hit the network, don't spill over.  The show's got to be done precisely on time so you can hit the network.  Larry [Maroney] didn't like numbers so he gave all the timing of the show to me.  So I timed the show, every night I would sit down time the show and one of the problems I had was with Fahey [Flynn].  I timed the segment and Fahey [Flynn] sometimes I guess he'd go out and have himself a good dinner and a couple of good drinks and sometimes he would read a little slower and sometimes the segments went a little longer than they were supposed to or a little shorter.  So I devised a scheme that would allow me to make the telescope the show depending upon how fast or how slow these guys read.  P.J. [Hoff] could not take a fist, in other words you couldn't tell PJ to stop.  If P.J. [Hoff] had a show put together, you had to take the whole show, that's it.  So to compensate for this, I used to write a lot of little readers.  They had no visual elements attached to them and I'd put the readers ahead of each commercial, just stories to be read, ten, fifteen, twenty second stories and I'd pad the show with readers ahead of every commercial.  So if the show got long, I could tell Fahey [Flynn] to kill the readers which would make it shorter or if it was too short, I'd tell him to read the readers.  That way I had control--the flexibility of the show and that's the way I was able to hit the net on time, it was kind of fun.  You do a lot of things, you do a lot innovation and I guess I enjoyed having an opportunity to do that.
Story_ID: 55713
Speaker 1: Now when you became the producer, what year was that do you know?
Speaker 2: It was probably '65/'66 [1965/1966].  We didn't get the title, they didn't give the titles it was just writer.  You're a writer of this show, that's it.  If there is a producer, it was an executive producer who wasn't there.  But functionally I was the producer.
Speaker 1: Now so you said 1965--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: About 1966/'67 [1967].
Speaker 1: So that's about two years after your--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't very long.  I'd been there not too long.
Speaker 1: So this--okay people in the larger community don't necessarily know what you did?
Speaker 2: I'd say so.
Speaker 1: But you were enjoying it?
Speaker 2: I had a ball well it was a money thing, you know.  I was staying at the YMCA Hotel for thirteen dollars a week and I had this little room and I thought it was the greatest thing in the world.  I could save all this money.  It was the best job I ever had in my life.  I was making all the money in the world, I could go to the bank and I could see this bank account getting a little bigger and bigger every week.  I thought it was just great.  I loved it.
Story_ID: 55714
Speaker 1: How did you move from producer, what was the move after that?  How did you, you know, move into being an anchor, 'cause that would happen in 19-
Speaker 2: I became an anchor in about 1968/'69 [1969].  I used to anchor a weekend-the weekend-it was a Saturday at noon at a time that nobody was watching television and I used to do that.  I became a full time anchor in 1972 but ahead of that the management gave us an opportunity, those of us who were writers to make a little extra money as reporters.  And we would be freelance reporters and they sent us in the street and we'd do interviews-interviews primarily and if your face and voice got on the air, fifteen bucks, if your voice just got on the air then it's ten bucks.  And those of us who were writers had the opportunity to make this extra money.  I mean that's great, you do two or three stories a week; you would get sixty bucks, seventy dollars extra in your paycheck.  So I started doing that and then I found myself doing more of it; going more in depth in stories and during that period television news was making a transition becoming far more sophisticated than it had been for a real long time.  When I started a television reporter did nothing but interviews, he'd go out and interview somebody and he'd send back the film and you cut it and you put it on the air and there's an interview.  But about the middle '60s [1960s] we began to get to the point that a reporter was beginning to do a complete story, one we call a package.  You do the interview; you write some narration for the voiceovers, you know that kind of thing was beginning to happen.  So I was beginning to do that and one of the reasons I was able to fall in to that situation as a reporter to go out and do a complete story with the voice over, narration and so forth was because I had been writing all these voiceovers for these other guys for so long, been writing all these voiceovers for the anchormen.  So that wasn't difficult.  As it turned out, I did less and less writing and more and more reporting.  One a general manager came to me-no it was a news director who came to me and said I'm going to make you the weekend anchor, I'm just going to make you a weekend anchor, I said okay.  So I began anchoring on Saturday and Sunday and--with some success.  I understand the numbers began to go up on the weekends and we went up to number one on the weekends and that was the beginning of the anchor thing.  I was not officially a talent or a reporter or an anchor until 1972.  This was what--I started in '64 [1964] six years, eight years--after eight years I got my first contract as a talent--as a reporter/anchor.  Up until that time I was a rather skilled writer and even being on the air as a reporter, I was still in the writers' guild that was kind of nice to get away from that writing thing.  I got tired of that because it kept in the office all the time and I like to get out and see stuff and do stuff, you know.
Story_ID: 55715
Speaker 1: What thing are you learning you know about either the news business or anchoring or--what do you learn?
Speaker 2: Well the first thing I had to learn is how to do it.  What does an anchor do to be effective and to communicate and that was quite a learning process.  How do you maintain an objectivity when you look into a camera and you are facing millions of people-thousands of people?  I had to work on that and in terms of my writing; I had to refine my writing to the point that it is more communicative.  I didn't think that I worked very well and I always practiced, practiced at home, practiced at work.  This stuff is not very good, I'm just going to make it better and by making it better meant that I had to make it simpler.  Forget about the dictionary, forget about words with a lot of syllables, you know try to be straight forward, few adjectives you know sentences you could punch.  Now this is the kind of thing I continue--I still do it now.  I still study my writing and I think I have to--I'm still trying to improve it.  But those are among the things that I had to learn when I initially started.  I did some of my own writing as an anchor, usually they have writers for these things but I did some of my own.  I just had to work to make it better.
Speaker 1: Let's change the tape.
Story_ID: 55716
Speaker 1: Sort of?  No-
Speaker 2: Sort of not really.  You know you're working with--at that time we had a really great writing crew.  I mean these were guys--there were some guys on that staff who had written books, who traveled all over the world.  I mean really very very bright, well educated people and I could see that.  They were very hospitable to me, some of them.  Others like the guy I worked with who gave me all the work, I mean they could see me as an opportunity to get out of doing something, possibly.  But generally the guys I worked with at that time were a pretty decent lot.  I didn't have a problem with them.  They could see that I didn't know very much about what I was doing.  I think [John] Drury could see when I wrote some of his--for him that I didn't--I was not news writer because I had a lot of stuff there but he was very nice, very gracious and he would say "you should do this and do that", and I tried to remember all these things that I was supposed to do.  It took a while to learn to do that.  Coming out of the cold, not having any experience and I really had a lot to learn.  But I figured, well this is the best job I ever had, the best thing to do is to go ahead and make the most of it.
Story_ID: 55717
Speaker 1: Now you said that--you said that you started anchoring in 1968, right?
Speaker 2: The weekend.  It was a Saturday, noon show and I wrote it and--I wrote it, produced it and then I anchored it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: 'Saturday Noon News'.
Speaker 1: And then that went to what?
Speaker 2: Well that may have led to my being during the weekend anchoring, it may have.  The show was so bad, I did such a lousy job, it finally just went off the air.  There was kind of a gap between my doing that--anchoring that show and doing the weekends.  I really did a lousy job because I'd run in, I'd write the show, I'd have to get all the visuals up and then put on the makeup, put on my jacket, run up and stand up there, I was always nervous, out of breath and I just wasn't very good.  But I did it, I persevered.  I used to write a lot of Martin Luther King, before he'd be in town and I would take maybe two minutes worth of his speeches to fill up the time.  I didn't have anything else to put in the show; it was awful (laugh).
Speaker 1: Now that led to what, that's what I was wondering?  After the weekend and anchor--How (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Then I became--then I did more reporting and I started reporting more than anything else.  There came a point that the company had to make a distinction between reporters and writers and there was a problem with employing a writer as a reporter and I think the unions kind of took issue of what was going on then and told the company you either have writers or you have reporters, it's one or the other but you won't have writers who are reporters.  So I became a reporter; that was it.  Nobody asked me, that's what they do, I came in, they gave me assignments and I'd go out and do stories, that's the way it happened, went along with the flow.  And then the anchoring thing came.
Story_ID: 55718
Speaker 1: Now when did Channel--'Two on Two' did that happened during that time or that was much later?
Speaker 2: That was much later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did 'Someone You Should Know', did that grow out of any of this.  I mean that--none of that?
Speaker 2: No 'Someone You Should Know' came in 1977.  At that time I'd been anchoring the weekends for about five years and we were doing pretty well.  But one of the problems that we faced every weekend was (unclear) of news.  No one had news conferences on weekends and we had very little to fill and one of the producers came to me and said--an executive producer for the show and he said, "You know we've just got to have more stuff in this show."  He said, "My thought is let's do something during the week.  Why don't you go out and do a human interest story.  Find somebody who is interesting, interviewing them, put the package together, put it aside and move on it on Saturday and that would help to fill up the show.  Do one on Saturday afternoon and one at Saturday night, we did two shows and let's call it 'Someone You Should Know'."  I thought what a silly name, 'Someone You Should Know'.  So we went out and I--the first subject we tried to capture for the show was an individual who sells flowers on street corners.  You'd see him out there selling flowers on street corners and I tried to interview him but that guy was so profane, we couldn't use the interview.  And then somehow on my desk, I had this note from somebody about a woman at the Northwestern University Medical School [Illinois] who was involved in an experimental project to determine whether a severely disabled person can function normally using computers.  Her name was Margaret Frommer and she was paralyzed from her neck down.  But in this experiment she was working as a secretary and she could take--receptionist actually.  She could take calls, put calls on hold, forward calls, do writing, do everything a secretary could do using computers and they were activated by what is known as a puff and sip method.  She had a little straw and she would puff and sip and each one of these movement of puffing or sipping would activate the computer one way or another.  A couple of puffs here, a couple of sips there would activate the computers.  So she could perform all these functions.  Well that was the first story I did.  The first serious story I did and I remember it was--apparently it went over so well that we started getting letters from people saying you know that's not bad and we started getting suggestions.  So it got to the point I had to ask people to stop writing in because we were getting so many suggestions.  Well that was really the first significant story which is in the mold of 'Someone You Should Know' is today, Margaret Frommer.  And so it went from there to other stories like that; people who are overcoming awesome physical disabilities.  People are doing outstanding things but always people who were not high profile, I stay away from high profile people, the rich folks and the folks who have access to the media but just--as one person described it to me ordinary people doing extraordinary things.  I thought it was a great characterization for 'Someone You Should Know' and that's the way I've tried to keep it.  But that's the way it started.  Just as a time filler and then it kind of grew and it's gotten a number of awards and it's fun to do I must say, 1977 yes.
Story_ID: 55719
Speaker 1: And I mean when you think about it, you've been doing it for twenty five years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do think about it, yeah (laugh).
Speaker 1: But that got you--one thing about doing that that was different from what you had been doing, it really got you to know Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Exactly and neighborhoods.  I've been in every neighborhood in the city.  I have a Romanian Medal, I've been written up and I think you have that.  I've been written up in a Polish newspaper and there's a profile of me in Polish.  I've gotten in Hispanic neighborhoods, I've gotten into German neighborhoods, guess I've been everywhere.  All through this vehicle 'Someone You Should Know'.
Speaker 1: Was it the show--you said the first show was a success and did it--so it was the right idea for the time.  How would you say the format differs--has the format been tinkered with since the beginning?
Speaker 2: Oh it's changed a little bit, it's changed a lot.  At first I had almost unlimited time.  I did a story on a fellow, Dr. Ronat (ph.), Dr. Ronat is Romanian who escaped with his life from a Romania that was becoming communist and he walked away from his grave, a grave he had dug, he was supposed to be shot and he wasn't.  Anyway it was the war years and he travelled across Germany and across Romania and he found his sweetheart and they got married.  But I did the story because this guy is a doctor and a dentist and he practices both disciplines.  He practices dentistry in the morning and medicine in the afternoon.  And I remember that story ran about four minutes well that's a big chunk of the show.  But as time went on it changed because time constraints changed.  It was moved--when I began to anchor during the week--they moved it from the weekend to through the week which meant it had to get shorter.  But still I was getting two and a half to three minutes for that show.  That was really the big change is the time.  Now I'm down to a minute and a half, a minute and forty five seconds and that means you have to make some dramatic things in terms of how you approach the story, what story you select.  I find myself thinking in terms how can I capture this story in a minute and forty-five seconds, how can I do that?  And a lot of stories I won't do because I don't think I can do them justice.  So that's been the major change in all of this.  For a long time I didn't do stand ups in these shows but there was a policy of putting a stand in every piece so that takes ten or fifteen seconds away from doing an interview or having some cogent B-roles; those were the changes.  Essentially the philosophy of this show is pretty much the same; the focus is the same, really.  I haven't deviated from that and nobody has complained about it.
Story_ID: 55720
Speaker 1: Now did you--so this gave you your own place.  Now when did you--let me ask you something about 'Someone You Should Know', are there things--I mean some of the stories that really stand out you know that you've experienced?
Speaker 2: A lot of them.  Yes Geraldine Lawhorn is a name that comes to mine.  I think I profiled Geraldine [Lawhorn] a couple of times.  Geraldine [Lawhorn] was the head of the Deaf, Blind Studies Department at the Hadley School for the Blind [Winnetka, Illinois] and she grew up in Chicago [Illinois] and she is a graduate of Marshall High School [Chicago, Illinois] and while at Marshall High School she began to lose her sight and before she graduated she was able to get a seeing eye dog.  Finally at the point of graduation, she lost her hearing too.  So she was both deaf and blind but she went on to achieve some really remarkable things.  She went on to college, she developed a one woman show that she took on stages throughout the country, she learned to play piano; plays piano beautifully and she's written a book.  When I make speeches, I talk about her and she's been looked upon as pretty much equal to Helen Keller and what she's been able to do.  She's one of those kinds of people, very unusual person.  When I think about stories that stand out in my mind, it's my meeting her and profiling her that I always remember.  That's one of the stories that I think is significant.
Speaker 1: Any others?
Speaker 2: Others?
Speaker 1: Stories that stand out?  Well let me ask--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, let me think there are so many of them.  I did a story on a woman who wrote a book.  What's Mary's last name--I'll think of it.  But she's a woman who was born with cerebral palsy and at the time when she was born the practice was to look upon these people as being retarded, that was it.  You know if you can't do anything with your hands and arms and you have these problems, you're retarded and they send you to an institution.  Mary was sent to an institution, the difficulty was--with that was that she had a very good mind, very bright lady and there she was in this institution with all these people with a very low IQ and she found herself on the floor--eating off the floor, being urinated on by imbeciles, just an awful place.  She was at Dixon [Illinois] at the time.  Well she got out of it and she decided she wanted to write a book about her experiences.  She calls it 'The Cross Gives Me Courage' and--but she can't use her hands, she has a spasticity problem.  She can't talk so she devised a means to write the book.  And what did she do?  On her wheelchair was put in the alphabet and with a social worker she would point to the letters on her wheelchair and that's where the book was written.  She would point to the letters, making works--making sentences and paragraphs.  It took them ten years to write this book but it was done and I remember she was so proud of this book.  I have several copies of it now and Mary writes me Christmas cards--she would have her scribbling.  But one of the high points of the story was and I remember the words I used to describing this, she wanted to play the piano for me.  Here is a woman who has no control over her body but she was able to go to the piano and with a pencil she played in these one notes 'The Bells of St. Mary' and you could hear 'The Bells of St. Mary' and I remember when I described that feat in the story, I said that was equal to the climbing of Mt. Everest because this woman was able to overcome.  Every instinct of her body that resisted, every resistance at that moment she was able to overcome all this to tap out that tune.  When I give talks, I talk about her, I think she is really an inspiration because she's written this book; it's about a hundred pages.  And it's interesting because she's not bitter about this experience, about the fact that her parents couldn't take care of her and allowed her to be institutionalized and she shouldn't have been because she's very bright but she's not bitter about the experience and she talks about it and how her life was ultimately improved.  She is now at a place called The Helping Hands Shelter [Illinois].  It's a place where people who have--disabled people have little jobs they can do, little things they can do and get paid for it and it gives them dignity and it makes them more self-assured the fact that their making a contribution, they are earning their own way.  Mary Utca (ph.) is her name, never forget Mary.
Story_ID: 55721
Speaker 1: So you became in many ways sort of the social scientist or social--I mean even the stories you took was all about people but these were a lot of triumphs.  You were understanding the fabric of sort of what makes people--.  Did that help you as a person sort of in getting to see people--I also think you were an observer over that period time even maybe changes in Chicago [Illinois] and things like that.  Maybe trends--?
Speaker 2: Well I guess they were trends; I'd have to think about that.  But in answer to your question about how was I affected by all this, of course I was.  It was an inspiration to see someone like Geraldine Lawhorn to overcome these awesome disabilities and to be so productive and Mary Utca and many others.  I've done stories with people who have been afflicted to the point where they can't walk and they do wonderful things.  I'm trying to think of--I did another fellow who was deaf and blind but not to the extent that Geraldine Lawhorn was and he wrote a book and he says, "I'm blind but so what."  He goes around and he talks to people and he needs huge hearing aid, I mean it's like a big boom box he has to wear so he can hear, he's blind but he can hear a little bit.  He stands in front of audiences and talks to kids about what it's like growing up being a pariah, not being able to play with the other kids because you can't hear, you can't see.  He tells a story about taking a girl to the movies at that time his sight was deteriorating but the point he could see a little bit.  During the movies and he sat her down and she wanted popcorn, okay, so he left her and he walked into the lobby to buy popcorn, couldn't find his way back, couldn't find his way back to her, couldn't see (laugh).  It's in his book, it's a very--it's interesting.  I did a story of a blind football player, Clinton Hollon (ph.) is his name, I'll never forget that.  Clinton was at Bowen High School, Bowen High School [Chicago, Illinois] when I met him and his coach wrote me.  I get a lot of letters from folks.  The coach said you know I've got a blind football player on my team, he ought to be 'Someone You Should Know', I said I agree.  So I went out to interview Clinton and sure enough he was a tackle and when I saw the tapes that were made of this play, you could see he was the first player across the scrimmage line, he was really fast.  He could hit a guy and take him out and he was voted that year--now that's a blind kid, legally blind he was voted the best offensive lineman--the team's best offensive lineman.  So I asked him when I sat him down for the interview situation, how do you do that and he said well you know I can't see this individual who is on the other side of the scrimmage line but the coach has told me that he has a particular color jersey so I look for that color jersey and he says the second thing--I'll never forget--he says we've been playing for a while so I can smell him, he's sweating and I can sense this and the third thing is I know that I can come off that scrimmage line and hit him so hard and so fast he won't know what happened to him and he did it.  But after the play, he had to be lead back to the huddle, blind football player.  And one of the most poignant memories I have of that experience--that situation was we had packed up all our gear in the car and I interviewed him and we got all the (unclear) and I was sitting in the backseat and we're pulling away and I looked in the rearview mirror and I could see a girl leading Clinton to a bus--he had his white cane leading him to a bus, a blind football player.
Story_ID: 55722
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about-no, no, no--when you start co-hosting 1983, right?
Speaker 2: Was that 'Two on Two' or--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Let's talk about 'Two on Two'.
Speaker 2: Co-hosting what?
Speaker 1: I was talking about with Don Craig.
Speaker 2: Yeah before that I co-anchored with Bill Kurtis.
Speaker 1: Bill Kurtis, okay that's right.
Speaker 2: That's how this whole thing started.  What happened was that there having a problem with co-anchors at six and the numbers were okay but they weren't number one and we were number one on weekends and they would take my numbers, factor them in to the numbers across the week, my ten o'clock news numbers and then the ten o'clock news would be number one.  They'd take out our weekend numbers, it wouldn't be number one.  So in 1979 they decided they needed me to co-anchor for [Bill] Kurtis--with Kurtis and they tried all they could to get someone else and I guess they finally realized the best choice was someone who was there who had great numbers on the weekend.  One day they said I want you to anchor with Kurtis, they didn't tell me that it was going to be permanent and for six months they didn't tell me that I had the job with [Bill] Kurtis, that's right.  As a matter of fact, one of the TV columnists made note of the fact that I'd been anchoring for four or five months as kind of a temporary but the show went to number one.  So that's the way it happened.  [Bill] Kurtis--I anchored with Kurtis until '82/'83 [1982/1983], something like that.  We went to New York and then Don Craig came in, a very nice guy.  We had a very good relationship and that went on until '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Now you like that that was a good thing, right?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved it, I could do 'Someone You Should Know' which I did, we did it a couple of times a week.  I went out and did my interviews, sat down, we got the story and worked with the editors and all that kind of stuff so that was kind of fun and then I anchored this hour long show, yeah that was very nice, I enjoyed that a lot.
Speaker 1: Did your viewers tell you what they liked; did you get a lot of viewer feedback?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I always got a lot of viewer feedback and particularly with regard to the 'Someone You Should Know' segments.  I always got a lot of viewer suggestions.
Story_ID: 55723
Speaker 1: Now did you enjoy working with Kurtis when you first--you said Don Craig was a nice guy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, [Bill] Kurtis is a very competent newsman and it was nice to be an anchor, I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: It was just that you said that there was this--the co-anchor--you said something about--you said that there were issues around co-anchors or--no no no.  Now talk about--so you are-[Bill] Kurtis has gone to New York, you're co-hosting with Don Craig and that goes on for two years, right?
Speaker 2: About two years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And CBS is the highest point of the news.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're number one.
Speaker 1: Right and how are you sort of growing as a person during this time?  You paid your dues and you have--you've paid your dues so it's not like--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well I don't know--I've never adopted that.  I don't know any organization that will allow you to stay in it and say well you've paid your dues.  All the organizations I belong to I have to pay my dues every month or every year.  So there is no such thing as you've paid your dues, you continue to pay your dues.  And I remember during that period I did a lot of MC things, you know weekends because you know I felt people are watching and it is because people are watching that we are doing so well.  People are tuning us in, they give us all these big numbers, I need to go out there and try to give back in some way.  So as I recall during that period, I was really doing a lot of stuff, MC work, banquets that kind of stuff.  People would come out and ask me to be part of whatever is going on, sign autographs or something like that.  So I try to do that, be in the Bud Billiken Parade, do all these things because I think it's necessary and because it keeps you where you are, for one thing and also because you want to try and thank folks for being so nice.
Story_ID: 55724
Speaker 1: Now [Bill] Kurtis comes--he--things don't go right for him in New York.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Right and he wants to come back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So can you tell the story of what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I remember when [Bill] Kurtis was going to come back and there was some talk he might come to [ABC Chicago, Illinois Channel] 7 or he might go to another station.  But I remember they handed me a piece of copy, one day I was working the six o'clock news with John [Maroney] and I read the copy that Bill Kurtis was coming back to [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2 and that he was going to be anchoring the six and the ten o'clock news, co-anchoring.  I really did think that much about that and that was the end of it.  One day I got this call from the news director, he wanted me to come stop in his office and he said you know we're going to take you off of the six and you're going to be anchoring the weekends and we'll let you do some reporting but you don't have to do the six anymore, that was it.  I had this awful thought at the time, I worked so hard to get away from weekends, I really hated to work weekends.  Saturday and Sunday and then you get off Monday and Tuesday and then you're back Wednesday for five years.  I said you know I've done that for five years I'm not going back to that.  So I touched basis with my attorney who also was my agent, I said you know this is--they're taking me off at six and they're assigning me to the weekend and so he said let's look at your contract and in the contract it was spelled out and under no uncertain terms I was to be employed Monday through Friday as a co-anchor of the six o'clock news.  Nothing about weekends, nothing about reporting, nothing; it was co-anchor the six plus we're doing 'Two on Two' and I was doing a thing called "Channel to the People" and that was in the contract, it was there.  So he said well if you go back to the station on the new schedule, you ratify it and so my last day as an anchor I said goodbye to everybody never to go back.
Speaker 1: That's horrible when you think about it. (tape cuts off)
Story_ID: 55725
Speaker 1: He [Bill Kurtis] walked out of NBC, he was a network news correspondent and he just quit.  He was a photographer for Walter Jacobson.  He would show up and take pictures for Walter Jacobson and then suddenly they hired him as an anchor.  Nice guy, I mean he was very competent but he just kind of showed up.  What I was led to believe was that there might be a three way anchor deal, that's what somebody had said.  Well we're going to go to a three way anchors you, [Bill] Kurtis and [Don] Craig.  I said well I don't know how that's going to work but that's fine.  I really didn't think about it; I didn't think I would be the one--I didn't think that I would be the odd man out, well things happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah they happen but the only thing--I understand things happen but had the station management changed at the time?  Was there any part of that--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No I had a very good relationship with the station manager and the--I had a very good relationship with everybody, nothing had changed.  I just signed a contract with these guys.  We sat down and we drank champagne and we signed this five year contract and everything was going well and the numbers were big--or good then boom--what was it June or July something like that--August.  I started at [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7 in September so it had to be--I quit CBS one week, two weeks later I was at [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7 and that's the story in itself.
Speaker 2: But so why--so they definitely wanted Bill Kurtis back but why start--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: I cannot tell you, I don't know what the rationale was, I have no idea.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: You know that they don't have to explain these things; that's what they wanted to do, that's what they did.
Speaker 2: And when your agent-agent, lawyer explained what the dynamics are and I understand from a legal perspective what that is but could that contract have been written differently?
Speaker 1: It could have been, kept me there.  I would have been in trouble.
Speaker 2: Others things could have happened, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was a breach.
Speaker 2: So was there any discussion with the station, no outbursts, no--nothing.
Speaker 1: Nothing, just this is what you can do next week.
Story_ID: 55726
Speaker 1: Now the black community went up in arms.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--but that didn't--they didn't really care about that either, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Operation Push [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] got involved--everyone got involved.
Speaker 2: I think after ten months they started to care about it.  I don't know what they thought about, I really don't know.  It puzzled me and I think about it from time to time, I say what went through their minds.  Harold Washington is the mayor of this city [Chicago, Illinois], you've got this huge black population and they know what the audience is, they knew it.  They do audience surveys every minute; you know what the audience is.  I said why would they do something like that?  Not to flatter myself but I knew--but I know because I made it a point to go after that audience.  I make it a point to go out every time I'm invited to something to be there, to show up even if it's five people getting together for something.  And what would prompt them to do that, got me, I don't know haven't the faintest idea.
Speaker 1: So okay so you weren't at a reflective period still at that point though about it.
Speaker 2: In what sense?
Speaker 1: Well I mean things were moving too fast.  Did you ever have any reflections around this time because--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I didn't have time, I'm given a weekend to decide whether I wanted to continue with my career or go out and sell cars--used cars.  Here I'm sitting there, I've these kids in Catholic school, paying tuition, I'm paying car note, I'm paying house note, I just bought myself a fence that I was building, I got some lumber I went out and bought, charged--I said my gosh, what am I going to do.
Speaker 1: That's the ultimate of unfair.  It was more than unfair than finding out when you're younger that people don't want to--you're not sure why they don't want to be associated with you.  This is even worse!  I mean you can laugh about it but that's not--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: The thing is--you know when these guys say you are going to go to weekends, that's what you got.  I don't ever want to see weekends again, I don't ever want to work that schedule again, I don't care what happens.  I'm never going back to that, never.
Story_ID: 55727
Speaker 1: So was there a lot of conversation with [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7, I mean about it or--no no you decided--you resigned--you don't know still at that time.  You weren't sure about Channel 7 when you were assigned, right?
Speaker 2: About three or four days before I was told that I was out, I got a call from the news director at [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7 and he said if you ever in trouble--you know you can't do these things--but if you're in trouble don't worry about it.  If you get in trouble over there, don't worry about it, you can talk to us if you want to.  That was not a whole card but it was something and it also was a clue that something is going on because nobody had told me anything.  I said why did these guys call me and say if you have difficulties talk to us, something is up.  I had no clue; I had no clue that was the first clue.
Speaker 1: And so you end up over at [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what is the discussion about what role you would play, or there's not?
Speaker 2: No there is no discussion, it's just a job.  I took a job; there was no room for an anchor so I wasn't going to be an anchor.  So I go back in the street as a general assignment reporter which I don't particularly care for but it was a job.  So I took the job.
Story_ID: 55728
Speaker 1: Now did you negotiate keeping your program?  Was that part of the package?
Speaker 2: No that came up later.  I thought about it and I approached management and I said, "Look why don't we just start doing this?"  They said okay do it and see what happens.  I start doing it, nothing happened, kept on doing it.  But one of the interesting things about that whole period is that this boycott and the protests happened after I left the station because I quit.  I had a meeting head to head with the general manager and I said look I cannot work with your news director, I'm not going back to weekends, the best thing for me to do is to leave and they tried to persuade me to stay, I said no I want to leave.  My attorney told me you know you've got pretty good grounds, this is clearly a breach of contract.  They made these commitments and they broke it.  You're supposed to being doing this, this and this and they are not adhering to that.  So you've got a pretty good case.  We even went to a Justice--he is now dead--he was a good friend of my attorney--oh my gosh I'll think of his name.  We even got some legal advice from a federal judge on this thing and he looked at the situation and he said you know you've got a pretty good case here which you can win, if you want to go that far with it.  I said well I don't want to stay with [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2 so whatever it takes but they didn't pursue it.  So finally I said okay you are released from the contract.  They said okay, that's it the end of it.  One of the things they say and I find it very interesting is that [HM] Jonathan Rodgers became the first black general manager [CBS] and they say that had nothing to do with this, I said okay.  Nothing to do with it, nine months into the break he became the first black general manager of any major television station in the country, I suspect but it had nothing to do with the boycott.  Interestingly I was covering some stories, I went to New York and [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7 doing some things and people would come up to me and say you know you don't realize what you've done for us, those of us of color--African Americans what that situation--what that episode meant because it put management on notice that there is a significant black constituency out there and this is what can happen if you don't give them credit, if you don't recognize them for what they are.  I got that from a number of people, this thing was covered in--we've got Newsweek, Los Angeles Times, [Chicago] Sun Times carried it every day, [Chicago] Tribune, it got wide press coverage plus [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson took it to--he was on a show in Washington D.C. and talked about it.  It really got to be very well publicized.  And of course after that I was out of it and I used to read about the demonstrations at Channel 2 and I said no I didn't--I'm humbled by this.  It wasn't me; it was just the principle that was involved there.  They did this and there was a lot of resentment in the black community.  Nobody asked me to come back so I got a job, so okay.
Story_ID: 55729
Speaker 1: So--did it take some getting used to be at Channel--I mean this--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It did not.
Speaker 2: No, when I walked into [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7, everybody in the shop was there to meet me; everybody came down to shake my hand.  It was like a family reunion, I'd never been in there before.  All these people I had seen on the street you know I was a reporter and so forth.  It was like a big family reunion, I couldn't believe it, first day I walked into the place, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you never wanted to be--I mean I know the opportunity wasn't there but and I know you weren't crazy about being a general assignment reporter but you never were looking for opportunities to anchor again?
Speaker 2: No, I figured well that's it.  If there is an opening and there is no place to go.  If there is an opening, if something develops, you know we'll use you.  I said that's good enough for me, I'll just go back to do this and I think that was--I left there in August/September that year I think I may have achieved something of a landmark.  I attended two number one parties--number one news parties that same year.  One was at [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2 in--February sweeps, May sweeps we were number one.  The next one I attended was the same year in November was [ABC Chicago, Illinois] Channel 7.  Also that year I was nominated for three Emmys by three different stations.  So it was quite a year (laugh).
Speaker 1: When you did have reflection, what went through your mind?
Speaker 2: Well my mother always said you know everything happens for the best and looking back I think it probably happened for the best.  I was probably the winner in that situation.  I was very uncomfortable, I agonized, I lost a lot of weight, I was--there were long periods of uncertainty going through that period.  But I think I emerged the winner because I'm still here, I'm still here and I'm not doing badly.
Story_ID: 55730
Speaker 1: You know a lot of people that aren't--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Are no longer here.  The whole management team is gone; none of those people are there.  [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2 is entirely different now but I managed to survive and that's all that's count, I think.  So who knows, I think about this okay so supposed I had stayed, well I would have been there a year or so and boom out the door, totally that would have been it.  That would have been the end of it and I was thinking in the back of mind, I'll be perfectly honest with you, I know there is a constituency out there, I know it's out there.  I don't know what's going to happen and I said not to go back in that station but I know something is going to happen, I just feel it.  I didn't realize that it was going to be something like the nature of a boycott or demonstrations but I knew that something was going to happen and it did.
Speaker 1: Well you had a lot of validation in many ways.  I mean ratings went down, people came all those things and they tried to fix it.  I'm just saying it's never fixed.  I don't think it will be fixed; it's gone from bad to worst.
Speaker 2: It's too late; the pie is too small now.  I remember at one time this column if you look at the overnights the column on the right is other and other is cable and cable was never more than two digits.  We were eighteen, twenty share, forty share, thirty share and all those big numbers but now the biggest share--any given night it's other and the pie for these commercial stations is just getting smaller and smaller.  I don't think that it's--I don't see how [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2 can ever come back, there's just not that much of an audience left.
Speaker 1: And the management seems to have gotten from bad to worst too.  So you (unclear) on this side you really saw the--you really saw the heyday of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Exactly, that's right the heyday.  I'd say the '70s [1970s] the early '70s [1970s] right through maybe the middle '80s [1980s] when things went into decline.  I think it began with the mini cam because the mini cam was first introduced to [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2.  The capability of going out and doing all these live shots, we had the first mini cam in town and it wasn't long before all the other stations followed, we were the first one.  I think from that point it really gathered steam in terms of the news business really--focusing on going out, getting stories, putting stuff on the air, being very serious about news.  For a long time news was a second thought up until I think the early '60s [1960s].  But then when the Kennedy assassination became very serious and that's when it began to mature because it was always--entertainment was first and then news second.  But then news became very serious during that period.  So you're right, I saw the heyday and then it declined, so the rise and fall.
Story_ID: 55731
Speaker 1: You were sort of riding on the crest, okay.  So you decide to go to law school, right?  And what are your thoughts there--I mean granted that you wanted to have something to fall back on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think you had--I know you had talked about law school that was very early on.  But was that--was it also to sort of protect yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes, precisely.  That was the initial thought, that was the initial reason for going and then once when this business happened at [CBS Chicago, Illinois] Channel 2, I thought well you know I've got this thing, I'd better stick with it and really, really knuckle down and get this degree because this is a good backup for me.
Speaker 1: And did you have any thought about what you might do with it or just to have backup?
Speaker 2: Well at one point I thought I might use it, I might practice but it was always--the main thought was having something to fall back on and quite honestly I realized the name is out there, people know who I am and that's worth something and to put JD behind it might be able to utilize that in a way that would help me out.
Speaker 1: Is that when you started performing at the Chicago Bar Association or were you performing before that?
Speaker 2: I started performing as a student, yeah.  That was--yeah before I graduated from law school.  Somebody saw me at (unclear) and we started a conversation, one of the guys was a member of the orchestra and I told him you know I'd love to play in your orchestra but I've got these night classes at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois] and he said what do you there and I said I'm a student there and he said why don't you come and play in our orchestra and I said well I don't know, I'll give it a shot.  So I started as a student and did a couple of things with them.  I did the 'Lincoln Portrait' [Aaron Copeland] with them, before I started playing I did the 'Lincoln Portrait' and I started playing, that was a lot of fun, I liked it, it's therapy.
Speaker 1: Well I can't help be struck by this interview in that you were saying that early on you were sort of facility and it took you some time but you found yourself and then you, I think sort of had an amazing--you know you could say that you were at the right place at the right time but you were good, you had a--I mean it wasn't that--I mean you had a facility.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked at it.
Speaker 1: Right and you worked at it but you found your sort of place.
Speaker 2: Niche?
Speaker 1: Right your niche and there has been time you know where you would sort of be reflective during that time and I'm (unclear) but have you--what are your sort of thoughts when you look back over your career and what you've done and you're greatly admired in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Nice to hear.
Story_ID: 55732
Speaker 1: So what are your--you've done--you've always--you searched people out and identify things but what are your thoughts about your career in its full--.
Speaker 2: Totality?  Well I think I have very fortunate.  I have come along through some rough times but I've been able to survive.  I think about the support I've gotten from folks, I'm really grateful for that, I mean that's upper most in my mind the fact that without a constituency, without people watching and writing you know.  I would have never made this far and sometimes I think about how it even got this far.  I think about law school, I don't know how I got through law school.  I used to go to class and I was so tired sometimes I would just go to sleep.  I remember when I covered the [Mayor] Harold Washington funeral, I was there at six o'clock in the morning, I was one of the first persons on the air with this--with the funeral broadcast from [Reverend] Johnnie Coleman's church, I was the last person to sign off when he was buried--when the funeral procession went to the cemetery and I remember I had a courier drive me to my car and I got my books and I was in class that night and I was so tired and there were many nights like that.  I think about all these long nights going to school and going to work.  I don't know how I got through that and then there were periods prior to that before I went to law school.  I used to spend a lot of time at work because I would look at things that I'd done and I'd say you've got to be better and to get better you've just got to spend more time working at it.  I don't know how I was able to survive working so many hours, trying to perfect this thing.  That's what I think about when I look back and say you know, it's been kind of rough and there were times it's been not to bad but I survived and a lot of people haven't survived.  It's a tough business, it's tough and I see what happens with folks.  People invest their lives in this thing and that's when it gets chopped off, they are bounced for no reason and I say you know I really am fortunate that I've come this long and that I probably gone further than maybe I should have but that's okay.
Story_ID: 55733
Speaker 1: Now what do you think--you know when you look up at the anchors today, what do you think of this sort of new form of journalism or the business of journalism?  Do you have any thoughts?
Speaker 2: Well the first thought I had is I can do that because I did it a long time and I think I could probably do it as well as you but I don't have to.  I was always proving something to myself and I did it because I had to prove to myself that I could do that and I've done that so that's good.  My thought is that it's good to be such a short time for some of these folks because the business is changing.  They can't possibly hope for a career like what I've had.  You can't stay in one job in this business for 38 year; it's just not going to happen.  I'd say enjoy it while it's happening because it's going to change, it's not going to be the same.
Story_ID: 55734
Speaker 1: Just one thing on music, you said it's been an important part of your life.
Speaker 2: It's been my therapy, yes.
Speaker 1: And that's what I wanted to ask you, what does it do for you in many ways, does it--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It relieves the stresses and strains and anxieties.  I can totally immerse myself in the music and forget everything else and it's another challenge to sit down and play something written by Beethoven or Tchaikovsky.  It's difficult to play Bach but initially I couldn't play and to work at it and to practice and to finally see it develop and to be able to play it the way it was written, that's a sense of accomplishment that's different.  It's just another pursuit, another activity that I can come away from and say you know I've accomplished something here.  I'm a little better at playing this music than I was before I started playing it.  That's the sense I get plus it's--when you're concentrating on a piece of music, you don't have time to think about anything else but what's there--but the notes, playing them in tune, playing them the right way, being part of the ensemble, making good music.  You don't have time to think about anything else.  So that's what it does for me.
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite musicians?
Speaker 2: Well I like--I love jazz musicians and classical musicians as well.  I've always been a fan of Charlie Parker; I think Charlie Parker was just an incredible musician because of what he was able to do with the saxophone.  I like Wynton Marsalis; I like Itzhak Perlman as a fiddle player.  I like Yo-Yo Ma; Yo-Yo Ma is an incredible cello player.  James Galway, flute player, James Moody you know, you can run the gambit.  I like Henry Johnson, he's a local guitar player, I like Chris Foreman who is a blind organ musician, an incredible person, he will be playing tomorrow night at Andy's.  There are so many that run the gambit.  Gerry Mulligan, [HM] Nancy Wilson, Ella Fitzgerald, Count Basie you name them.
Speaker 1: What do you want to do that you haven't done with your life?
Speaker 2: Well I haven't passed the bar, I'd like to pass the bar, I think I'm going to do that.  I'd like write a book and I'm working on some things.  I'd like to write a book, I'd like to write some music, I used to write music, I'd like to build a model airplane that I can fly by remote control.
Story_ID: 55735
Speaker 1: The late '80s [1980s], WYLD AM and FM, Jim worked really hard and got the station up to number one, he's really done great things but that ancient history.
Speaker 2: You know the media industry is such a tough industry.
Speaker 1: Well I can appreciate that, yeah.
Speaker 2: You have exposed all parts of the Chicago [Illinois] community and you've done that.  When you look at the black community and the change that has occurred since you first came to Chicago really on a dare from a cousin.
Speaker 1: Exactly what it was, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was wondering if you had any comments about what hopes or concerns you have when you look at the black community that exists and I say that because it was a time when you didn't even know exactly--you know it was a surprise for you to find out that you were black.
Speaker 1: What hopes and concerns.  Well I have to think back to [Mayor] Harold Washington.  I think that was the beginning of a renaissance for the black community.  I talked to a fellow not too long ago, [HM] Bennett Johnson who said that his influence has extended even into the current time.  That he has influenced politics in a way that has been so positive and that if he were alive he might even have an influence over how presidents are elected.  So I look at that and I look at sophistication of the black community--political sophistication.  But one of things that I think I'm so impressed with and which I didn't see for many many years when I came here was the emergence of black business, the emergence of black CEOs [chief executive officer], the emergence of these entities that are making a difference in the community.  Businesses growing up, people building buildings, people doing things that were not heard of in the past.  I think there is real hope in that and I think that's the only that the community is going to thrive is through the development of businesses.  I think back to when I was coming up and the only hope I had of ever getting a job--the only place that I thought I could work was in a factory, not even a restaurant but in a factory and now where can you work.  Go to a bank if you have your eyes set on being a CEO you can do that, you can go anywhere and work and expect to make a good living and expect to live quote unquote the American dream.  And so it's gratifying that I've been here long enough to see this metamorphosis from despair--when I talk about despair I'm talking about after Martin Luther King, Jr. was shot, to see what's happened to the west side where churches are taking the lead and building new houses, developed entities that employ people.  I think that's probably the most gratifying thing I've seen and I think in that--in the emergence of black business is the hope a black Chicago [Illinois].  It's interesting to me because during the turn of the century there were a lot of very successful business people, their banks and we kind of retrogressed over the years but it's coming back and I think it's a good thing.  Every day I get something on my desk about somebody who is starting a new business.  A fellow called me the other day, he's got seven jets and he has a jet service--he flies people all over the world--jet service and people who are in advertising and who are in banking.  I did a story on a woman who was making a sugarless desert, a very young woman.  She was a chef and she put together a business plan and won an award.  Her first year in business she did a five hundred thousand dollars-her first year in business and these are the kinds of things I think are going to help the black community flourish, thrive.  That's my thought.
Story_ID: 55736
Speaker 1: As someone who--for all that Saginaw [Michigan] did not offer Chicago [Illinois] has offered a lot in terms of its richness and its diversity and I'm wondering what you consider, of course you have been able to see all aspects of Chicago, what do you consider unique about this place?
Speaker 2: Well Chicago [Illinois] is probably the--it's a big country town, that's what makes Chicago unique.  It's not a big city; it's a city of neighborhoods.  I don't care how you want to characterize it; it's still a city of neighborhoods.  It still has that hometown country feel to it.  That's its charm, really.  Of course it's got LaSalle Street, its got Michigan Avenue but still it's a place in which you can feel at home, really feel at home.  But it's got blues, it's got jazz, it's got all those good things.  It's not like New York, cold steel personalities but it's--I think it's warm and friendly and you know they say, if you can't make it in Chicago, can't make it anywhere, I think it's true.
Speaker 1: And for young people, what messages do you have for them?
Speaker 2: I think a young person starting out should certainly be confident that if they have a courage of convictions, if they are willing to adhere to their goals, there is a very very good chance they are going to succeed because the opportunities are going to be there.  I think when they set goals for themselves; they should have every expectation of reaching them.  I think that can happen, no matter what they do and no matter what area they go, I think it's a possibility in Chicago [Illinois] 2002.
Story_ID: 55737
Speaker 1: And in terms of what you Harry Porterfield want to be remembered for, what would you want?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I want to be remembered (laugh).  Why?  What I want to be remembered for, well-being a nice guy, I guess.  Just being a nice guy, that's good enough.  Try to get along with everybody, try to be nice, that's good enough.
Speaker 1: Have people referred to you as a gentle man?
Speaker 2: Well I think sometimes I've heard that.  Yeah occasionally but I mean that's a performer thing, it's just a matter of courtesy.  I've used the term myself, that's just courtesy, yeah.
Speaker 1: I just think about how, I mean you said you were a rambunctious child, a rambunctious gentleman (laugh).
Speaker 2: Well you know, you mature and you run out of energy, you can't find things to destroy and trouble to get into anymore and I get tired of that.
Speaker 1: Okay and so if you don't want to be remembered, do you want to leave a legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I'd hope, given what happened in 1985 I hope that that legacy is that it's been an opportunity for a lot of African Americans to get in the business.  If I'm to be remembered for anything, I'd like to be remembered for that.  That through that ordeal came a lot of opportunity for a lot of people who will go on to be very successful, that's good enough.
Story_ID: 55738
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Ask about HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: (SIDE CONVERSATION)
Speaker 1: What do you think about HistoryMakers, the significance of it? (SIDE CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: Well I admire the effort and I think that sometime in the future there are going to be a lot of people who will appreciate the information they can get from HistoryMakers.  I've always been interested in history.  I've always liked to read testimonials from people.  What happened way back when and I think it's important to know where given situations have been so you know where you are going.  What did people have to go through to get to this point?  I think HistoryMakers serves that purpose and I think it will more important in the future as you hear people talk about their trials and tribulations because I sense--since I remember the turbulent '60s [1960s] and I remember Martin Luther King--I met Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Malcolm X, I sense that all of this is being forgotten and people who are making history today are going to be forgotten but HistoryMakers is going to keep them alive, to communicate with other people.  And down through the years I'd like to believe that Tchaikovsky and Bach and Mendelssohn and all those people that play, they're communicating with me down through the years and HistoryMakers is doing that, it's going to be a continuous communication to the future for their benefit.
Story_ID: 55739
Speaker 1: I was interviewing the British Council and this was in connection with the death of Princess Di [Diana of Wales], it was outside the British Council in the Wrigley Building [Chicago, Illinois].  Okay this is a youngster who had down syndrome and she had just finished her dance class and we profiled her because she was trying very hard to live a very normal life.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Do you remember about what year this would have been?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh, that goes back '90 [1990], perhaps 1990.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And this is for the people who write the captions and this is for 'Someone You Should Know'.
Speaker 1: For 'Someone You Should Know' that's what this is.  That's my daughter Allison.
Speaker 2: A-L-I-S-O-N?
Speaker 1: A-L-L-I-S-O-N she may have been--maybe she was--that was some affair.  She had just graduated with a Master's in Business Administration from Purdue [University, Indiana]-- and Information Technology and is going to work for RR Donnelley; one of the few in her class who was offered a job.  I got an award for some reason--I think it was the Southside JC or something like that.  That's my wife sitting down to the left.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I always bug you with these questions but do you remember the year?
Speaker 1: It's probably in the middle/late 1970s I think.
Speaker 2: So left to right you don't know who this person is?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: What's your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Marianita, M-A-R-I-A-N-I-T-A.  I don't know who that lady is.  [Joseph] Cardinal Bernadin gave me an award for 'Someone You Should Know'.  Here we go; this is the crew of 'Two on Two'.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  How about the approximate year if you remember?
Speaker 1: Okay this is probably 1982/'83 [1983] maybe.  This is the crew of 'Two on Two' and there is Don Craig, Bob Wallace and--she is now an anchor on Fox, [HM] Robin Robinson.
Speaker 2: You need to go from left to right.
Speaker 1: Okay that's me, Don Craig, Bob Wallace and [HM] Robin Robinson.  I was a presenter at the Emmys and I can't tell you what year this was, maybe in the late '70s [1970s] early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Is that Roger Ebert?
Speaker 1: That's Roger Ebert, yeah.  And this is when I used to do the weekend news, that goes back maybe in the middle '70s [1970s], '76 [1976], '77 [1977] something like that.
Speaker 2: You did okay on photos, I mean compared to what you had--I saw the clippings, you did better than--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well I've got others if you want them.  I wanted to find the army stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah that would be good.
Speaker 1: So I can dig that up plus some early ones.  Oh that's the Calumet JCs, gave me an award and that goes back early '70s [1970s].  Calumet JCs I got an award early '70s [1970s] for that one.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Do you remember the people with you there?
Speaker 1: I don't.  Okay this is weekend anchor again--this was during the period I was anchoring on the weekend, middle '70s [1970s] I would guess, WBBM TV, Channel 2.
Speaker 2: Okay thank you.
