Story_ID: 59799
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Judy James.  Ma'am, would you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Janet Purnell, last named spelled P-U-R-N-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 30, 1936, and I was born here in the City of Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired development officer and educator.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 2, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're located at the Wooster Branch Library here in Akron, Ohio.
Story_ID: 59800
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, before we get into some serious questioning, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions I'm compelled to ask you.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food... ummm... broccoli.
Speaker 1: That's mine, too.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Possibly winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "Do not go where the path may lead.  Go instead where there is no path, and leave a trail."
Story_ID: 59801
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let's talk about your beginnings.  And please give us the name of your mother, her date of birth and place of birth, and spell her name for us.
Speaker 2: My mother, who is deceased, was Nannette Victoria Johnson.  She was born in Roanoke, Virginia, and she was 82 at the time of her death.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: N-A-N-N-E-T-T-E, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And could you please do the same for your father?
Speaker 2: My father's name, and he too is deceased, was Millard Walter Johnson, Sr.; M-I-L-L-A-R-D, W-A-L-T-E-R, and Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.  He was born in Mound City, Illinois and was approximately 57 years of age at the time of his death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 59802
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] or your father [Millard Walter Johnson] have stories that they passed along to you from their parents or from their grandparents about your family's history?  Any stories from Reconstruction, or the Civil War, or from slavery?
Speaker 2: Not I can immediately recall.  I would imagine there would have been informal sharings.  But I was blessed to know both my grandmother and my great-grandmother.  My great-grandmother lived until she was 104 years of age, and she was here in the city of Akron [Ohio] the last three or four years of her life.  And so, she talked to us about being a child of slavery and being in the slave master's home and being taught to read as a child, and shared similar kinds of experiences associated with her life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you share some of those stories with us?  And is this your mother's--
Speaker 2: This was my maternal great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, your maternal great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Virginia.  I cannot recall specific stories she would have related.  I just remember that she talked to us about the fact that she was taught to read on the plantation.  And she was very literate, even though she had been blind eighteen years.  Her last eighteen years of life, she was still able to recite from the Bible very specifically, more readily than folk who had their sight... was a very vociferous reader.  And even in her blindness would obtain books from the public library in Braille, so that she could maintain her reading through the time of her death at age 104.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever talk about what she was doing when the slaves were freed, or how the news reached her?  Or, how she reacted when she got free?
Speaker 2: I don't recall that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Any stories from your father's side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None.
Story_ID: 59803
Speaker 1: Alright.  Did your mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] and father [Millard Walter Johnson] talk about what life was like when they were growing up in Roanoke [Virginia] or in Mound City [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In terms of the stories about walking long distances to school; in terms of churches without pianos and organs, and relying on hymns and singing a' cappella--some more traditional type historical references that you hear families make.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, it's good for you to tell the specific ones that you know, because this is your history here, you know.  So, you can, you know, if you have some stories, you know, that you can relate that they told you... you know, it's a good time to tell them.
Speaker 2: I really don't have any in-depth that I can share, you know, that come to me spontaneously.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, alright.  Did your parents have a story that they related to you about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't recall that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did they meet in Akron, or did they meet someplace else?
Speaker 2: And I don't recall that either.
Story_ID: 59804
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Both of your parents are not from Akron [Ohio].  Do they have stories about how they came to Akron?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Nannette Virginia Johnson] and her sister, who is now deceased, traveled to Akron with my grandmother, my maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, what compelled them to move to Akron?
Speaker 2: Seeking a better life, seeking employment.  The girls were able to have access to better schooling coming to Ohio, and coming specifically to Akron.
Speaker 1: Did they come with their families... or with their family?
Speaker 2: No.  They were young, very young girls... that came with their mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And did your grandmother have relatives here in Akron already, or--?
Speaker 2: I believe she did have some, a few relatives.  And she did domestic work, worked for some families.  One of the particular families would have been the Billow Funeral Home family, which is a well-known family down through the years here in the Greater Akron area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they both came when they were--
Speaker 2: They were very young, yes.
Speaker 1: They were very young.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Children.
Speaker 2: Because they attended elementary school at what was Spicer Elementary School here in Akron, which has not been in existence for quite a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother basically grew up here in Akron?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She was born in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about your father?
Speaker 2: My father, I do not have a recollection of what life was like prior to his coming to Akron.  He came working in the factory.  He was Firestone Tire Rubber Company employee most of his life; a truck driver most of that tenure.  So, he came, he came here seeking employment and better employment opportunities.
Story_ID: 59805
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us then how many brothers and sisters you have?
Speaker 2: Four... there were six of us... four brothers and two sisters.  One brother is deceased.  So, there remain five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where do you fit in that--
Speaker 2: I'm the second eldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have one older brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you describe for us, you know, some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the particular neighborhood that you grew up here in Akron?
Speaker 2: Most of my recollection would have been in growing up in public housing.  We were among the first residents in Akron Metropolitan Housing, right after the construction of it.  It was a very pleasant experience, in that it was a new environment.  It was an environment where things were controlled.  Like, if your grass ceased to grow, there were crews that came through and re-seeded it and made sure you got in the business of being green again.  There was security; there was formal recreation in Elizabeth Park which was immediately adjacent to the housing development.  Our church, Mount Zion Baptist Church, was right across the street.  We could hear choir rehearsals when we were not directly a part of the choirs ourselves.  I can remember early, early on when the ice truck would come and deliver ice.  And the man would come with the tongs and put a big block of ice in the refrigerator... well, Frigidaire, originally.  And I can recall the visits by a snake oil man who had these ointments available that would cure everything known to man and womankind.  The Watkins Products man... from whom you got your mixture for making the best lemon pies and special cleaning kinds of products that were available on a door-to-door basis.  I can remember the insurance man showing up month to month for the premium, which was in change.  But he had the little card, and you'd sign the card, and my mother would pay him.  The milkman stopping by...  So, this whole host of vendors who were regulars in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something that doesn't really exist anymore on that level.  But in those days, you know, you're right.  All the different kind of... the insurance man, the milkman, the bakery man... everybody would stop by the house.
Story_ID: 59806
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I remember being in the Brownie troop down at the local park.  But the bulk of our social life was centered around the church, belonging to youth groups in the church.  Both my parents played a role in terms of--well, my father [Millard Walter Johnson] sang with the male chorus.  My brother and I sang in the church choir, and were active in the Sunday School.  My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] served as one of the supervisors for different youth groups, so that we were at all times encouraged to be involved.  And until we reached the age where we could internalize that it was important and do it on our own initiative, we were helped along.  And our time was committed to being very productive, in terms of giving of ourselves and developing our skills and developing the social skills to interact in the community.  And the church was the first base of that.
Story_ID: 59807
Speaker 1: My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] was a staunch Republican, and so she was involved politically in working on the precinct level as a judge and campaigning for their candidates.  When now retired, Judge Roulhac [Hon. Joseph D. Roulhac, HM] ran as the first black judge.  We were all a part of the rallying together to help that campaign be a successful one.  So, it was, it was a matter of ongoing involvement that we grew up very deliberately--not accidentally, not incidentally with a path for becoming responsible, caring people that was mapped out for us by our parents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And by their own personal example.
Story_ID: 59808
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what kind of rules did your parents have for you when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, it felt like we had to be in the earliest of anybody in the city of Akron [Ohio].  I realize now that that was an exaggeration on the child's part.  (Laughter).  But my mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] always said the night was made for sleeping.  So, she awakened you to (Laughter) beginning your productive day rather early, and we were among the first folks to go in at night.  But upon reflection, as I became an adult, there was time to do everything constructive that we needed access to do.  And most of the time, something like going to skating parties was a big thing for the pre-teens and the teenagers.  And so, my mother would see that her Eastern Star chapter included among their fundraisers, that they would sponsor some of the skating parties.  And I could go if my mother and her team of chaperones were the ones being responsible for the outing.  But very great care was taken to see who was chaperoning dances and parties and picnics, and whatever the outings were... that if your parents were not directly involved, that they would vouch for who they could personally vouch before you could participate.
Story_ID: 59809
Speaker 1: Okay.  What other things did you do for recreation, you know, when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, riding my bicycle.  We did go to the library.  We were generally in some kinds of clubs and organizations, you know, youth organizations where you got into a number of activities, those that were church related.  We might learn how to bake cookies, learn the rules of etiquette.  We went to Sunday School conferences as delegates, and became proficient in Bible Study... interacting with others, sharing our ideas, defending our convictions in the context of other youths from all over the state.  A fun thing we got to do on my dad's [Millard Walter Johnson] payday was that we all got in the car and drove... he drove to pick up his paycheck, and we got to go to Krispy Kreme.  A family with six kids, you didn't do a lot of things, you know, big ticket items.  (Laughter).  But there were things that we did that were very intimate as a family, very special for us a family... that we'd go and enjoy Krispy Kreme on payday.  That after church on Sunday, and after dinner, we would take Sunday rides in the country, and very leisurely enjoy the animals and enjoy the nature.  And those were very special times.  I didn't realize until I grew up and went to college that we were less than wealthy.  Because the experience was a rich one for me, and for each of us.  And we were very much happy, because our parents very deliberately saw that we had fun experiences, that we had enriching experiences, and our lives were active.  And so, we didn't see them falling short of anything.
Story_ID: 59810
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that was something, you know, the big recreational option.  You know, they'd take... line the car with the kids.  That's something we don't see as much, you know, of anymore, the way it used to be.
Speaker 2: Right, the sense of family.  And another thing, we celebrated every birthday.  Whether it was a lean time or a good time, we still celebrated a birthday.  All birthdays, all special days, we made a big to-do... you know, at Christmas time.  And I assumed the whole world was doing that when I became a teacher, and went to my first class and said, "Let's talk about what you did on Christmas morning."  And here are these inner-city students... stared at me as if to say, "Like, what do you mean?"  You know, I was accustomed to my dad coming down first and turning on the little tree lights.  And then mother leading the family down, and we opened our gifts together.  We had Christmas breakfast.  You know, there was a ceremony, a protocol, for celebrating Christmas.  And so, I assumed that the rest of the world was off doing that same thing, until I became an educator and learned not to ask that question categorically ever again.  Because the children were saying, "We opened our Christmas packages the night before.  There wasn't the whole family coming down together.  No breakfast, you know.  As a matter of fact, they gave us cash, we didn't have a tree."  So, you know, it was interesting upon reflection to realize how blessed we've been, that our family was very family-oriented.
Story_ID: 59811
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were a pretty happy child then, I suppose?  I guess what you're describing is pretty--
Speaker 2: Yes.  We felt our parents [Millard Walter and Nannette Victoria Johnson] were too strict, because we had a life where folks did care where you went and who was supervising.  And like I said, in terms of the time curfew, in terms of things we wanted, you had to wait longer.  But really, that was by virtue of the fact that there were six kids.  And so, for your name to come up in the hat for a Schwinn bicycle, you had to be patient.  They got you a Schwinn bicycle.  You got a new one when you got it, but it had to be in the context of paying the family bills and everybody sharing the resources.  And so, we came to learn that if we would prevail in terms of being patient, that our parents really extended themselves to a reasonable extent to see that we had the major things that we wanted in life that were important to us.
Speaker 1: Did any of you all ever rebel against your parents, in terms of the rules and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We were very normal.  (Laughter).  I was probably one of the best children, because my mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] could anticipate, before I even got into doing something that was out of order--she could sort of read my eyes and she would predict that I had in mind doing something.  So, that cancelled it out.  But no, we were normal children who had to be spanked and who had to be grounded.  I even got as far as college days, and dating my husband.  And no one in my family had ever gone to a drive-in movie.  And we came home after 1 o'clock in the morning, and my mother would not believe there was such a thing as a movie theater open after that time.  And so, she grounded me for thirty days.  But my eldest brother got me bailed out, because he had a talk with her.  We had a young adult club that met on Sundays at the Urban League.  And he talked with her and explained that if she took me out of circulation, I might be with her forever.  And I didn't what conversation had transpired; I just know that she called me upstairs and said, "Get dressed and go to your meeting."  (Laughter).  And she subsequently told me about this conversation, and reflecting on as much as she loved me... having me forever... (Laughter).
Story_ID: 59812
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] was really involved in civic activities, too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My parents were involved in Masonry.  My father [Millard Walter Jordan] was one of the founders of the first local chapter of the Prince Hall Masons here in Akron.  And my mother was involved in the Eastern Stars.  And so, they had this interchange in terms of their Masonry involvement.  My mother was involved politically.  She was one of the pioneers in bringing the first black teachers to the Akron public school system.  And I think she was our first black vice-president of the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association].  So, very involved as an advocate on behalf of those community variables that directly involved family, but those that affected quality of life.  She was generally in the midst of any constructive community advocacy.  And my father to a lesser degree, but was always supportive.  One thing about the two of them, they never cancelled each other out in terms of where they stood with respect to their expectations of us.  You knew it was an absolute no-no to go to both mom and dad on the same issue, when the first one had spoken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: But they were very involved in the community all the time, and would volunteer us as well.  If they volunteered to help with an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] rally and that... you know... they'd stuff a thousand envelopes... well, that meant the team.  When they got home, we'll be stuffing envelopes at 4 o'clock on Friday.  And so they got... that's how I initially got involved in community advocacy... being a part of the partnership... that when mom and dad made a commitment, they had made a commitment for the kids, too.
Story_ID: 59813
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me about school now.  Where did you go to school?  And how did you like school?
Speaker 2: Well, I attended the Akron Public Schools.  I attended Bryan Elementary School, Jennings Junior High.  I was in the first class to go all the way through the junior high system that was just coming into being while I was yet at Bryan Elementary.  And I attended North Senior High School.  Bryan Elementary was a predominantly black school.  When we went to Jennings, we were among the first black classes to integrate that school.  And so, we had the challenge of being among the first classes.  And then at North High School, there were only two blacks in the college prep course program.  Most blacks took commercial courses with no particular intent on pursuing college, and no particular incentive forthcoming from staff that they should.
Story_ID: 59814
Speaker 1: But our parents were always such a strong, such strong motivators, that they had that expectation of us--that it was just normally assumed you would flow through the system on into college and then do some professional discipline, though neither of them got that far.  Mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] graduated from high school, and my dad [Millard Walter Johnson] went as far as ninth grade.  But he was extremely well self-taught.  He could repair radios and TV's.  And when I would see him look at some of the electronics books, very complex... that I could not decipher even as a college student and figure out what to do to handle all these.  He could re-model anything in the house; repair anything, you know, no matter how technical it was, though he didn't have the formal education in terms of his continued self-education; he was very advanced.
Story_ID: 59815
Speaker 1: But the school system, I have positive memories of the elementary school experience.  I was aware of the transition as our parents worked towards getting the first black educators.  And we got, Martin Chapman was our Physical Ed teacher, and that was the first time we'd had a black teacher.  The... Herbert Bracken was the first black teacher in the Akron public schools brought forth.  My brother, who was six years older than me, had the benefit of being instructed by him.
Speaker 2: Now, when was he brought on?
Speaker 1: This would have been in the early 1940's.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, that's a long time not to have a black teacher in the--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh--
Speaker 2: --public schools.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an awful long time, compared to other cities I know of in Ohio, even... you know.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's a long time.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And it was Larry Eagle who was the first black PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] president.  He was the leader with my mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] and a few others who made the case for the fact that it had been much too long.  And so, I think at least three gentlemen were brought along eventually as that pattern began to break.
Story_ID: 59816
Speaker 1: The junior high experience... I remember coming home the first day, and my mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] asked how it went.  And I said, "The white kids were staring at me."  And she was hanging up clothes, and she turned and she said, "Tell me how you knew that."  (Laughter).  And it dawned on me there was a message in her response.  I said, "Oh, okay."  (Laughter).  So, she said, "Tomorrow we won't have that problem.  Now everybody's looked; we can get on with school, right?"  (Laughter).  So, that sort of turned the corner.  It was a shocker.  But many times, you know, they would throw it back on me, so that I would have to introspectively check myself.  So, the business of...  And that was before, you know, "I'm black and I'm proud" and all of that.  They always said, "Remember, you're a Johnson."  And it was, I had to get older to appreciate what that meant.  They always said, "No matter what you do, remember you're a Johnson.  That stands for something in the community."  And it did; they were highly respected.
Story_ID: 59817
Speaker 1: I recall when my dad [Millard Walter Johnson] passed that the fellow Masons were passing around, and there were tears in their eyes.  You know, that the grown men were not ashamed to reflect the fact that they were endeared to this person.
Speaker 2: And he founded the Prince Hall Masons in this city?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's, that's interesting.  It suggests on some level... I mean there wasn't a lot of...  Did the black community in Akron [Ohio] have a long history--is there a long history of black people being in Akron?
Speaker 1: In terms of--the heaviest migration occurred as the factory influence caused people to migrate from all over the nation.  And so, you had that greater influx occurring there.  And there were others who had the interest, and he was able to pull together a cadre of them.  And... because they were very seriously committed to it.  And I can remember mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] learning the private rituals, and she had the secret book up on the shelf.  And she'd be putting the yellowing in the margarine, back when you had to put the color packet in the bowl with the white substance and convert it to margarine--and she's--margarine.  And she's stirring and learning these secret rituals.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 59818
Speaker 1: And the two of them, the thing they did that I appreciated--and what I appreciated is they visited people every Sunday notwithstanding the weekend and the time off from work and so forth.  After church, they would go and visit the sick, and they were very faithful about that.  My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] was also very faithful about attending funerals.  We sort of laughingly said that she and my oldest brother were professional funeral-goers.  If she looked at the obituary and saw that someone had passed, and had the feeling that folk might not pay attention and be in attendance, she would attend the funeral of someone she didn't know, so that some respects would be paid on their behalf.
Story_ID: 59819
Speaker 1: --Talking about your mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] attending funerals of people, and she'd just go because she thought somebody ought to be there, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She'd read it in the newspaper, and just sort of had a sense that that would be someone that folk would probably not pay attention to.
Speaker 1: Now, with your parents involved in the Masons and in church.  What denomination were you all?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose they had a lot of friends, right?  A lot of friends and associates?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 59820
Speaker 1: And you said they infused their children in the activities of the Masons and the church and the political activity, too, in the sense that...  So, did you have a lot of responsibility as a child, you know, in these--?
Speaker 2: Well, these responsibilities were developed in the home, in that the cleaning of the home regularly was divided up.  And there was even an organization chart on the wall in the kitchen (Laughter) because sometimes there'd be controversy over whose week it was to do dishes, etc.  And so, our responsibilities were delineated by an organizational chart.  And depending upon your age, the lighter the responsibility.  And of course as you got older, the reverse was true.  But we were taught to be self-sufficient.  I mean we were taught to mend buttons and... both male and female... so that everyone, regardless of whether they remained single throughout life or were married, would have the ability to take care of themselves and another person in whatever situation.  And for a long time though, I was flustered because there were so many people that could cook.  My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] could cook, my father [Millard Walter Johnson] was an excellent cook, and my oldest brother could cook.  And so, I got stuck with things like peeling the onions and the carrots, and setting the table, and doing the more custodial tasks.  By the time you got all the way down to me for preparing a meal, we were desperate.  (Laughter).  But we were still all taught to prepare meals.  And so, I was prepared to take over my responsibilities when I got married.
Story_ID: 59821
Speaker 1: And one other thing I wanted to touch upon for those who see this tape in the future--going into the future--most people stigmatize public housing today.  But in those days, I mean public housing did not have this stigma.  You talked about the people coming out and planting grass for you.  And I know they had inspections of places, and security and organized activities for youth in a lot of public housing projects in the early days.  Can you talk about that, how it was different?
Speaker 2: Well, that was why we felt no stigma.  Number one, we moved in when the developments were first built.  The inspections were spontaneous.  And so, theoretically, you kept your unit in the proper working order.  If you had a spontaneous inspection and, say, had a section missing from your ice tray, on your next bill it invoiced you for replacement of your ice tray.  And so, folks tended to be in a state of readiness, realizing that that was a reality.  They did a lot of preventive maintenance.  And so, the painting of the wood-framed portions of your building--the kinds of things that they did--cyclical painting of the interior.  And so, there was an ongoing preventive maintenance program.  Plus, keeping the properties, they understood that maintaining the environment gave them a more stable clientele, in terms of folks who used it.  It was to be transitional housing, and after a period of time, we later moved to a home.  But they did everything to make it attractive so there was not a stigma attached.  And so, until I read the books later in college, I didn't realize that that was supposed to be something less than a good thing.  I still regard it as having been a good experience.
Speaker 1: I know that many people who lived in public housing or even saw it developed, you know, see it as positive.  It's not in today's... you know...
Speaker 2: Right.  And that was one of the factors when I was interviewed to serve as Executive Director in later years of Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority--when someone asked why I thought I brought... what they--what I felt I brought by way of experience and expertise to the climate of projecting myself to serve successfully as the executive director.  And I indicated because I know what it was intended to be, and because I experienced it at its best, I felt I was in an excellent posture to preserve the intent of this quality transitional housing.
Story_ID: 59822
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about high school now.  You say you were one of a few black students at North High School here?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a predominantly white high school.  And I was one of two students in the college prep program.  So, most of the people I ran with, at least during the school day, were white.  I sang in the senior choir, which was a very elite choir.  And the director, in auditioning me, explained that there was a certain type of... she said "Negro" at that time... student that she selected to be in this choir, and she only selected so many.  And I left that interview thinking she was telling me good-bye.  (Laughter).  Then I got the call I had successfully made membership in the North High Senior choir.  Another experience was that I served on the school newspaper and ultimate became the first black editor of the high school paper here locally.  Prior to that time, they would not even permit black names in the gossip section of the school paper... you know, where it says, "C.T. loves R.S."  I never understood (Laughter) how anyone was going to know the distinction anyhow.  After I became editor, I made my staff more diverse, so that everyone's news and everyone's gossip could appear, and the folks still could not tell that "T.S. loves L.Y." involved black students.  And so, that was a good experience.
Speaker 1: I had the opportunity to show my skills, because I participated in a lot of oratorical contest competition.  And my mother and my brother were my trainers for those kinds of competitions.  And so, many times I won hundreds of dollars for the school.  So, that caused them to take note and give me greater and greater responsibility.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you were quite an orator in school then?  Just... okay.
Speaker 1: Well, I was an acceptable black, because I was producing, you know.  You produce a measure of success and your marketability (Laughter) is enhanced sometimes regardless of your color.  There were reminders, of course, though, that I was still ultimately black.  For example, I was an on all-white--with the exception of myself--volleyball team in a competition in our senior year.  And the final two teams involved an all-black team, which included most of my neighbors from the public housing development.  And my team... and they were beating us, and our Phys. Ed teacher changed the score, (Laughter) and declared them the winner.  And my team had enough integrity to be supportive of me, in that we protested and corrected, and indicated we would have to involve our parents if we could not convince her that that was a travesty... that was not a victory.  You know, we did not want to be anointed with a hypocritical victory.  But there were experiences like that.  When they would have elections for the team clubs and the school clubs, if they said the journalism club was meeting in Room 214 at 4:00, we'd wait in 214, and no one would ever come.  By the time we discovered it was 301, the election was over.  So, we ran into those kinds of growing pains as that school gradually became more integrated.
Story_ID: 59823
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your social life like in school [North High School, Akron, Ohio]?  Did you, you're in kind of a... you know different... you're outside of your neighborhood.  Were you all bussed to school?  Is that what it was?
Speaker 2: We would walk one way, and the ride the bus back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We participated in things like the Homecoming Dance, some of the kinds of potluck suppers and things that the Latin Club would have--things that were associated with our particular majors and special interest clubs, and of course things that were associated with journalism... related.  So, we participated enough.  I guess I probably didn't miss it, because I was active through church and other organizations.  So if I hadn't been active beyond school, it would have fallen short, because I was in a situation that really did not welcome us on a regular basis.
Story_ID: 59824
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, what other activities were you involved in in high school [North High School, Akron, Ohio]?  You were in the chorus, you... what were your favorite subjects in school?  And did you have any mentors or any teacher that took a particular interest in you in high school that you could talk about?
Speaker 2: Yes, the journalism teacher took a particular interest in me.  And that's why I ultimately... and was blessed to become editor of the newspaper.  And she worked to develop my skills.  And I had a rhetoric teacher, Mrs. Rook who was very short, who was my mentor in terms of training me for oratorical competitions like the "Voice of Democracy" contests.  And she would get my parents' permission to come over on Sunday after church.  And they'd leave us in the living room because she was short, when she sat on the couch, her feet didn't touch the ground.  (Laughter).  And she would have this twinkle in her eye and have me go through my speech and, you know, tell me where to put the proper inflections and where to be spirited and so forth, and spearhead me on to a number of victories.  And so, that was very special.  And my parents and I always appreciated that this was an exceptional person who gave up her time, not only in school.  Because I can recall she had us do special research papers.  And the other students might turn in a hundred, two hundred note cards, and I had five.  And I'd drop mine off on the day we were supposed to turn them off, and headed downstairs and I was out the door.  And I heard somebody call me from the upstairs window.  And I said, "Oh, oh, I'm going to be in trouble."  And I hurried back, and she said... she didn't reprimand me.  She had the same twinkle in her eye.  And she said, "You know, this much is so exciting.  If I could just get you to draw out just a little bit more for me by tomorrow, I think we'll be on our way.  This is some of the greatest stuff I have heard in a long time."  (Laughter).  You know, just drawing me.  And of course I went home.  And it turned out she got what she wanted, by making me think that she couldn't stand another day without having some more morsels of this wisdom flowing forth from me.  So, she had that gift, to draw out my gifts.
Speaker 1: This is interesting.  Now, she's very, very short.  And I assume she's a white teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And here you are, probably the tallest girl--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh--
Speaker 1: --or one of the tallest girls in school--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--
Speaker 1: --in school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--
Speaker 1: --and black--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --one of the few black girls?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, did she, did she... did she have an insight into what it was like to be different in high school, and how to kind of overcome that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think she was a genuine person that loved people, and a true teacher that, you know, she saw the gift there and she wanted me to learn to value that gift.  But she had to give me an object (Laughter) to share that gift with, and so she made herself the object, as if to say, you know, "I'm not sure I'll be able to go on if I don't know where Purnell is really coming from... (Laughter) where Janet Johnson is really coming from as it relates to this theme topic... this research topic, you know.  And you know, she'd be sitting there with almost tears in her eyes when I made the final presentation in the competition... just there for me.  But never, never a reprimand because that would have closed the door.  She just had that gift for opening the door, and sort of taught me that.  And that's how I in turn have tried to mentor through the years, to realizing how valuable a tool that is for exciting folk about their gifts.
Story_ID: 59825
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So when you were, I guess, lining up your high school [North High School, Akron, Ohio] years, did you have a strong idea what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I wanted to major in journalism, because most of my success and my accolades and trophies and so forth were geared in that direction.  And I had taken an inventory--one of those inventories you take that is supposed to give a clue as to what your real bent is, and which direction you should go.  But my parents felt that I should get into something that I had the probability of being employed in as a black person.  (Laughter).  And they felt journalism was a bit abstract for those times, and suggested to me I might want to think in terms of education or something else, where there might really be a job in the near term.  But the charge I was given is that you will either go to college, or you will get a job; I was told that as a senior.  And I originally started out riding the bus each day downtown job-hunting with six or seven of my friends, not realizing that was not a good plan, group hunting for a job.  Many of them got hired at the Ohio Bell Telephone Company that was looking for switchboard operators.  Well, I was too long for that, because you could only be so many inches away from the switchboard.  (Laughter).  And there were several jobs that they got where there were restrictions.  My height was a constraint.  And so, then someone said, "Well, why don't you join the service?"  Well, that sounded, it sounded too neat and orderly to go on to college, as I knew my parents were expecting.  And so, I thought I'd sign up to join the service.  I ran into the same thing, that... let's see.  I think the WAVES [Women Accepted for Volunteer Service] had the highest maximum height, 6'1; I'm 6'2.  And the Women's Air Force had 6'2.  And I actually went to Cleveland [Ohio] and was processed.  And we came back from lunch that day and they checked my height again, and I was three-quarters of an inch over their maximum.  (Laughter).  And so, they said because you couldn't have your uniforms available when everybody else's was available, they did not take people under the maximum.  So, they gave me my bus ticket and sent me back.  The next day was the last day to register at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio].  And so, when the window opened in the cashier's office, I was there paying my monies and enrolled to major in education, which was really my calling.
Story_ID: 59826
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you really liked the--I mean, was the... the Education Department at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] was good for you then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.   Well, tell us about the University of Akron, and who there that really inspired you or helped you?
Speaker 2: Well, the University of Akron, we started this business of being shut out most of the time once again.  It was not a climate... the undergrad experience was not one that would have drawn me back to the University for advanced degrees, because we were... we were really not included... you know... on that campus, per se.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was, I graduated from high school in '54' [1954].
Speaker 1: So, this is '55' [1955]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I concentrated on my studies, and I had to work.  And I worked on campus in the Science and Technology Library part of the time, and then I worked at the Urban League part of the time.  And so, most of my time was taken up with getting my coursework and leaving to go to work.  So, I didn't feel as much of the pain, though I had the keen awareness that there really wasn't much going on there where my participation was encouraged.
Speaker 1: So your community activity basically was, you know, filled that gap?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Campus activities, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we made it through.
Story_ID: 59827
Speaker 1: What kind of tasks did you volunteer for at the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Well, the Urban League, I started out volunteering in the Summer Day Camp program.  What happened...?  Well, that was even before college.  My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] called up... I think I was nine or ten.  She called up and said, "What do you have for a young lady to do during the summer wherein she will remain a young lady?"  And the--
Speaker 1: So, she put up--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  The caseworker said, "Well, we don't have any paid positions."  And she said, "No, I'm not talking about paid positions.  She is willing to volunteer. I just want her to be under proper supervision, and she came daily, Monday through Friday."  And I heard her say, "Fine.  She will be there on the bus at 9 o'clock come Monday morning."  And so, that's how I began, by volunteering in the Summer Day Camp program as an assistant counselor.  Within weeks, the arts and crafts instructor, who was an adult, had to re-locate to Florida.  And as it happened, Vernon Odom who was then executive director, who I had been assisting, gave me the job.  Even though I was a kid, he put an adult with me... teamed an adult with me... but really had me dealing with the creative part of planning that program.  And so for the next few summers, that became my first paid employment in that summer program, directing the arts and crafts.  So, that was my first job there.  I also served during college as what we call the cage lady, where you received the people's clothing--the lockup and the baskets while they were swimming.  So, I had the title, "cage lady."  I'd be walking down Main Street, and somebody would yell, "Hey, cage lady."  (Laughter).  And everyone would look around to see what a cage lady was.  (Laughter). So, I had that halfway through my undergrad experience.
Story_ID: 59828
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in college [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] and working at the Urban League, the Civil Rights Movement really started to heat up in the United States.  How did that affect you in those days?
Speaker 2: It didn't affect me as much as an undergrad, because of the tightness of my schedule.  I got involved in it through my community, once again, through things like--we'd go away to visit a church in another city and come back, and we weren't allowed to come into the city unless the police boarded the bus and checked us out and guided us into our church for us to go home.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute... now explain.  You're talking about Akron [Ohio]?  You couldn't come back into Akron?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: If you had--
Speaker 2: No. We were alerted that we were to call when we reached a certain distance from the, you know, the city limits.  And then a police escort came out and they checked us, checked the bus, and then they guided us all the way into our church property.  And then we were allowed to disburse.
Speaker 1: I have never heard of such a thing.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, in the sixties [1960s].  Plus, on Wooster Avenue they were... they began to have some riots and kinds of upsurges in some of the communities.  And there were actually police with bayonets pointed at us on one side of the street as we were walking to the Poor People's Headquarters to see what we could do to help, you know, bring some, restore peace in the community.
Speaker 1: This is very enlightening.  Now, the bus restriction or checkpoint activity... did that take place during the riots, or was that a normal thing that happened?
Speaker 2: No, that took place during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it was over once that had been quelled; it ended with that.  But we had a couple of experiences.  So even that was sort of frightening, because we didn't know until we called to tell someone we were leaving the guest church and what time we'd be in... because everybody had to have their parents and so forth waiting to pick them up from church and take them home.  And we were given this instruction that you're to wait... you're to come to this point and wait.
Story_ID: 59829
Speaker 1: Now that's not so strange... during the riots, you know.
Speaker 2: No.  It was during that time of unrest.  And so, we helped out as community people, more in the community at large than anything we did on campus.  When I became the interim director of Minority Affairs and served on the president's cabinet, we had to deal with various stages of students going through changes in terms of their issues, student issues.  And the early seventies, the late, late sixties, early seventies... and we'd have instances where white students would send notification that they were going to have Nazi demonstrations and surround the campus [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio].  And I remember one time we had to get together and come up with a security plan if that in fact happened.  And we had a primary university official who indicated he would not be going out there.  And so, I was one of the primary people to go.  They didn't show up, but it was interesting when we would get in a tight that there were folks who would candidly say that they would not put themselves at risk to protect the campus.
Story_ID: 59830
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's go back to college [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio], not to leave that, you know...  So, when you... you completed the degree requirements to become a teacher?
Speaker 2: My bachelor of science in education, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were going to teach in the sciences, or just--
Speaker 2: No, in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.  So when you graduated, when did you--where were you assigned?  And how did you find that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I taught at Crouse Elementary School.  That was a predominantly black school.  We had... well, my first school was Howe Elementary School, and it was a much smaller school.  But we had a caring, sensitive white principal who worked well with all the children and with all the families.  And so, that was a positive experience, because we could do what we needed to do to meet the total needs of our children in that setting.  And then the next school was a much larger school, Crouse Elementary.  That was predominantly black.  We had a black principal there.  Part of my tenure there the white female, but the rest of the time...  In both of those instances, they were people who cared about our kids and who were strong advocates for... as strong an advocate for inner-city kids as they were for any  others.  And so, we were able to do some really tremendous things.
Story_ID: 59831
Speaker 1: We were able to get the parents involved.  I think we broke a record of having the largest PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] in... one of the largest PTA's in Ohio at that point and time.  We had eleven hundred people involved in PTA in a school that had a population around that.  But we were very involved in involving parents... including parents meaningfully... being very open with parents and making them partners instead of pushing them aside as though we had something secret to accomplish with their children.  And I think that was the ingredient that made that exciting.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you... was parent participation on a level that was pretty good when you first started teaching?  I mean was it easy to get parents involved?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  Because there was, the teachers were afraid to involve the parents.  There was always the fear they'll get too involved.  (Laughter).  And so, we had to do some educating about the fact that this was a partnership; that you cannot expect to impact the life of a child without including the parents as partners.  Because most of you have this child a segment of the day; both of you have a piece of this life.  And if it's going to be a whole child, then it's got to be because the whole team is coming together.  And so, we had to give some examples of how you constructively...  They saw them as folks just coming to spy on them and report downtown as to the shortcomings.  And I said to them, "No, let's see what happens when we involve them with teaching eye to hand coordination... the early steps needed to prepare a child for reading.  Let's say to them, "Wear your sneakers and blue jeans and we'll meet you in the gym.  And we'll teach you how to toss a ball to the child, so his eyes converge on one place and catch that ball... and that you are in fact starting his pre-reading activities."  And so, we formed a cadre of twenty-five parents that we trained to do those eye-hand kinds of things.  And they were so pleased with themselves that some of them ultimately went back to school.  Some of them had started... had a year of college or, you know, some fragment of college experience, and went back.  And some of them are still in the system today.  But then we heralded to everybody, "Look what these parents did."  It was a very basic training, some very elementary activities, but they were faithful each day to come and put the children through these paces, and they made a difference.  Now, these children are ready for the reading experience.  This is a partnership.  They weren't spying, they were teaming to get you to the goal of proficiency in reading.  And so, doing those kinds of things was showing them how you meaningfully partner with parents and include them.  And I always said to them as a teacher and as a principal, whether Mickey Mouse or the President of the United States comes through that door... "You should know what you're doing in the lives of the children.  You know, don't entertain... don't look to entertain folk.  Don't say you can't do it unless you know who's coming, and when.  Be doing the right thing when that door opens, no matter who stands there."
Story_ID: 59832
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were talking about school partnerships and how kids worked with teachers.  Can you remember exactly where we...  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Well, I had given the example of the early identification of learning disorders, and how we trained the parents to actually be able to work with children and be support--a support system for the teachers in pre-reading developmental skills.  But we would find many, many other ways to take away the threat of the notion of having the parent come to help the teacher.  We prevailed upon the parents that it wasn't wholesome to come and just hang out all day, either.  (Laughter).  Because were the situation reversed they would not want someone on their job taking advantage of them that way.  So, we got it in perspective with real tasks.  Because we talked with the parents and we simply said, "What kinds of tasks would you think more appropriate...most appropriate for your being involved with your school on a regular basis?"  And they said, "Well, surely we can do more than bring the cupcakes on Halloween, and the cookies at Christmastime, and the birthday cake.  You know, this is the sum total of what's being required of us.  And while we're not practicing professionals, in many instances we bring expertise that could help out in that classroom if the teacher just sat down and we shared what might be of benefit, and her goals for the year."  And so, we encouraged them then enough to start talking about what the real levels of expertise were that might be brought to bear, and try little short-term projects that evolved into things more elaborate, at the point there was a trust level.
Story_ID: 59833
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, what other things did you do, I guess, and were involved in (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Well, we had the first bussing for integrated learning experience when I was yet in the classroom.  I taught fourth grade.  And a colleague of mine, Dr. Patricia Stewart, taught fourth grade.  She taught at a predominantly white elementary school, and I taught at a predominantly black elementary school.  We secured permission to transport my class to spend the afternoon with her class once a month, and we alternated months they would come to us.  And we would have a social studies experience.  We'd also have a time when they teamed up with specific buddies that they would look toward every month... find out what their hobbies were.  They would take something...  If Joe was interested in kites, then I might take a kite or something that I had found related to kiting on my next visit, to exchange.  So, we had the social studies experience.  They would have sack lunch together so that they could interact informally.  And at the end of the school year, we had an international buffet luncheon that was more like a picnic, in which we had them bring dishes that related to whatever nationalities were reflected in the group.  Some folk got to know what potato pie was for the first time.  And by first, in terms of other dishes reflecting other cultures.  And what we found was not only was it an excellent experience and they learned to work extremely well together--they fashioned such close bonds that at the end of that first summer when it was time to say good-bye, they were hugging and in tears, as though they had a summer camp experience and had been inseparable for many, many months instead of coming together once a month.  And many of them to this day have relationships that have continued to go on into adulthood.  But we were able to do that.  The public schools provided public transportation for us to--
Speaker 1: Approximately when was this?
Speaker 2: This would have been in the late 1950's.
Story_ID: 59834
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's interesting.  I would think... now correct me if I'm wrong.  I would think there'd be a problem amongst African-American students--who would then be known as Negroes--in terms of what their cultural identity is in terms of saying... because I know identity is a big problem as it, you know, as it's starting to become an issue in the sixties [1960s].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: In the fifties [1950s] I would guess it would be something that was still an issue, you know.  Black people would say... or Negroes would say like, "Well, who are we?" An international thing.  Who do we represent?  Where's our ancestry?  What are we...?  You know, so was that an issue?  And how did you deal with it?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of--remember we were building up to this through the course of the whole year.  So, in the course of our monthly interactions, we were dealing with different cultures.  We were dealing with a different culture each month.  Plus, in our own individual classrooms, we were building up the sense of pride in who you are, and not being in denial under any circumstances about who you are, and the value inherent in that, and the contributions that have been made by your ancestors and those who have gone before and those that you don't generally hear of.  And we exposed them to many folk that they would not ordinarily hear.  So, they came into this relationship with a base that, "I am somebody.  Not that I'm going to be overwhelmed that gee, they've done a lot of significant things, and I probably haven't done much."  We, we, they were in balance physiologically because we were preparing them for this interaction, and that with this new found friendship, they were bringing as much to bear to the table as the children in the predominantly white school.
Speaker 1: Is that important to do with--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, because it was, it was what my parents [Millard Walter and Nannette Victoria Johnson] had armed me with, and my brothers and sisters.  And like I said, it was prior to the day of "I'm black and I'm proud," and all of these things, by saying "Remember who you are," and letting you know that the name Johnson stands for something in terms of integrity and in terms of spirituality... you know, in terms of stability in this community... helping them to understand that.  I mean we did it in a thousand different ways.  I was a very unconventional classroom teacher in terms of the lengths to which we would go to, to make the point; the lengths to which we would go to develop even self-sufficiency.  I had a nine point program, in terms of skills that you had to demonstrate so that you would be totally capable of taking care of yourself--again, an offshoot of what I told you we grew up with--that we actually brought an iron and an ironing board into the classroom.  And you had to iron a blouse if you were a girl, a shirt if you were a boy, sew on a button, polish your shoes, learning to use wax and all the special processes.  There were all of these skills: how to make a bed folded into hospital corners; do everything it took to basically be capable of surviving on your own.  So, we went from that elemental level and kept on going, exposing them to the contributions that their own had made, so that they arrived... everybody arrived as somebody that are interactions.
Story_ID: 59835
Speaker 1: Now that's good, that's good.  So, how long did you teach elementary school?
Speaker 2: Eleven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you stay at the same school, or did you move around?
Speaker 2: Well, I was primarily at Howe Elementary and Crouse Elementary with my teaching.  And then at a point, the system was in what I felt a very low morale posture.  And I went to see the superintendent to offer my services, to be of some assistance because I felt we needed to do something to turn the corner.  And he suggested that perhaps it was time for me to come out of the classroom and to have my influence prevail over more than thirty children and their families.  And he encouraged me to go back and get my master's degree and join the administrative staff, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 59836
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, now during this period of time, are you still involved with the Urban League and other civic activities?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  From the time... initially it was my parents being sure that I was involved.  But then it became internalized (Laughter) and I was in it permanently.  Because we laughed in later years when my mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] would call and say, you know, "I can't find you."  And I'd say, "But you put me out there.  (Laughter).  I'm out there being committed.  You sent me on the mission.  I'm on the mission now, so this is the product of your--of my ultimately internalized what you taught me.
Speaker 1: Are there any community issues that you look back and can remember that you were really involved in with... I mean issues of... Akron [Ohio] issues that the Urban League was involved in, or some other community organizations you were with?
Speaker 2: Well, with the... this one issue was an issue in terms of area pride, purportedly pride... with swimming areas... corporations that we visited.  We had a young adult at the Urban League.  And we would drive around in a car caravan of maybe six to eight cars, and visit quote unquote "private parks."  And we would watch families drive up and pay their two dollars and go through.  And so we'd get our money out and drive up, and put our two dollars out.  And the gentleman would explain it was private.  And we were able to ultimately cause those area places to become open to everyone, because we persisted in this showing up and this documenting of what was happening, and filming of what was happening.  And it ultimately, they ultimately ceased to... quite an effect.
Speaker 1: Now, these were public parks and they were, they were operating as private parks?  I mean as far as--
Speaker 2: They were ostensibly private, but we would watch the general public pull up and pay two dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And go right in.  So--
Speaker 1: So, they were being operated as public--
Speaker 2: We'd do it--
Speaker 1: --but they really were private?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, we'd do what we saw the previous cars do, and then it wouldn't work.  You know, someone wanted to direct us back out of the circle, or make room for us to back out.  And so, we were able to put an end to that discrimination.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I know that in the fifties there were a number of lake resorts in Ohio that were, where black people couldn't go.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They were open to the public, and they advertised on television.  But if you went there, you couldn't get in.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Indian Lake was one.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And there were some others.
Story_ID: 59837
Speaker 1: But, so, those are kind of...  Any other issues that were really big for you?
Speaker 2: Voter registration and voter education was a big issue.  You know, folk were frustrated and wanted the quality of life to improve, and wanted to have real representation of issues and needs, and did not equate that to their having to make a physical commitment to go in there and cast that vote.  So, we did a lot of things to encourage folk who had never registered before.  And I even tied that into my school.  As a junior high principal, we had a registration.  And if you could convince your parents to register, you didn't have to pay to come to the skating party.  And I convinced the City Recreation to loan us the skates for a big skating party.  And we got a whole host of folks who were say twenty... in the twenty-five to thirty range who had never voted before, who under the pressure of their children saying, "Mom, you know, you have to pay fifty cents for me to go.  Go up and register."  (Laughter).  And they did register and they did vote for the first time.  So, there were many times when we did creative kinds of things to get the parents' attention, because that was a target population that needed to have a vested interest in voting on the issues and being alert as to the issues of the community.  So, so, many times we engaged in different forms of voter registration and voter education kinds of programming.
Story_ID: 59838
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have been involved in politics as a Republican?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how long did your active involvement go back to... you know, I know your mother was active in Republican politics.
Speaker 2: My mother [Nannette Victoria Johnson] and father [Millard Walter Johnson]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I, from the time I was legally able to vote.  It extends prior to that because they would take us to help distribute campaign literature, and get us involved in the campaigns and the custodial type things that kids could do associated with that.  So, I was involved with the candidates that she and he were supporting through the years.  And then that, too, became an internal thing, and I was involved from the time that I could vote.  I served eleven years as Vice-Chairman of the Summit County Republican Party.
Speaker 1: From what years to when?
Speaker 2: I... it would have been through most of the eighties [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably around 1980, '81' [1981], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know, it seems 1960 is probably the last time when there was, seemed to be a significant number of black Republicans to debate with black Democrats about who was going to be the President, and that sort of thing.  I remember when I was a kid in 1960, a lot of parents and students in an all-black school situation in Dayton [Ohio] actually discussed, you know, is Nixon [President Richard Nixon] better or Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] better?  It seems like that's the last election where that was an issue.  It was like overwhelmingly black Democratic, you know--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --activity after that.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And of course you know, history has shown it hasn't always been rewarded.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 59839
Speaker 1: You know... so, but how did you feel being a Republican during a period of declining black participation in Republican politics?
Speaker 2: That was a sore point.  The reality was that if you, if you were involved, you knew the reality that there needed to be more equity in terms of the opportunity, and that it certainly wasn't any reflection of competency, the fact that there was less and less involvement.  In terms of local support, at the time I was appointed by the Governor to the Board of the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], it certainly had something to do with the fact that the pendulum was swinging, and there was a predominance of Republican leadership.  That didn't hurt, coming from the ranks.  It did not hurt also when I was interviewed as a candidate for the Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority, in terms of the Republican presence on that board at the time.  Both boards were diverse, but when the pendulum swings and there's a competent candidate that can go forth, sometimes it does happen in a positive way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there were some... there were some benefits I guess, career wise and so forth, as being involved with--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in politics with a state like Ohio with strong Republican governors.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In each instance I was not anticipating... I was not moving consciously in that direction.  It was someone else's notion that I should let myself be considered.  I think it was my pastor who was very active at that time in politics, Dr. Arthur Kemp, who recommended me for the governor's consideration for the gubernatorial appointment to the University Board.  And I don't recall whose recommendation... there were several people that drew my attention to the opportunity when the Housing Authority position became available.  But in neither case was I moving toward that particular opportunity.  I stopped and considered it by virtue of the folks that brought it to my attention at the time because of my regard for them... that I didn't just dismiss the notion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you feel any sense of ideological isolation being a Republican, a black Republican in Ohio?  I know Ohio has a history of...  There have been even white Republicans that felt that they didn't really fit in, like Charles Whalen [State Representative Charles W. Whalen, Jr.] and other people.  Liberal... they were liberal Republicans in the state, and Republicans that had a social change agenda.  But I mean how did you... you were chairman of the Republican Party during the--
Speaker 2: Vice Chairman.
Speaker 1: Vice Chairman during the, I guess during the Reagan presidency--you know, a real conservative time in America.  How did you fit, did you feel like you fit in?  I don't know what your personal political philosophy is.  But did you feel like you fit into that?
Speaker 2: I feel that my presence was able to lend to some constructive things happening, and to cancel out the possibility of some negative things that could have happened.  So that... so long as I felt my presence was making a difference, I was not idealistic to the extent of thinking that I would turn the world around by serving.  I was not, I did not extend beyond remembering my blackness, because that was always a reminder at some point in our interactions and politics, as well as any other any discipline you'll continually come up against--that there are times for things to be counted.  And yes, you are counted outside of the infrastructure when you're in the infrastructure many times.  But for the most part, to the extent of those things that I was charged with and involved with, I was dealt with above-board, and I could feel free... I always felt free to voice my conviction in any case.
Story_ID: 59840
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you didn't feel like any... you didn't feel that you had... that you were compelled to have to follow the line of reasoning of the majority of the Republicans in the state or in the nation.  You felt you could be your own independent voice?
Speaker 2: No, because we talked... there were times when protocol-wise we had to find a way to affect it.  We talked about the best candidate from time to time.  And there was ultimately a reality that the best candidate in every good situation--be he Democratic or Republican--was not necessarily the person of your party.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and there were times when we would have to--for example, there were times when there was a promising black candidate forthcoming for the first time in a given discipline.  And we would have to talk about the fact of our commitment that we were part of the total community. Yes, we were part of the Republican Party, but we were part of the total community.  And we would have to discuss a commitment that--you know, when we definitely felt the need to be supportive of a black Democrat, for example.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, were you a part of the National Black Political Assembly back in the seventies at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there was like a big movement here in the state, you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And there was a convention in Gary, and all of that.
Story_ID: 59841
Speaker 1: But, okay.  So, you went to school to get... and you received a...  Where did you go to school to receive your master's degree?
Speaker 2: University of Akron [Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you began a career after that of administration, I guess, working in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  After eleven years in the classroom, then I spent eleven plus years as a principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On the elementary and secondary level.
Speaker 1: Well, it seems... it seems as though you're probably well-prepared to do that, with some of the innovations as a teacher now, you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, what would you--what kind of things did you do as a principal?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that we did was to--when teleconferencing and phone conferencing became... well, when phone conferencing became a reality... I arranged for the children to, at Rankin School [Rankin Elementary School, Akron, Ohio], to interview Alex Haley directly from his home.  And it was interesting and it became very political, because the adults felt that because he was so renowned that it would be inappropriate to have the children (Laughter) do the interviewing.  And I explained that they were culminating the skills they had learned in English, and that they were prepared and everything was in order.  And so, we really had to hold the line to hold the adults off, and let them know this was the kid's show.  And so, he gave us about forty, forty-five minutes of an interview, and said "Hi" to the parents at the end.  (Laughter).  The kids were able to ask... they asked some very insightful questions.  And they had... we had let them come up with their questions ahead of time, you know, so that we could teach them the protocol of the interview process.  But the whole community got excited.  And like I said, everybody was going to push the children aside, (Laughter) because this was an international figure and only grown-ups should be speaking to him directly.  So, whatever it took--and things like that helped, too, to reinforce that they were significant, that they were somebody, that they were valued, and that their opinions and their considerations would be respected by adults and children alike.  Those kinds of experiences--whenever we could come up with something of that nature--you know, that reinforced in the child's mind--
Speaker 1: Yeah, just looking back on that time period, I know there was a considerable drama around "Roots."
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Alex Haley came up with this story in the early seventies [1970s], and they finally put it all in book form.  And then the movie finally comes out.  And it comes out in book form, I guess, around '74' [1974].  And then finally the movie comes around 1977.  There was a lot of excitement about it.  For the first time... and black people are crowded around the set to see it.  White people are crowded around the set to see it.  It broke all the ratings.  And, but the idea that here for the first time we get this black story.  And yet, every black family... you know, people could have told those stories or passed them along to their children.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But yet they really didn't.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Children were often told in those days, you know, "This is grown folks business, you don't need to know," you know, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 59842
Speaker 1: Was there a... were you thinking about all that when you had the children interview Alex Haley?
Speaker 2: We had to deal with feelings.  I remember it was a very emotional time... that children didn't know what to do with their anger, you know, when they came back to school after watching those movies.  You know, they want to know, "Who do I hit?"  (Laughter).  You know, you're just going to let somebody re-count to us that this happened, and I'm not supposed to strike someone because this happened?  So, what week can we schedule a chapter in revenge?"  (Laughter).  I mean, you know, they were out of kilter.  And we really had the staff meeting come together and talk about strategies for talking this out, for explaining that your friends and the people around you were not alive at that time.  You know, we do not transfer the blame.  That was a cruel thing, an inhuman thing that happened at that point in time.  And so, we had to come up with a formula for putting it in perspective for them, and really deal with it and let them talk it out.  Because they really came back, you know, wondering, "Where do I get the ball bat?  Is it my turn now?"  You know, so we had to go there before we could arrive at a point where we said "Let's talk with the author and find out, you know, how this came about and find out some things about his life."  And he was very patient and very grandfatherly.  And that was sort of the frosting on the cake to put it back in perspective, when they actually got to meet him.  Because he was so warm, it was like a fireside chat the way that we did it.
Speaker 1: That's really unique, to have access to him during that time period, because I know he was in great demand.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: There's only one of him, too.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I knew he couldn't afford him, under the circumstances that entertained bringing him.  At that point and time, because he was so popular, every place else...  So, I merely asked.  I mean, you can only get--my mother always taught me, you can only get a yes or no answer.  So, I said, "How about this format?"  And he was very pleased.
Story_ID: 59843
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what other things did you do that stand out in your mind during that period of time?
Speaker 2: I can't immediately recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what... well, let me put it this way.  What... I know that schools all over the country... I can't think of a time when schools weren't under a lot of pressure in the black community since I've been alive.  What were the biggest pressures on your... on your... on you as a principal in a school?  It's a predominantly black school, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Here in Akron [Ohio], I mean in those days?
Speaker 2: The matter of discipline as to what were the appropriate forms of discipline.  They'd not gotten to the point of banning entirely being able to spank children, paddle children.  They had gotten to the point of defining what kinds of paddles were within limits.  You know, the Teachers Union had gotten to be specific in terms of limitations in terms of a witness, in terms of the developmental steps to avoid corporal punishment and those kinds of things.  But discipline... options for and strategies for avoiding getting to the point of discipline were a thing that I spent a lot of time working with teachers on--explaining to them how they psychologically paint children into corners so that they come out profane or so that they come out destroying property or battering another kid... coming to understand how that many times their own conduct sets up the circumstance, and then they want to punish the child because it happened, when it's predictable.  You know, I could demonstrate to them, "You do this, and he's going to do this. And then you're going to want to punish him" (Laughter).  So, we started to work a lot with how do you avoid being the problem, you know?  We had to work with parents in terms of being very... I can use the term strict.  It's a term that was assigned to me very often, because I charged that they should be a partner in this business of getting on with the child's life.  And so, if the parents were frivolous...  Like, I had mothers who said, "Well, he's late forty-five minutes every day because I've never been able to get to my job on time."   You know, we're speaking as though it's a condition of life, (Laughter) instead of a personal self-discipline we've never gotten committed to, you know.  And I'd have to sit down with Mom and said, "Mom, how about we buying an alarm clock?  There's no alarm clock in the house?  And how about we're going to turn it off and get up when it goes off, and get the children up?"  I mean, we start working through a few steps at a time how we're going to get this kid here when school begins, instead--not at the end of math period.
Story_ID: 59844
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give me an example of what a teacher might do that might give the wrong message to a student and be reflected in his behavior later on?
Speaker 2: Well, I had for example a junior high school teacher who would look at a student every morning at approximately ten after 10:00.  I knew to stand in the door facing of the office, that he was going to come around that corner shortly after ten after 10:00 every morning, because it was the beginning of the social studies lesson.  And she had a habit of calling upon him first.  And then she would send a note and say, "He was looking disrespectfully out of the window.  And so since he's not participating, I want him out of class."  And so, about the third time that happened to me, I went through his permanent records to see if there was a clue as to why he might be looking out the window.  And it indicated he had a 1.3 reading level, and this was the seventh grade.  And so, I called the teacher and I said, "Have you checked his record for any frame of reference for how things were going prior to his coming to you, and why he might be looking out the window?"  And she said, "Oh, no, I never let what anybody else said influence me."  And so, I said, "Well, just by virtue of giving you some clues as to how you might end sending him to me daily at ten after 10:00..."  And she said no, she never considered that possibility.  And so, I had him currently tested, and his reading level was 1.3.  That was why he was looking out the window.  After he passed the first picture, he was out of context of what was going on in the lesson.  And she was making no provision, you know, whatsoever for him.  And thereafter, then we came up with a  prescription for having him work at his own reading level, and receive some tutoring so that his reading level could be enhanced.  But just every single day, like I said...  It got so I would stand in the door facing, because I knew he was coming around the corner with the pink card, on the dot.  And if my watch had stopped, I would have known it was ten after 10:00, because she was routinely just reinforcing the negative.  You know, "you're nobody, you're a bungler... you don't care."  And he was a very sensitive child, a very helpful child, obviously wanted to succeed--total frustrated himself about why this book didn't make any sense.
Story_ID: 59845
Speaker 1: So, time and time again I would run upon...  And one of the experiments I did in junior high was to go to Akron Children's Hospital and talk with Dr. Timmons, because they had started an adolescent learning disorders department.  And I said, "I would like to engage in a collaboration.  I would like to take fifteen of the children that are sent to the office most regularly for negative disciplinary related reasons.  I would like to bring them in and have you take a team and check them head to toe to see if there are other reasons, other than plain cussedness, why these children are disruptive and are not being successful.  And he was very excited.  He put together a team of experts that actually did physical and psychological evaluations on them for everything, actually head to toe.  We had to bring him in on Saturday mornings.  The counselor and I got permission to drive the school van to pick them up at their homes, starting like seven o'clock in the morning.  We'd drive them over, play board games with them while their differing appointments were taking place.  When it ended, we had a full profile on each child.  And every one of those children had something that was physically undiagnosed that was the primary cause for their not able to be successful academically.  One child was deaf.  And it was a generic, it was a heredity related illness.  And his mother had never told him, nor had she ever taken him to have his ears checked.  And he was very mild-mannered, and I noticed the kid would come along at the locker in the morning and go like this [makes slapping gesture].  And he would deck him, (laughter), be all over him.  It would take a half dozen of us to pull him off.  And then later, he'd be mild-mannered again.  Well, she was constantly sending him, and he'd been getting suspended through the years for being a constant fighter.  He wasn't a constant fighter, it was the pain caused by whatever was related to this hearing loss when he got thumped in the head.  But, and so the hospital expanded my number to thirty kids.  And so, we ended up with a total profile on thirty students, and were able to then program into what it would really take to turn them around academically.  So, it was those kinds of...  I was always in the quest for how could we expand the numbers to have a successful experience?  How can we really get...?  There are reasons.  They are not just evil, they are not just fighters, quote, unquote.  They're not just profane children.  These are indications of something substantive.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Any other things that you can remember from... any other issues you had to deal with as a principal that you want to talk about?
Speaker 1: Those would be the primary, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So--
Speaker 1: Because I worked for years on those.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 59846
Speaker 1: How was it being the Republican Party Vice Chairman here from '80' [1980] to... for eleven years?
Speaker 2: Well, to the extent that I think my opinion was heard, it created an opportunity for my voice to be heard, for a minority voice to be heard.  I had the opportunity to participate in the screening of many of the judicial appointments prior to recommendations to the Governor and to the President.  It was important for... even if they did not internalize it or did not respond to it positively, it was important for that voice to be there with a constancy, and a voice that carried with it some respect and some reputation of competency.  So, to that extent, I felt I made a significant contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories related to that that you... that stand out that you'd like to tell us?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall at this point.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: The way you're laughing, I think there is.
Speaker 2: No, I don't mean that I'd not like to tell you.  (Laughter).  I mean that I'm drawing a blank in terms of a specific story.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: For the record, let me clarify.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm staying in town after this.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 59847
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let's talk about, I guess the department of... the Metropolitan Housing--
Speaker 2: Authority.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Metropolitan Housing Authority.  Yeah, now how did you become the... you know, tell us how that came about.
Speaker 2: Well, I came from home from an Alpha Kappa Alpha National Conference one summer, and there was an indication that were receiving applications for the position of Executive Director.  And I did not immediately relate to that meaning anything in my life until I started getting calls, and people asking me to consider that they felt I was a natural because I had grown up in public housing.  And because I had had these twenty-two years of experience in the Akron Public Schools working with low-income families, highly successfully, that I should consider that this combination might indeed make me a probable candidate.  And so, I talked with some individuals that I valued as mentors and--both black and white--and made the determination to put my hat in the ring.  There were seventy-six candidates, and I emerged as the successful one.  I remember one of the questions being put to me that was rhetorical, by one of the board members in interviewing me.  He asked how I felt... why I felt I would bring to bear the proper expertise to serve as a Housing Authority Executive Director and I had never done so before.  And I said to him, "Probably with the same confidence that a mayoral candidate or a presidential candidate brings to the fore.  I have this combination of experiences and competencies which tell me there is the probability that I could handle this, and handle this well.  You know, the President never practiced; the Mayor never practiced."  And so, the gentleman sort of put his pen down and (Laughter) had no further questions.  And within a few days, I got the call.
Story_ID: 59848
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about that.  I mean, what was that like?  Because I think the previous administration was Democratic or whatever, and you came in.  And what kind of issues did you have to face?
Speaker 2: Well, not only the issue of blackness, but the issue of being a female.  Because not only on a local level was it interesting to be received in that setting.  I would run into situations because I...  It called for a lot of traveling on a national basis to affiliate with the Council of National... large public housing authorities, etc., etc.  And generally, I would travel with at least one other administrator.  Like, it might be legal counsel or the vice president of finance.  And there would be two of us who would come into a setting.  And someone would say, "I'd like you to meet the new Executive Director of AMHA [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority]."  And say, if you and I were together, the person would immediately reach for your hand.  (Laughter).  This happened to us all the time that no one ever guessed that it could possibly be the tall black woman.  No one ever guessed.  And so, that happened throughout the whole six and a half years.  When I first arrived even on the national scene at a conference, someone made the joke... made the comment, "Why would a little schoolteacher think that she could succeed in public housing?"  Now six and a half years later by the time I was retiring, then they were angry because I was leaving because I'd become one of the leading lobbying voices before the Congress.  Then they were upset, and I said, "Well, this little old schoolteacher is moving out now.  Remember you thought this wasn't going to work."  So, on all fronts--on the front of sexuality, on the front of race--from many perspectives there was the challenge.  Because it is an autonomous political sub-division, and that was the climate in which I came in that could not be changed suddenly.  And so, the fact that I had the ability to make multi-million dollar decisions day to day, and to really have the authority to run the Housing Authority, notwithstanding that the board was, you know, a governing board.  As long as I was producing... as long as I was attracting the millions of dollars that were needed to run it, and producing the proper profits and enhancing the image of just what that housing authority was, then the board was pleased.  And so, we were able to have a successful administration.
Story_ID: 59849
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of changes did you feel compelled to make in the administration of public housing here in the City of Akron?  I mean what had it come to since you, since the days that you lived in public housing as a child?  And what did you have to change to try to make it better?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the first things I had to do was to establish a system for our... a formal system for pest control.  We had a very informal system for that.  And that was major, in that we had something like 9,000 units of housing in six cities and two townships.  And so, we did develop a full-scale program of that.  One of the things--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  The scope of what you were doing was not just in Akron [Ohio] then.  It was in other cities?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  They were all in the county.  But it was six cities and two townships.
Speaker 1: So it was Canton--
Speaker 2: Most of the others were smaller.
Speaker 1: Smaller.
Speaker 2: Were smaller than Canton [Ohio].  They were some of the smaller townships and villages, but it still made up nearly 10,000 units of housing.
Story_ID: 59850
Speaker 1: I had to change the thinking of staff to understand...  We found when we had job postings, it could be a posting for say a Section-8 manager.  And everybody from the person who greased the screws to someone who was over-qualified (Laughter) would qualify... would apply.  And so, I would hear folks say things like--and because you had a rather limited number of folk who were serving in responsible positions who were blacks--who at the same time had the proper tenure and the proper competencies--when they, all things being equal, were the best candidate they got the position.  And so, these folks who would apply, no matter what their competencies were, started spreading the word that I was employing--that I was promoting too many minorities.  And so, it was my practice that whenever a rumor flowed, I took it up in the monthly meeting with staff.  And I met with every level of staff every month.  Everybody employed there had direct access to me once a month.  And so, I simply said, "I understand there is a rumor that I'm promoting too many black people."  There was a nervous shuffle in the room.  (Laughter).  And I said, "You must read the posting and understand that there are a set of competencies that come with every posting.  If the level of your skills is sweeping, you probably should not applying to be the computer program tech.  However, if you aspire to become the computer program tech, I'm going to establish that we're going to have a reimbursement--tuition reimbursement program, so that you can get back in school.  Because there are obviously a number of you... and I'm glad for that, who want to become more than you've ever become.  And so, this is how you get the tuition money."  You know, we gave reimbursement for A's and B's.  And so, about nine of them ultimately went back and got their degrees while I was there under that movement.  And so I said, "Always understand..."  And I said, "I will probably tell you if you're really worried... I'll tell you on the day that I need to cap it, because I proudly promoted too many blacks." (Laughter).  We never had that discussion... that discussion again.  Because I was always able to demonstrate to them... I talked about it.  It was not a secret what slots were coming up.  It was not a secret what competencies they called for.  If you had them, your name went in the hat and got decent consideration.  But it just happened that a whole lot of people who had been passed over, were already standing there with managerial abilities and expertise and so forth.  And so, we were able to make that staff much more diverse.  We were able to train people the price you pay to get where you want to go in life.
Story_ID: 59851
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other issues that you all faced during that period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh, we faced lots of issues.  We were dealing with--there were 20,000 residents.  We faced lots of issues.
Speaker 1: Did you have any high-rise housing here in Akron [Ohio] at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But ours isn't as high as it is in the big cities.  You know, we don't have... fortunately we had more that are of the low-rise and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in cities like St. Louis [Missouri] and Chicago [Illinois], they're destroying public housing and you know, destroying some of them because they felt they had deteriorated beyond, or stigmatized beyond the... anybody's ability to do anything about it.
Speaker 2: Plus, in those extreme high-rises when the elevators would break down, then the people couldn't get to their upper floors because it was more than a normal human being could traffic, to go that far.  And one of the things I found... we'd been blessed in that we had excellent public housing.  And in the course of my tenure, all of the oldest of our housing stock we were able to re-hab.  So, all of it had been rehabbed by the time I retired from AMHA [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority].  When we would visit national conferences, say, in Chicago or New York [New York City, New York] or something, and I'd be talking with my peer in that setting and say, "You know, are you going to take me on a tour to see your housing?"  And they said, "No."  They'd say, "I'll take you to lunch.  I'll take you to dinner."  (Laughter).  They would not show their housing stock.  And that was a routine thing; most of them would not show you their housing stock.  And sometimes when we were applying for funds and the HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] people would come here, you know, and I'd say, "You've got to do something for us so that we can do 'X.'  And he said, "Well, that's really not so bad compared to the norm."  I said, "For Akron it's not an appropriate quality of life for people here."  And so, sometimes the conditions in those other cities worked against us, and made us have to lobby that much harder to get what was needed here.
Story_ID: 59852
Speaker 1: So, so, it's been historically better?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You've managed and maintained here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as it has been in the past?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.  The Human Services program for the tenants in terms of the things that were offered them...  I also met with the tenant councils once a month, so that they had direct access.  They had their own travel program, and that was started back in the days when Dorothy Jackson was Human Services Director.  But there were many services that we offered above and beyond, that made the residents, you know, feel important--teaching them governance and their councils about parliamentary procedure, and how to function in terms of their meetings to accomplish what they needed to accomplish.  It wasn't left to chance.  And so, all of that--you know, plus their having real input and seeing that they had real input, and having direct access to me.  Because there were those who feared for my going in and about developments at night, if there were a night activity, you know.  They said, "Aren't you afraid you'll get mugged or something untoward would happen?"  And I said, "No, because I suspect the residents will protect me first against whatever might occur.  The probability is that my rapport with them is such that they would see to protect me."
Story_ID: 59853
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you all have a--or did you have... or do you have a gang problem in Akron [Ohio] associated with public housing?
Speaker 2: That began to surface just as I was retiring.  We started getting indications of drug trafficking and gangs surfacing.  Because then we started--we steeped up the security, the Housing Authority security, and the relationship with the Akron Police Department and the Sheriff's Department.  But that was just on the fringes.  It really came into a real groundswell.  I had moved on to the University [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio] by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is it a real problem now in public housing with gangs?
Speaker 2: Yes, it has been.  They have, you know, had some major drug busts and problems where drug dealers would move in and pay a resident to let them handle distribution out of their units.  There's been that kind of thing, and roving gangs.  You know, they've had to do some major things.  One of the main deterrents has been-- and, but sometimes it works against families--that there are innocent members of the family that's... you know, the family gets evicted if that kind of trafficking or those activities are associated with specific units.  Then the people are required to...to suffer eviction.
Story_ID: 59854
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you come to leave your position as executive director?
Speaker 2: I retired in about 1987, and went on to the University of Akron after that point.  I had originally projected I would stay five and a half years.  I stayed six and a half years.  I projected that because the pendulum swinging from Republican back to Democrat would have occurred in that period of time.  And while we had a very successful administration, there was the reality that that is a major institution in our community economically.  And so, I had anticipated, I was blessed to be successful there a year beyond what I had projected when I projected accepting the position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 59855
Speaker 1: Now, so you were invited to the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The president, then president Bill Muse [William Van Muse] was looking for an interim director of Minority Affairs, Assistant to the President, Director of Minority Affairs while they conducted a search.  And so, he invited me to the position, a cabinet level position.  And I served in that position about three years.  In the meantime, we changed presidents.  President Peggy Gordon Elliott was president, and she devised the position of Executive Director of Minority Development.  I had started to do some development activities in association with our... getting our gallery back once black history started.  And she initially sent me to see what dollars were out there on a national basis.  And the response back from the corporations was "Let us see the city of Akron [Ohio] supporting this concept and that you have some corporate support and in an on-going way, and community... some demonstration of community support.  And so, I got an endowment program established and got that up to $60,000.  In the meantime, President Elliott concluded that I really needed to be able to do that full time, to raise funds for minority initiatives on campus, period.  Because what happened was, as you know, you get grant money for a limited time.  And the federal administration changes, or state administration changes, and your program is out the window until someone comes in and says, "I'm bringing grapes, and giving money for grapes," and you start the cycle all over again.  And she said, "It's time to stop this cycle being tied to who is in public office; that we need a full time solicitor of funds, development officer, who will help bring in the funds for minority initiatives so that they remain stable.  And so, then I moved into the position of Executive Director of Minority Development for the next three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that when, I mean did you retire from that position?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 59856
Speaker 1: And you still remained active in a number of...  I've got a sheet here of different organizations--Urban League... everybody, you know, since... the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]... (Laughter), a lot of organizations.
Speaker 2: Yes.  With Alpha Kappa Alpha, four years ago we made it a part of our national constitution that you must be certified in leadership development for upward mobility in the organization.  And I was appointed as a Regional Coordinator of Leadership Development Training for the Great Lakes Region, which is a five state region, and helped... provided leadership in developing a curriculum and mobilizing a team to train for certification purposes. Well, we trained over a thousand, certified over a thousand women in this past four-year administration.  So, that's how I got into that.  And there was a spin-off of some of the other national appointments that I'd had on national committees with the sorority.  And I loved that, because I'll always be a teacher at heart.  And the curriculum design, I love to do as well.  And so, that was... that was a natural for me, in that experience.
Story_ID: 59857
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In terms of curriculum design, I know you've run two examples that show--I mean can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Right.  The Dr. Shirla R. McClain Gallery of Akron's Black History and Culture is housed on the University of Akron's campus [Akron, Ohio] in the Buckingham Center.  We've had the program there for the past six years, and it's really a spin-off of activities that began as early as 1985.  The gallery concept came into being because our then State Representative Vernon Sykes went to President Muse [William Van Muse] at that time and indicated that he felt the University should provide the leadership in establishing some permanent archive for the contributions of Akron's blacks.  And the president agreed, and gave him latitude to recommend a blue ribbon committee which included both staff and community.  We did a study for about a year on available resources, and found that there weren't really any that were curriculum driven.  There were museums, and even at that, at best, limited sources even if you looked all over the whole nation.  And so, we decided to design our own concept.  And we ultimately competed for the building in which the gallery is currently housed.  We had a steering committee of community folk.  That endowment that we got started, we asked about forty blacks to make a commitment to contribute a thousand dollars to get that started.  And we let them do an installment plan, which is a part of the culture.  It worked really well.  (Laughter).  You had to realize what the realities are, to ask somebody to do something that's doable.  And then of course they're very proud of themselves because there are plaques outside that wall that show who got this going.  And so, for the past six years we have been providing a formal curriculum program for the third-graders in the Akron public schools in partnership with the Akron public schools.  We've had assistance from McDonald's Children's Charities... the Walgreen Drug Company.  The Beacon Journal permitted us to place an intern to work with them in their archives to help bring up some of the things that we initially needed.  But we have provided this formal curriculum wherein the third-graders come on a two-part field trip each year.  They go to Old Stone School, which is the original one-room schoolhouse; walk up the street, come through the Business College concourse, have sack lunch, and then have a formal lesson and tour of the gallery.  The archives are obtained from local citizenry who donate... they probably donate at least a third to half.  The others, they loan to us.
Story_ID: 59858
Speaker 1: Please tell, tell me about how people are responding to the archives in terms of... and how you go about getting materials for people.
Speaker 2: Alright.  It's been a major job in terms of educating individuals, because everyone sells themselves short in terms of the fact that he has valuable clues as to how history proceeded.  When we call someone and say, you know, "We'd like to have your... we'd like to come over and visit and see what kind of archives you have."  And they'll say, "Well, I just have a bunch of junk in the basement.  It's in boxes and things.  It belonged to my great-granddaddy and, you know, it's just some old stuff."  And you have to go and sit down with them and help them understand that they have valuable things.  You know, sometimes they'll pull out a jeweled sword from the Knights of Pythias or, you know, really tremendous kinds of things in terms of books that are collectors' items; in terms of maps; even in terms of their photographs and the frames they're in.  They have no sense of how valuable and what important links they are.  And they always say, you know, "I'm just a, we're just an ordinary family.  You don't really want this stuff."  And they don't understand that the stuff is history, it is the archives; it is the story, the missing pieces that we're trying to insert into the context of history.  So, that education of getting them to trust and get excited...  And most of the time, the first time they understand what they have, is when you explain it to them in the middle of their basement or their attic or their living room--(simultaneous)
Story_ID: 59859
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- going through it.
Speaker 2: You try to conceptualize what a history maker is?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And what is it you were--
Speaker 1: Well, they always say, you know, "But we're just ordinary."  And I said, "History makers are ordinary people who either make the right choice, take the right action at that point in time... and it impacts the lives of thousands upon thousands of people.  It's not like somebody said "Today, I'm going to be a history maker."  I said, you know, "By virtue of... you're probably a history maker when we check to see what your contributions have been in your church, you know.  You were the person that laid the cornerstone on such and such a date... at such and such a date.  Every day, we're impacting...  We even explained to little... to children, how they have made history.  They're doing things that never happened before in their community or in their classroom or in their Sunday School room.  And so, this lesson of making folk understand that each of us holds some piece of the key...  Don't just discard as junk what grandparents and forbearers passed on to you that's in the attic.  If you're not sure, let us back up the van and take a look at it and analyze it and tell you, you know, help you to realize what you have here.  Because many times, there have just been room after room of things.  Sometimes we had to get an extra van when we'd really seen what kinds of valuables and things--newspapers back in the early 18, 1900's--things that folks had never seen before that they just thought they should call the trash man to haul away.  And they're the missing pieces of this history that gives credibility.  And I explain to them, it helps--for example, university scholarship students...  When I award them scholarships and say, "You can become anything you want to be," sometimes they do stop and say, you know, "Now, I want to believe you, Miss Purnell.  But I don't really see many people playing these roles you tell me that I'm going to be welcome to play in society."  And sometimes I wonder, are we really pressing... have we paid enough dues to want this equity in life we're talking about?  And so, when we invite them in the gallery and we start walking through the Howard Forts and Art Minsons [HM] and the Judge Roulhac [Hon. Joseph D. Roulhac, HM] and the Dorothy Jacksons [HM]--and the folks who plugged in their contribution in their context in time, it makes them feel a sense of credibility.  Because there are even, even in the brightest of your college students today, I find that they do not have this.  They're not really sure that equity is something we're deserving of--that we've been key players in the past; that we should say, you know, leave us in the full mix of life.
Story_ID: 59860
Speaker 1: Do you think that maybe sometimes we--because we are so ignorant, I guess, of our history--as a whole nation, not just black people--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that oftentimes we, black people, buy into the myth of inferiority?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because they don't have information to offset it with.  And that's the whole reason for our operating the gallery concept.  And that's the whole reason we were pleased when the Beacon Journal discovered that we dealt year round with a whole set of information they never had access to.  They were doing the Black History Month limited national perspective.  And a reporter wandered in one day to our exhibit hall.  And that's when the partnership came forward.  And she said, "Can we put all of these pieces together?  And can we, would you mind if we publish it to the entire distribution area of the Akron Beacon Journal, which is about six counties, 39,000 families.  Would you mind?"  And I said, "Well, I'll go ask the steering committee."  And they shoved me back to give the "yes", the "yes" answer.  (Laughter).  And so, now we're starting to see more people come in who don't necessarily look like me, bringing their children, because they got a snippet of it, you know, in the excerpts that appeared in the paper.  And they come to see this, and they're dumbfounded as to why they did not have access as whites... did not have access to these contributions and this ongoing valued membership in the community.  So, it's had that effect, not only for our own children and our own adults to realize what was missing, but for whites to be shocked to find out, you know, that Howard Fort is an Eagle Scout... "I thought whites were Eagle Scouts," you know.  And then--they are paying attention and bringing their children from private schools to tour and to realize that these contributions are, you know, forthcoming.
Story_ID: 59861
Speaker 1: Okay, you seem very excited about this.  And do you see, what do you see yourself doing in the future?  I know you're working on this project.  But what else do you see yourself doing in the future?  Because you're still young, though retired.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, we'll see where it takes us.  The opportunities are discovered as we stay active, and we'll see.  You know, we have a long way to go with this.  We have a long way to go with not having to do it as an appendage of the public school system.  Real textbooks that have contextual history, that's yet before us.  So, it's not like we've achieved the goals and we move on to something else.  We're still in the process of getting the world to say in the context of history, let's place our history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But personally, what do you see yourself...  Do you have any goals that you want to achieve, or another plan?
Speaker 2: I think I'll know when I get there.  I've been blessed that the major directions my life has taken were not specific directions I was walking toward.  I was not walking toward the Housing Authority [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority].  I was not walking toward the cabinet position at the University [University of Akron, Akron, Ohio].  I was not walking toward the regional leadership position with the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  I was not walking toward becoming chairman of the Board of Trustees at my church as the first black... first female in the history of my black Baptist church, Mount Olive Baptist Church.  I was blessed to be, to move in that direction; that there has always been at the right point in time, there has always been another sense of where my next fit is.
Speaker 1: Do you see all those things as your legacy basically?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 59862
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I know you're still young and everything, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a risk taker, as a caring person who made a difference, and who realized that every day of our lives we have the opportunity to make a difference.  And every day that we're blessed with life, we should be about seeking to make that constructive difference.  There has always been someone to give me hope.  You know, it was parents [Millard Walter and Nannette Victoria Johnson] for many years.  But even beyond parents there has always been some mentor, or someone on the byway with a note of encouragement or a word of encouragement, or being supportive of something that I was committed to, to encourage me on and to cause me to become more than I have ever been.  And I in turn am trying to do that same thing in the lives that I touch.  And so, I don't think I'll ever go out of business, because there'll always be that need.  But there's the joy in that.  Because I tell folks, you know, I have lots of trophies and plaques, etc.  But the one reward that I value the most in terms of all my contributions, is the fact that over 600 black students graduated from the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] with a Janet Purnell W. Howard Fort Scholarship, because I was asked the simple question one day, "How do we get more black students at this university?"  And I said, "Afford them the same resources you afford their white counterparts.  And within a couple of weeks, that endowment was begun.  And it changed the lives of a minimum of 600 students, who are now practicing professionals out in the world.  And that is the trophy that I bear in my heart.
Speaker 1: That answer was so simple, yet so powerful.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Story_ID: 59863
Speaker 1: Alright.  This is a picture of me in my capacity as Director Executive of the Housing Authority [Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority].  I was conducting a regular monthly staff meeting when two sheriff's deputies, representing the Akron Cancer Society's Jail and Bail program, came in and officially placed me under arrest before my staff removed me from the meeting by cruiser and took me to a central location in a downtown hotel.  And my staff had three to four hours to raise money to pay my bail.  And they managed to raise $1,095 in that period of time.  And then a staff member, one of the administrators, brought the monies down to reclaim me, and I was permitted to go free. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What year?  I think it's on there, right?  Ninety...
Speaker 1: I think, does it say '94' [1994]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-Four, [1994], okay.
Speaker 1: About 1994.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the earliest baby picture of Janet Purnell, born in the city of Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: An elementary school picture.  In a large family, moms did the curling of the hair.  And that was the Shirley Temple style hairdo in the elementary school years.
Speaker 2: Next, please.
Speaker 1: This is my senior high graduation picture, graduating from North High School here in Akron.
Speaker 2: Did anybody try to recruit you as a model in those days?
Speaker 1: No.  I did a little hat modeling in my early college days because one of my best friends and sorority sisters was a milliner.  This is a picture of me posing with then president Peggy Gordon, Dr. Peggy Gordon Elliott at the University of Akron and the Assistant to the President, Director of Minority Affairs, Jeffrey, Dr. Jeffrey Wallace during one of our public receptions related to our Gallery of Akron's Black History and Culture.
Speaker 2: Year, please?  Do you know the year this was taken?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's in the late nineties [1990s], right, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes, it would have been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here I'm posing with the current president of the University of Akron, Dr. Luis Perinza, and Art Minson [HM] at another of our public events associated with opening of new exhibits for the gallery, Dr. Shirla McClain's Gallery of Akron's Black History and Culture.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a picture of three ladies during the course of our Women's Day at the Mount Olive Baptist Church.  I think I got that in inadvertently.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Sorry about that.  This is the ribbon-cutting for the official naming of the Gallery of Akron's Black History and Culture.  It was given the name of the Dr. Shirla R. McClain's Gallery of Akron's Black History and Culture.  Standing to my right in the picture is Henry McClain, the widower of the late Dr. Shirla McClain.  And assisting me in the cutting is President Proenza of the University of Akron, and Dr. Jeffrey Wallace.  Dr. McClain was the first person ever to chronical Akron's black history in her doctoral dissertation, and was a primary consultant and member of our steering committee until her death.
Speaker 2: For the camera, do you have all the content?  Do you have the spellings and years that you want?  When was this?
Speaker 1: I don't know all the dates of these things by heart.
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: That would have been in the nineties [1990s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This would have been in about 1987.  It's the groundbreaking for the Vincent Lobello Lane, a family development.  And it was the first of the new developments built during my administration as Executive Director of Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority.  And assisting me there are various members of the board.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here I am posing with William Lewis, who was the former Director of Black Studies at the University of Akron.  He retired a year ago.  He is standing talking with me.  And looking on is Dr. Jeffrey Wallace, again, at a public function having to do with the Gallery of Akron's Black History.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the campaign brochure for my late husband, Norman Purnell, who ran for 4th Ward Councilman.  And we are shown there with our eldest son, Alan.  And this would have been back in the late 1960's.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: Here I am shown presiding at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Freedom Fund Dinner, co-presiding with Billy Soul, who was a former radio-TV personality in the city of Akron.
Speaker 2: That sounds like a personality, Billy Soul.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Billy Soul, S-O-U-L?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In this photo, I am receiving my Life Membership Certificate to the Akron Branch NAACP from Mrs. Medgar Evers during the course of another Freedom Fund Dinner.  And to my left is Attorney Ed Gilbert, a member of the Black Membership Committee.
Speaker 2: You said Gilbert?
Speaker 1: G-I-L-B-E-R-T.
Speaker 2: Alright.  And what year is this?
Speaker 1: That would have been late nineties.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: Here I'm posing with the President, former University of Akron President, Peggy Gordon Elliott, on the occasion of a Purnell Fort Scholar reception at which we would present our outstanding minority scholars--the only positive public setting in which minority scholars were ever presented, on the University's campus.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: In this photo we are presenting the Minority Business Networking Expo.  And seated to my right is Marla Gibbs who was a guest.  This occurred at the John S. Knight Center.  And we were doing this on an annual basis in the mid-1990's where we would feature minority businesspersons and they could network and present their goods and services to the Greater Akron community.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This is one of the programs, the cover to a program for a public meeting introducing the gallery theme, "The Playing Fields: Arts, Sports and Entertainment,"  and features a young woman whose name escapes me now, but was a very talented musician back in the mid-1900's in the Greater Akron area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is this the date on this?  Or is it--
Speaker 1: I don't see it outside, it might be inside.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It must be in here somewhere, hold on.
Speaker 1: Is it on the inside?  No?  But that would have been around mid-nineties.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a newspaper article that discusses the project in which we recorded the video bios of eight elderly black Akronites and the evolving program of the Gallery being established at the University of Akron.  And it explains to the community what the project does in terms of preserving the black experiences.  And in this case, the theme was about black educators.  And so, it discusses various aspects of the program and its curriculum component and so forth, and the fact that we used students to do the interviewing process and students to do the videography for the individual interviews on the video histories.  Those students helped record the voices of history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Here I am appointed to a nine-year term as a new member of the Board of Trustees of the University of Akron.  Then president, Dominic Guzzetta, is extending his congratulations as my husband looks on.  And the chairman of the board, Attorney Rosen, is on the other side of me.  And interestingly enough, beyond us, outside of the frame of the picture were some picketers holding signs protesting apartheid, who stood up and staged a demonstration just as it was time to swear me in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when was that?  This is 19--
Speaker 2: It's about--
Speaker 1: Nineteen Seventy [1970]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-Eight [1978], yeah.  Because I didn't realize it was for nine years when I accepted the appointment (Laugher) until the Governor congratulated me, and said something about nine years.  And I called my husband, and he said, "Well, how did it go?"  I said, "I think I married him."  (Laughter).  And he said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "The only covenant I made that long was marriage."  (Laughter).  Let's see.  Oh, this is the awarding of my honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters degree from the University of Akron, which I received in, I believe that was 1987.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is a formal picture of me in my Board of Trustees cap and gown upon my becoming the first female Chairman of the Board of Trustees at the University of Akron.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a formal photo of me at my desk in my capacity of Executive Director of the Akron Metropolitan Housing Authority.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That would have been a photo in the early 1960's while I served as a classroom teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of the late Norman Purnell, my husband for 39 years.  And he at that time was serving as a Municipal Court referee in Small Claims Court in the Akron Municipal Court system as a practicing attorney, for at least 39 years in the Akron area.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Here I'm posing with my grandmother, Louise Sloan, on the occasion of her 104th birthday.  She lived to be 106, and lived independently through being 106 within a couple of months of her death.
Speaker 1: Okay, this one here?
Speaker 2: And this is on the occasion of my retirement from the University of Akron... that the women administrators and other friends gave me a luncheon.  And I posed there with some friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is the formal wedding picture cake cutting period at my wedding... marriage to Norman Purnell.
Speaker 1: What year is that?
Speaker 2: That was 1957.
