Story_ID: 102590
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Hugh Price, H-U-G-H, P-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you use your middle name?  I know you have one.
Speaker 2: Rarely.  I use the middle initial when I sign my name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't use it.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 22, 1941.  Place of birth is Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a senior advisor in the law firm of Piper Rudnick LLP, which means that I am helping them to develop clients and co-chairing a practice group that focuses on non-profit philanthropic organizations.  I'm not a practicing lawyer.  I left the law a long, long, time ago, and I'm too old to take the bar exam.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  September 14, 2004, or is it the 15th?
Speaker 1: It's the 15th.
Speaker 2: September 15, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in New York City, in the offices of Piper Rudnick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102591
Speaker 1: Now, before we get into depth there are five People Magazine-ish type questions we're compelled to ask, and they only take a short time to answer; they're lightweight questions.  The first one is, Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have, I guess, sky blue; Caribbean, sea blue, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Berkshires [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep on truckin'.
Speaker 1: Okay, like R. Crumb [Robert Crumb]. (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 102592
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, let me ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Charlotte Gwendolyn Schuster Price.  C-H-A-R-L-O-T-T-E, Gwendolyn, G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, Schuster, which is her maiden name, S-C-H-U-S-T-E-R, and Price, last name, P-R-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is October 6, 1912.  Her place of birth was probably West Haven, Connecticut; either New Haven or West Haven, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: We can go back to the Revolutionary War.  One of her ancestors, and therefore my ancestors, was a man by the name of Nero Hawley.   He fought in the American Revolution as part of the unit out of Trumbull, Connecticut.  My mother and her sister did a lot of work tracing that connection.  A grandson of Nero's was married to the daughter of George Latimer, who was a slave who escaped from Massachusetts to Virginia in the late 19--excuse me--the late 1840s, and whose case became a cause celebre in the Abolitionist Movement.  George Latimer was the subject of a re-capture attempt by his slave owner, who came north from Virginia to Boston [Massachusetts] to try to re-capture him.  And the abolitionists like William Lloyd Garrison rallied around his cause and prevented the re-capture, and there was a Latimer Society created coming out of that.  He was a bit of a celebrity.  Latimer had several children, including my great-grandmother, Margaret Latimer, who ended up marrying one of Nero Hawley's--I think it was either grandsons or great-grandsons.  Another of Latimer's children who was the brother of my great-grandmother was Lewis Latimer, the celebrated inventor.  So, you know, we can go back to the American Revolution on one side of the family, my mother's side, and back to the Civil War, and part of the Civil War on the other side.  And we haven't invested much energy in going back beyond George Latimer.  And we have some information about his parents, but then we can bring it forth from them.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you know about his parents?  I'm nosy now, so--
Speaker 2: About George Latimer's?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not much.  I've just, in reading about him, I got the names of his parents, which I'd never seen before.  But I, you know, we know a fair amount about George Latimer.  And Kareem Abdul-Jabbar has written about both George and Lewis Latimer.  Some of the biographies of Lewis Latimer have information about George as well.  And the case that attracted so much attention in the Abolitionist Movement also gathered the attention of the poet, John Greenleaf Whittier, who wrote a poem about George Latimer's escape.  It's called "From Massachusetts to Virginia."
Story_ID: 102593
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.  Now, did your mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] talk about growing up?  Did she talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up in New Haven, Connecticut, or actually West Haven, Connecticut.  And, yeah, she talked about it quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were, well, what did she say about growing up?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  My mother was the youngest of ten children, a big sprawling family.  And she said she was born in 1912.  Some of the most vivid recollections, unfortunately, have to do with the tension over color that erupted in her family.  She had several of her siblings cross over, in the vernacular of the time, to live as white.  Some of the children were very fair-skinned, and some were swarthier.  And so she lost contact with several of her siblings as a child, and never much re-established contact with them.  And as a result of that, there are least four households of aunts or uncles and their children, who are my first cousins, that I've never met in my life out here abroad in the land somewhere, although many of them are deceased.  So, it would be their successor generations.  And there was some confusion in my grandparents' minds about how to treat their children.  They, in some respects were probably trying to pass, and they often wouldn't acknowledge their browner children if they ran into them in public.  Particularly, my grandfather [Augustus Schuster] was like that.  In the late 1940s, my grandmother [Cora Schuster] joined one of her daughters in crossing over to live as white, and so I lost all contact with my grandmother in the late forties.  It was very wrenching for my mother to lose direct contact with her mother.  They corresponded a lot, but rarely saw each other.  Occasionally, there would be these family reunions in New York, and various branches of the family would gather in the hotel, and they wouldn't speak to one another in the lobby.  They wouldn't speak to one another on the elevator, and they'd only open up once they were behind closed doors.  So, I grew up in that kind of tension.  In 1963, I was living with my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] in New Haven, Connecticut while I was in law school.  And one of my mother's sisters, who was one of the supposedly brown children was living in New Haven as well, with her family.  And when my grandmother, who had crossed over as white, died in 1963, the daughter she lived with brought her up to New Haven and buried her before she let any of the supposedly brown children know that their mother had died.  So, I have some very wrenching memories.  And for me, its light stuff, compared to what my mother went through and what my father went through.  My father was a very brown-skinned man, dashingly handsome, very brown-skinned.  And he caught a lot of grief from her parents when he was dating her.  So I saw up close, and I heard the grief over a lot of the confusion in this country about color, the angst in this country about color, and how it sort of ripped families apart.  It's a very, very sad story.  And I still have to this day some first cousins living out there who I don't have any contact with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think a lot of people read about these stories, but they really don't know--
Speaker 2: They have no idea how much pain it causes.  I had, one of my mother's brothers showed up in Washington when I was in high school.  And he's a very Caucasian-looking man.  He came to my dad [Kline Price, Sr.]'s office, my dad's medical practice.  And my father had an occasional white patient, so they didn't think that much of it.  And this fellow, during the examination, asked "How's your wife?"  My dad said, "Who the hell are you to ask that?"  (Laughter).  And it turns out that was one of these long lost brothers who had crossed over years ago.  And he wanted to come visit my mother, and my father wouldn't let him in the house.  He just said, "You know, you left the family.  Your mere appearance will pull the scab off of these wounds again." So, but I insisted on seeing him, because I'd never seen one of these uncles who had crossed over.  And I went down to the bus station in Washington, D.C. on New York Avenue and met him.  And we had a brief conversation, then he got on a bus and disappeared.  That's the only time I ever saw him.
Speaker 1: How many of her brothers and sisters did this?
Speaker 2: I think there were four out of ten.  Well, one sister--well, maybe it was three out of ten.  I know of one sister and two brothers for sure.  And one sister died when she was very young.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now did you, on the other hand, I mean, did, how did this light-skinned family fare in the black community?
Speaker 2: Which family?
Speaker 1: Your family.
Speaker 2: My family did very well, as did many, many families that stayed put.  I mean, one of the ironies is that, you know, we were, I mean my mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] was fair-skinned and my father [Kline Price, Sr.] was brown-skinned.  So, there was no way for them to pass as a couple, obviously.  My father became a physician and had an extraordinarily successful career.  They lived at peace with themselves, and never feared detection.  So, they weren't afraid of their shadows.  A lot of the folks who crossed over, I'm sure were afraid of their shadows.
Story_ID: 102594
Speaker 1: I mean, it's interesting.  There's a comparable story on my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price]'s side.  My wife is related to [HM] Shirlee Haizlip, who wrote the book, "The Sweeter the Juice [: A Family Memoir in Black and White]," and is [HM] Jewelle Taylor Gibbs' sister.  And a similar thing happened in that family, where Shirlee and Jewelle's mother remained in the black community; she had no choice.  But one of, I think her sister crossed over, and they found her living in a trailer park.  And Jewelle and Shirley's and Patty [Patricia Gibbs]'s mother [Margaret Morris] led a glorious life as the wife of a distinguished minister who lived in a Tudor mansion in New Haven [Connecticut]. So, I think a lot of the people who crossed over were so afraid of detection that they ended up compromising their own possibilities.  One of my mother's brothers was educated at either Howard University Dental School or Medical School.  And he basically disowned the degree, and I don't think ever really practiced, because he couldn't put Howard University up there on the wall and be able to explain that to white patients.  So, there were a lot of compromises.  I mean, in one sense I understand why people might have made that choice in 1900 and 1910 in the face of lynching and rampant Jim Crow discrimination.  But they couldn't see over the horizon, and I can't fault them for not being able to see over the horizon.  But they paid a dearer price, as far as I'm concerned, by crossing over than those who stayed put.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Because I think it's been romanticized in movies like "Imitation of Life" and novels--that the person that crosses over actually has this material success and societal success, you know, which is much different from what they would have had had they remained black.  But what you're saying is actually--
Speaker 1: Well, it depends on whether they could come to terms with it, or whether they were haunted by it.  I mean, it's fascinating to read that Carol Channing has revealed that her father was African-American.
Speaker 2: Right, that's something that recently in the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She was able to pull it off, and maybe she didn't even know.  What I'm encouraged by is the number of people with mixed heritages, and therefore, people of color who are celebrities today who say "Yeah, I'm this, yeah, I'm that.  I'm not denying anything, y'all deal with it, I'm moving on."  (Laughter).  "I've got a career, I've got dreams."  And you read about the Vin Diesels of the world, and Derek Jeter, and Mariah Carey--all of those folks who are saying to the world, "This doesn't matter to me.  And if it matters to you, it's your problem, but I'm moving on."  I think that's healthy, as long as they're not in denial about who they are.  It was the folks in the prior generation who were in denial about who they were, because of the way race was handled in this country.  And I think those who couldn't come to terms with it, and those who tried to hide behind it paid a very dear price.
Story_ID: 102595
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any specific stories in your family of anyone who's tried to come back after doing that?
Speaker 2: Well, there were relatives who would occasionally reconnect.  But they wouldn't leave their addresses.  So, they'd want to call.  And after I became the head of the [National] Urban League, one of my cousins, one of my first cousins, whose family had crossed over, called and wanted to reconnect.  But he never wanted to reconnect in a way that made it clear to me that if I went out to where he lived, that he would let me know where he lived.  It was always on his terms that he wanted to reconnect.  Some of the people have tried to reach my mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] through me.  They'll send cards to her, but with no address on them. (Laughter).  So, over the years, there are folks who want to try to find out where the rest of the family is, and want to try to fill in that missing branch on the family tree, but they don't want to be discovered.  They don't want you to know how to get in touch with them.  So, as far as I'm concerned, those are all non-people in my estimation.  They made a choice.   The choice was wrenching for them, and it was wrenching for us.  They don't, they barely exist in my estimation as far as I'm concerned.  I'm not curious about them, I don't want to meet them.  They're technically family, but they're not, I don't want to be hard about it, but I'm really not terribly curious about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, nobody actually ever came back.  They reconnect, but they don't really come back.
Speaker 2: They connect--my mother's had some contact with them, because they're closer to her, you know.  She has had some contact with the husband of a deceased sister who came back.  And I've met them, but they then, you know, disappeared again.  And it's very clear that you're not going to be invited to their homes.  And that's fine, because I'm not interested.
Speaker 1: That's really something.
Speaker 2: It's cold.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Only in this country.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the coldest thing is to have your mother die and have her buried, and not even be told about it.  When that happened in 1963, I said, okay, I see what the deal is.  And both my brother and I have this attitude.  "Y'all made that choice.  If you're going to do that kind of thing to my mother, and to us, and to her sisters, fine.  We don't need to have any contact."
Story_ID: 102596
Speaker 1: Now with this, this kind of scenario in the family, I mean, have you been like sensitive to other kind of, or privy to who's passing in America?  I mean, in other areas?
Speaker 2: I haven't--
Speaker 1: I know there are rumors that Harding, the people in Marion, Ohio, they swear up and down that the [William G.] Harding's grandfather was black.
Speaker 2: I haven't, you know, read a lot about those kinds of families.  You know, it's so up close for us.  And I was fascinated by the book ["The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White"] that [HM] Shirlee [Haizlip] wrote, because it was a wonderful detective story, if you will, trying to track down her long lost aunt.  And since there's a connection there--and actually when I looked at the photos in the book, I was able to see some of my children's ancestors and my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price]'s ancestors, whose picture we had never seen before.  But I haven't made a habit of trying to follow these stories.  I did see the movie, "The Human Stain" recently by Philip--based on a book written by Philip Roth.  And there's a very wrenching scene in there in which the young man went--back from college, you know, left the family.  And his mother made it very clear that he shouldn't bother to return once he made a decision to cross the line.  Because she wasn't going to allow him to cross back on his terms.  It had to be free flow if it was really going to be family.  So, I'm aware of these situations.  I read about them occasionally, but I haven't, you know, tracked down any literature or read a lot of books about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, what you're describing here is not only just the fear that would compel somebody to do that, but also the pride that your family had, those who remained.  And I understand--
Speaker 2: Well, there was opportunism by those who crossed over.  They thought the world was better and the future was brighter on that side.  And most of them did it at a time when the obstacles posed by segregation were so stark that they may have figured they didn't have a choice.  They didn't want to be trapped in segregation.  I understand that.  But once you make that kind of choice and precipitate the kind of pain among those who don't have the ability to make that choice, then you can't sort of go back and forth across the line as it suits your habits or it suits your curiosity.  Because the moment that you walk away again, it just triggers all the pain again.
Story_ID: 102597
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did your mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] go to school?  In New Haven [Connecticut] did she go to school--?
Speaker 2: She went to the West Haven schools.
Speaker 1: West Haven.
Speaker 2: And then she started out at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and stayed there for a year.  And then she went back to New Haven to go to college and to work.  So, she was at Howard for a year, and that's where she and my father [Kline Price, Sr.] met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was interesting.  My dad was a medical student.  And all the freshmen women were--my dad was a medical student and my mother was a freshman.  And the medical students used to come to the dining room where all the freshmen girls ate.  And they'd go up in the balcony and just sort of scope out the freshmen.  And apparently, his eye was drawn to her, and that's how they met.  I was working on a memoir, and I said to her, "I was drawn to him."  And she corrected me, she said, "No, his eye was drawn to me."  But it's a classic story, I just, I love the story.
Story_ID: 102598
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your father's full name?  Can you spell name for us?
Speaker 2: Kline, K-L-I-N-E, Armond, A-R-M-O-N-D, Price, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth was May 7, 1907, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: A little bit less.  The farthest back we can go--we never expended the same kind of energy tracking this.  But the farthest back we can go is 1840 to a great-great--I forget how many great-grandfathers of his--a direct, you know, ancestor by the name of Robert Gunnell.  He purchased his freedom, and then purchased his wife and several children as slaves over in Langley, Virginia, in order to prevent them from being seized by someone else.  And Robert Gunnell, my father's ancestor, owned the property on Old Georgetown Pike in Langley, Virginia, which is walking distance from where the CIA headquarters are now.  And that property stayed in our family from about 1840 up through the late 1970s, and the successor generations lived out there.  If you were to out along Old Georgetown Pike now, there's a little gulley.  There's an old gas station on the left-hand side as you get away from the city.  On the right-hand side there's a little church.  And there was a little house.  And the little church was called Gunnell's Chapel, and that was part of the property.  And the last time I was out there a few years ago, Gunnell's Chapel was still in place.
Story_ID: 102599
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Okay, now, you had some, I believe you mentioned earlier that you had some relatives that served in the Civil War?
Speaker 2: That was on my mother [Charlotte Schuster Price]'s side.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, you know, Lewis Latimore served in the Civil War.  I think either the grandson or the great-grandson of Nero Hawley served in the Civil War.  As a matter of fact, Lewis Latimer, or one of the Latimers--not Lewis Latimer--his brother, his older brother, served in the Civil War in the same unit as Nero Hawley's grandson.  And it may even be, my brother speculates that it may be, that by virtue of the fact that those two sides served in the same unit in the Civil War, that young Hawley made the acquaintance of Margaret Latimer, the sister of the Latimers who served there.
Speaker 1: It seems likely.
Speaker 2: It's quite possible.
Story_ID: 102600
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else about your father [Kline Price, Sr.]'s side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father's father [William Price] was a farmer in Charles County, Maryland.  I haven't had a chance to learn much about him, but I want to learn a lot more about him.  Because given the fact that he would have been born around the time of the Emancipation Proclamation, and maybe even earlier, he would have been part of that first generation of independent farmers, or certainly the second generation of independent black farmers who were economically self-sufficient in the latter half of the 18th Century, or the latter part of the 19th Century.  I think that's an amazing and wonderful and inspiring story.  I don't know much more about it than that.  But he had a farm down in Charles County.  My father's mother, Irene Payne, who is a descendent of Robert Gunnell, was a schoolteacher reared in Washington, D.C., and she went down to Charles County to try to find a job as a teacher.  And we believe she met my dad's father down there.  My father's father died when my dad was very young.  I think my grandfather was about, my father was about three years old when my grandfather died.  And my grandmother then came back to Washington, D.C. and she worked as a handmaiden to an actress, a white actress, and traveled a fair amount.  She was very active in Mount Zion Church over in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], which is one of the historically significant churches.  She ran the drama group in the church.
Speaker 1: Now, which actress was it, do you know?
Speaker 2: The name is something like Norma Baynes, or Nora Baynes.  I haven't been able to track either one of those names down and verify them through Google.  But I understand it's a name something like that.  And I don't know if she was a famous actress.  But my brother tells me that my grandmother and the woman she worked for were supposed to have sailed to Europe on the [RMS] Lusitania.  And there was a warning issued by the Germans that they were going to sink the ship, and they decided to cancel their trip, and were blessed that they did.
Story_ID: 102601
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did your father [Kline Price, Sr.]--what, well, tell me about how he became a doctor, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, my father, when his mother [Irene Price] was a widow moved back to, lived in Washington.  She re-married a man who was a good hardworking, blue-collar man, but didn't particularly believe in education.  And my father lived part of the time with his first cousin's family.  The man, the first cousin's name was Frank Jones, and they lived over on T Street in the LeDroit Park section of Washington, D.C.  Frank Jones became a physician.  As a matter of fact, he became the first African-American who was board-certified in urology.  I think that probably inspired my dad to go into medicine.  And my father ended up training up under his first cousin, Frank Jones, practicing medicine with him, and becoming a urologist himself.  And my dad became the second African-American to receive board-certification in urology in the United States.  But I think it was that close an example.  Plus my father went to Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C.  And that, of course was a mecca of first-class secondary education for blacks.  Undoubtedly, there were lots of physicians who came out of Dunbar High School.  So, he grew up in a milieu where people pursued professional careers.  And then he had the, you know, the example right up close in his family.
Story_ID: 102602
Speaker 1: We-- we're in the middle of an answer, I'm trying to think of where we were--
Speaker 2: Something about growing up in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Growing up and going over to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  We lived about five or six blocks from Howard.  And so, Howard was a huge presence in our lives.  My father [Kline Price, Sr.] and mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] had gone there; most of their friends went there; many of our neighbors went there.  We'd go down to Howard to go to the Christmas concerts at Andrew Rankin [Memorial] Chapel.  We went down to Howard on Friday nights to swim.  It was, it was the presence.  It was an intellectual, spiritual, and physical presence in our lives.  So, that connection to Howard is sort of the, sort of the mothership of the black community in Washington.  It's something I remember very vividly.
Story_ID: 102603
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well who were some of the personalities that lived around you that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a fascinating neighborhood.  I grew up on New Hampshire Avenue and Park Road.  One block away on Park Road near Georgia Avenue was Sam Lacy, the celebrated sportswriter who helped to, he led the crusade to desegregate baseball.  Across the street from me was Art Carter, another famous sportswriter who led a similar crusade.  Up New Hampshire Avenue from us lived Todd Duncan, the opera singer who performed in "Porgy and Bess."  He might have been the first person to do "Porgy and Bess." Charles Hamilton Houston was a neighbor.  He was the architect of the early phases of the school desegregation cases, probably the first head of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.  The Thompson family lived near us, a black family who had a thriving catering business in Washington, D.C.  Across the street was Dr. Alonzo Smith, a celebrated pediatrician who taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So, lots of doctors.  Just a few blocks away lived W. Montague Cobb, the renowned--
Speaker 1: Renowned--
Speaker 2: --anatomist who was my wife's uncle by marriage.  Those are just some of the people I remember.  It was a very special place to grow up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Everybody was into the thick of the freedom fight for black people.
Story_ID: 102237
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in the New Hampshire [Avenue] and Park Road area; it was a segregated neighborhood.  So one of the sights was, ironically, how segregated the schools were during the day, and how integrated the playgrounds were in the afternoon, a very strange phenomena.  In the afternoons and on the weekends we'd go to play in the playground associated with the school, where we could not attend during the day.  Some of the theaters, movie houses, within walking distance were integrated, and some of them were segregated.  I remember going, I'd love to go roller skating.  We'd go roller skating over on Kalorama Road.  And the roller skating rink on the street level was integrated.  The bowling alley in the basement was segregated.  Go figure.  We lived right up the street from the Wonder Bread bakery, and so that smell, that aroma, wafted all over the neighborhood and just made you salivate.  I was a rabid baseball fan, and Griffith Stadium where the Washington Senators played was about a ten or fifteen minute walk from my house, and even less from the school that I attended.  So, I used to go to baseball games.  I'd go to about forty, fifty, sixty baseball games a year, because I could go down by myself once I was in the fifth or sixth grade.  I'd pay 25 cents or 50 cents to get in the bleachers and watch a game, and then go home.  I have a fabulous autograph collection from the late forties and early fifties that I got by myself by going to the clubhouse after the games, and just waiting for the ballplayers to come out.  My mother [Charlotte Schuster Price], in the early years, chaperoned me, until a baseball player tried to pick her up.  She looked at me and she said, "Son, you've just grown up, because I'm never coming back."
Story_ID: 102238
Speaker 1: But I was, I was a rabid baseball fan.  I dreamt of becoming a major league baseball player.
Speaker 2: Who were your baseball heroes?
Speaker 1: Well, the supreme hero for me was Jackie Robinson.  I mean he'd broken the color barrier, he was smart, he was handsome, and he was committed to civil rights.  He laid it all on the line, both in the game and outside.  He was a deity, as far as I was concerned; he wasn't just a hero.   And I met Jackie when I was about twelve years old.  I had my picture taken with him, and I thought I'd died and gone to heaven.  It is, of all the people I've met, and of all the photos I've been blessed to have taken with people who are famous, there is no picture I treasure more than the one I took with Jackie when I was a little kid.  Because the [Brooklyn] Dodgers weren't an American League team like the Washington Senators, the ball club that I rooted for the most was the Cleveland Indians.  Because the second black ballplayer admitted into the major league was Larry Doby.  And so, like lots of other black folks, I used to flock to Griffith Stadium to watch the Cleveland Indians play.  And of course, they loaded up on black ballplayers pretty quickly.  Dave Hoskins, Harry "Suitcase" Simpson, and Satchel Paige joined Doby.  So, I just couldn't wait for the Indians to come to town and collect their autographs.  And so, baseball and the stadium were a big part of my life. U Street, not far from where lived, was the center of downtown for black Washington.  I used to go to the theaters--the Lincoln, the Republican, and the Booker T.  And it was safe, it was a great.  You could go see first-run movies, and cowboy flicks, and that kind of thing.  So, I remember the vitality of U Street.  I remember growing up in the All Souls Unitarian Church and attending Sunday School there.  It was, the church was led by a crusading pastor by the name of A. Powell Davies, who was one of the major forces in fighting for integration in Washington, D.C. and beyond.  I was very proud to be a part of that church.  And a lot of people who cared passionately about integrating our society belonged to that church.  Both black and whites belonged to that church.  I vividly recall when I was a member of the Sunday School at All Souls Church, that roughly once a month we would go visit another church.  We'd go visit a Greek Orthodox church, or a synagogue, or a Catholic church, or a Russian Orthodox church.  And once a month, a delegation of kids from Sunday School would come visit us.  And as a result of that, I grew up with a deep appreciation for sameness and a deep curiosity about otherness.  And I grew up without any bias toward anybody who was different than me.  And I wish that more of our children had that kind of exposure to others at a very early stage, before we formed impressions based on what adults tell us.  It's one of the most powerful inter-ethnic exchanges I could imagine, and all it cost us was a batch of cookies when we were hosting, and a quarter tank of gas when we were visiting.  But it was very powerful, and I have never forgotten it.  So, those are some of the recollections and images, and sights, and sounds, and smells of my neighborhood.  And I'll never forget the chlorine in Howard University [Washington, D.C.]'s pool (laughter) where we swam on Friday nights when I was a kid.  And I remember going to the annual Christmas concert at Andrew Rankin's Chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel].  It was a wonderful elegant little structure where the Howard University choir, which was so very powerful, used to perform with the Washington Symphony [National Symphony Orchestra?].  They'd hold an annual Christmas concert there, and when they hit Handel's "Messiah," it felt like the roof just lifted off.  I was always bored to tears by being dragged to that concert by my parents.  I wondered, "Why do I have to hang around all these old friends of yours, etc.?"  And it was a ritual.  And once our children grew up, my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] and I looked for a similar ritual that we could share with them on Christmas Eve.  And we found it by taking our children, even though they're fully grown, we'd go to Riverside Church every year.  So, those rituals, when we were young, we don't even understand the power of them, but they were hugely important, formative experiences in our lives.
Story_ID: 102239
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about yourself when you were growing up.  What kind of little boy were you, and what were you like?  How would people describe you?
Speaker 2: I was goody two-shoes.  I did well in school, cared passionately about baseball.  Not terribly complicated, in other words.  I had an older brother who was, who is dashingly handsome, movie-star handsome.  The girls all flock to him, they didn't flock to me.  I did well in school.  He could have, but he didn't feel like it.  So, there was a complementarity.  I admired and envied his success socially, and he admired and supported my success academically.  I wanted to be more like him socially, and when he felt like it, he could be more like me academically.  (Laughter).  And, you know, I went through school with a great deal of success.  I worked hard at it, but school came reasonably easily to me.  And so I did, I managed to do well every step of the way, all the way through high school.  And I was fortunate to get into a very fine college and a very fine law school.  When I reached high school, the original plan was that I would go away to prep school instead of going to a public high school in Washington [D.C.].  But I wanted to stay in Washington and have a social life, and I didn't want to be isolated up in New England where there was snow at an all-male college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102240
Speaker 1: I want to go back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to B.K. Bruce [Elementary] School named after Blanche Kelso Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay, who was a senator, right?
Speaker 2: A senator, yes.
Speaker 1: Blanche K. Bruce.
Speaker 2: It's located on Sherman Avenue and Kenyon Street [in Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was that like?  I mean, what was, you said you did well in school and everything.  Were there any teachers that you remember, or activities that you really were fond of?
Speaker 2: I remember quite a few of the teachers, yeah.  [William] Montague Cobb's wife, Hilda Cobb--my wife's aunt, was my fifth and sixth grade teacher; very passionate, very devoted, very supportive of me and of other children who were striving to do well.  Before that, I had two Mrs. Johnsons as my teachers, who were very, very strong.  The principal of the school was the fearsome Mrs. E.L. Hutton [ph.], who I learned only a year ago, was Sam Lacey's sister.  She was the kind of principal that no one of us ever wanted to encounter on a bad day.  So, I lived in fear of doing something naughty and being summoned to her office.  Because you just, she was just a terrifying presence. But they were all to support us and educate us.  And Bruce School was a traditional old school, and I had some wonderful classmates there.  And we used to play softball in the yard next to it and try our best not to hit the ball through the classroom window, which I managed to do most of the time, but I slipped up occasionally.  And Bruce, as I mentioned earlier, was located fairly near to Griffith Stadium.  I shouldn't admit it, but when I was a schoolboy patrolman in the fifth and sixth grade, I'd go out on patrol duty.  But instead of staying there for the full amount of time that I was supposed to, I'd often cut out early and go down to the ballpark to the games.  But I did well at Bruce.   I mean, I, you know, finished near the top of my class.  So I was into school, liked it, and I didn't particularly have any problem with it.  And it went well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102241
Speaker 1: Now, high school, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, junior high school is another interesting story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I entered Taft Junior High School in the eighth grade.  I went to the seventh grade to an integrated private school called Georgetown Day School.  That was sort of a holding pattern as we were, our family was about to move to a new neighborhood.  And frankly, we were waiting for the U.S. Supreme Court to hand down the decision desegregating public schools in the United States and in [Washington] D.C.  So, for the academic year of 1953 and '54 [1954], I attended Georgetown Day School in the seventh grade.  And then the Brown v. Board of Education decision and the Bolling v. Sharpe decision provided, applied the same ruling to Washington, D.C.  It was handed down in May of 1954, and that summer we moved over to the Northeast section of Washington, D.C.  And I entered Taft Junior High School in September of 1954 as one of the first black students to integrate the Washington, D.C. schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was also blessed that we moved to a neighborhood that turned out to be only a five minute bicycle ride from the Garden[s] Apartment complex, where all the Washington Senators lived.  So, I could, I could go over there on my bicycle and walk into the pharmacy and walk into the supermarket and talk to the ballplayers.  I was a happy camper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was like Georgetown Day School first, then Taft Junior High School?
Speaker 2: Georgetown for a year, and then Taft for two years, the eighth and ninth grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, eighth and ninth, okay.  Now, are there any teachers or experiences in junior high school that are memorable?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the initial stages of desegregation weren't always pleasant.  Black students entered Taft and other public schools in two waves.  Those of us who had not been in a public school the previous year--and I had not been--and who were new to the neighborhood that fed this school, came in first.  And then kids who were already in the public school, but hadn't been in that neighborhood before, came in second.  So I went in, and there were just a handful of us.  And then when the second wave of black students came in, the white students got it in their head that it would be a good idea to boycott that day (laughter), and they asked the black students to join them  (Laughter).  I said, "What are you, nuts?"  (Laughter).  But they were confused.  I think they were more interested in a day off than anything else.  There were some prickly experiences, you know, there were some fisticuffs here and there, nothing too serious.  There were some teachers who were very supportive.  I remember Mrs. Mills [ph.], who was quite supportive.  Barbara Decobaum [ph.] was my math teacher.  Mr. Fischer [ph.] was my math teacher.  They were very supportive, and struck me as colorblind.  They were, you know, intrigued by the fact that I seemed to take school well and perform well.  And I never felt any ill-will from them; I felt nothing but support from them.  I didn't have very close relations with too many of my white classmates from the school.  We played ball together but, you know, I didn't often visit anybody's home or anything like that.
Story_ID: 102242
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about high school?  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went on to Coolidge High School in Washington, D.C. which I entered in the fall of 1956.  That was the compromise.  That was not the school that I would normally attend, based on where we lived.  But once I decided that I did not want to go away to prep school, my parents said, "Then you've got to go to one of the very best high schools in Washington."  And Coolidge and Wilson were considered the best high schools.  And we decided that summer that I absolutely had to learn German, and German was only taught at Coolidge.  So, that's where I went.  I paid a very dear price socially, because a lot of my buddies, African-American buddies in the neighborhood were upset that I didn't join them in the high school where we were supposed to have gone, and I ended up--you know, I originally stayed in Washington thinking that I would have a great social life for three years, and I ended up being ostracized and having almost none for three years.  So it was a, I paid quite a price for going to Coolidge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And once I got over there, there was no fraternizing among whites and blacks, certainly no inter-racial dating.  There was very little, you know, visiting of homes or anything like that; it was kind of a cold environment.  But again, it was, you know, the early years of segregation.  So people were just getting accustomed to being in the same space together.
Speaker 1: Now, why did your family feel, or why did you feel you needed to take German?
Speaker 2: Well, that was the way to get to Coolidge, because German wasn't offered in the high school that I was supposed to have gone to, which we didn't think was quite up to snuff with Coolidge and Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to give them a reason.
Speaker 2: So, if you could find a course that one of the best high schools offered that wasn't offered in the high school you were supposed to attend, then you have the right to go to the other one.  So, it was a ruse.
Speaker 1: Okay, that you used to get in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, so were there any black students there at all?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There were a handful, not many.  But there were some, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you all bond in some way, or did you--
Speaker 2: To some extent.  But, you know, they mostly lived in the neighborhood that was close to Coolidge, and I didn't.  So, I had quite a trek every day.  And I was, you know, I was friendly with some of them, but not terribly close.  I mean, I had a pretty isolated social life during those three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a bad time.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you end up going to proms and all that, the prom and all that stuff?
Speaker 2: I went to the prom.  I mean, I ended up dating a couple of girls.  And there was one young woman who lived out in Maryland that I got very close to.  But it wasn't, it just wasn't what I expected.  The social life wasn't as active as I expected, and those were some difficult years to be quieter than you wanted to be.
Story_ID: 102243
Speaker 1: Well, on the academic side, maybe are there any teachers there that really stand out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my homeroom teacher during those three years was a real champion of mine, by the name of Mrs. Anderson [ph.], or Miss Anderson, probably.  She was a real fan, very, very supportive, even to the point of interceding with teachers if she thought I--you know, in various courses, if she thought I didn't get the kind of grades I should have, she would, she'd be an advocate on my behalf.  She pushed me.  I didn't need a lot of pushing, but she was very supportive, and she'd just keep me focused.  She was fabulous.  She was a white teacher, very devoted to my success.  I'll never forget her; she was really wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it common for you to get cheated on your scores, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, I did very well.  I mean, she figured I was an A student, and I was fortunate enough to get virtually all A's my entire high school career.  But if I dropped below that, she was very upset, and she wanted to know whether I really deserved that, or whether there was anything going on.  So, she would just check things out (laughter), when I might not have. But there incidents based on race.  I mean I remember when I was getting ready to apply to college and, as I said, I had a very strong transcript.  I think I finished tenth out of a class of seven hundred or something.  And I went in to see the guidance counselor.  And they suggested this person, who was a white guy, this counselor left over from the days of segregation and who was part of a crew of teachers, principals, and guidance counselors who were notorious for their hostile attitudes towards blacks.  This guidance counselor suggested that I consider going to colleges that were many, many notches below where my academic record would suggest.  And I just told her I didn't need advice like that, that my parents and I would handle it from here on out.  So we didn't pay any attention.  I worked in the summer jobs for students who were very strong in math and science.  You had to have a strong academic record to get into the program.  This was the summer between junior and senior years, and they gave us all tests to provide a prognosis for our academic future.  I remember taking the test and being told that I probably would get to go to college, but that I should not count on going to graduate school or professional school.  That's a prognosis I've never forgotten in life.  And it's not uncommon for black students to encounter that kind of foolishness.
Speaker 1: You're right.  I mean, I don't anybody who watches more than one of these interviews, or, you know, searches these, will find--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, very common--
Speaker 1: --that case over and over again.
Speaker 2: --people messing with you, injecting doubt, not being supportive, not steering you properly.  Fortunately, my brother [Kline Price, Jr.]has always been very aggressive on my behalf.  He's always said, you know, "Reach for the stars and go for it, go for it."  My parents have always known which end was up, and if we didn't get the kind of support we needed from the schools or from teachers, you know, we knew what we had to do, and we did it.
Story_ID: 102244
Speaker 1: Now, your brother [Kline Price, Jr.] is older than you.  Did he attend the same high school, or did he go somewhere else?
Speaker 2: No, he went off to prep school.  He came through during the latter stages of segregation.  So, he went off to prep school and then went to college initially at Baldwin Wallace College in Ohio, Berea, Ohio, and then on to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He had a good time in college.  Remember, he was quite the social animal.  So, he'd be on the dean's list one semester and probation the next semester.  "No problem, where's the party?  You know, let's have a good time."  (Laughter).  So I think he went through school in about six or seven years.  He was a very serious student by the time he graduated.  He got into medical school, but could not complete it because he had to go into the [U.S.] Air Force for a while, because he had part of the ROTC.  When he came out, he entered medical school at about age twenty-seven, twenty-eight.  He struggled during the first two years of medical school, but he also was married and had a couple of kids and worked through all that period.  During the last two years of medical school, he hit the practical part of medicine where you're working in the hospitals.  And by then, his academic record was so strong that Georgetown Medical School [Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] offered him a position.  So, it was always there; he just had a good time en route.  I was a little more straight and narrow.
Story_ID: 102245
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what courses did you like the best in high school [Coolidge High School, Washington, D.C.]?  And what were your career aspirations?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any particular career aspirations in high school.  Physics and math came fairly easy.  I guess I might have thought I was going to become an engineer.  Because, remember, this is around the time of Sputnik, and there was a lot of talk about getting more people to go into engineering.  And since science and math came fairly easily to me, I figured that might be where I'd go.  But I did pretty well in everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now how did you choose college?  How did you choose Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I applied to four--five colleges, all of them terrific.  I was blessed to be able to get into all of them.  The choice basically came down to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Amherst.  I went up once in my spring of my senior to visit both of the schools.  When I got to Harvard it was kind of a bleak March day.  The campus looked pretty dreary, looked big, looked foreboding.  I went down to Amherst, and by the time I got there, the weather had cleared.  It was a cozier place.  I figured that academically, there wasn't much to choose between them.  As a matter of fact, I don't think there's anything to choose between them, they're both great institutions.  I had always wanted to play sports, competitive sports, and I thought I might have a better chance at playing varsity sports in a small school than I would in a big school, and that I might have a more enjoyable social life.  And lastly, since Amherst was kind of a bucolic rural setting, I figured that I might not get to live in an environment like that ever again, so why not try it for college.  And so, those were the drivers.  My father had always loved schools like Amherst and Williams [Williamstown, Massachusetts], and knew lots of people who'd gone off to those schools when he was young.  He always had a dream that he would have loved to have gone to a school like that.  I think he was thrilled when I went.  I got a lot of support and a lot of pressure from [William] Montague Cobb, who was the distinguished Amherst alumnus.  Charles Drew was an Amherst alumnus.  William Hastie, a legendary figure. [HM] Mercer Cook, a dear friend of my parents.  So, there were a lot of famous Amherst alumni who were dear friends of my parents.  But that didn't have much influence on me.  It was the question of the academic quality--and there was little to choose--of the size--the opportunity for the breadth of experiences that I thought I would enjoy in college, and the opportunity to live in a rural setting, which I might not replicate.  Those were the drivers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  They all seemed like well-thought out reasons, you know.
Speaker 2: They were.  I never regretted it-
Story_ID: 102246
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So, what was Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] like for you when you started?
Speaker 2: A wonderful experience, and a vexing experience at the same time.  On the upside it was, and remains, a great undergraduate school--brilliant professors, brilliant students.  I got a world class education there.  I got to participate in the kinds of things that I wanted to participate in.  I got to compete for and make the freshman baseball team, to make the freshman basketball team, and probably could have gone on to varsity if I'd wanted to.  I think I was temporarily on the varsity baseball team.  So, I got a chance to see competitive athletics, and to be able to play.  I met my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] of now forty-one years while I was there.  She was at Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], so my social life couldn't have been better.  I was a very happy camper.  The primary disappointment was that when I went to Amherst, the brochure said that every freshman gets to join a fraternity.  There was universal rushing.  I got to Amherst to discover that only five out of the thirteen fraternities admitted blacks.  So, there was racism there, and I was deeply disappointed in the college for tolerating it.  And there was a lot about the way the fraternity system worked that troubled me greatly.  So, that was a major disappointment of mine.  But on balance, it was a great experience, and I've never regretted going there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who were some of the personalities-- Amherst students or teachers--that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the teachers, I remember my thesis advisor, George Kateb, who taught, was a political scientist and taught courses on Utopia.  His lectures were like magnificently crafted mosaics.  There was Benjamin Ziegler, a very crotchety professor who taught us constitutional law.  When I got to Amherst, I was quickly disabused of the idea that I was going to become an engineer, and I took calculus.  When I'd taken math courses in high school and could touch and feel that which I was studying, I got it.  When we got to calculus and it was out there in the ether, I didn't get it.  (Laughter).  And I also took physics from a professor by the name of Arnie Arons, who's a brilliant acerbic professor.  It was quite an experience.  Freshmen at Amherst were required to take six courses.  We all took physics, and we all took calculus regardless of our high school preparation.  We all took humanities and English composition.  We all took a foreign language, and we all took European Culture.  It was a tough curriculum.  But it was an integrated curriculum, and what was fascinating, in retrospect, was to learn how closely the faculty members from those various disciplines planned the integration of the freshman curriculum, the integration of calculus and physics.  So, it was a great academic experience; it was a grueling one.  Many professors, I've never forgotten.  And I made many lifelong friends, Bill Davis, Al Bernstein, and many, many good friends from Amherst.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you involved in a lot of social activity at Amherst at all?
Speaker 2: Well, keep in mind that the fraternities were segregated.  I did rush a fraternity at the end of my freshman year.  I had managed to save enough money to buy a car.  I went to live in a fraternity, and life was good.  But my grades started dropping.  In those days, both the tuition bills and the grades went home to your parents.  So, after the first marking period of my sophomore year, I got a letter from my father, a very cryptic letter; he was a man of few words.  He said, "Dear Son, I got your grades.  We're having a good time, aren't we?  We have a two-car garage at home.  One of the beds is empty.  Love, Dad."  (Laughter).  In other words, "Get those grades up, or the car is coming home, and I don't care whether you own it or not."  And I saluted, and I moved out of the fraternity (laughter) and got the academia act back.
Speaker 1: Was this an integrated fraternity?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of the fraternities that admitted blacks were integrated.  But keep in mind that eight out of the thirteen fraternities on campus did not admit black students.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  I read on the--you became an Alpha later on?
Speaker 2: Yes, once I had graduated from law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The nearest Alpha chapter probably would have been either Springfield [Massachusetts] or over at Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].  So, it was kind of hard to get to if you were an undergraduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what did your major end up being?
Speaker 2: I majored in political science.
Speaker 1: Political science, okay.
Speaker 2: By that time, I was beginning to think that I wanted to go to law school.  And, you know, I did reasonably well, not spectacular, but reasonably well.  I fell in love and enjoyed...  I mean the things that I expected, to look for at Amherst, came true.  And so I got the education I wanted, and met the love of my life, and lived in a bucolic setting.  And I don't regret any of it.
Speaker 1: It sounds pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was good.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did you, did you do anything like run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not at Amherst, no.  I was involved in something called the Harlan Fiske Stone Debating Society.  And I was active in, I was a freshman dorm advisor once.  When I became a senior, I lived in one of the freshman dorms and was an advisor to the students--a dorm proctor or dorm advisor to the students--that was about it.
Story_ID: 102247
Speaker 1: Now, were you inspired by any of the lawyers that you encountered as a youth?  You know, you went through a list of high-powered people--Charles [Hamilton] Houston and that whole group.
Speaker 2: I knew of them from my parents, who were very close to them.  I discovered in reading Houston's biography for example, I read in a foot note that my parents had been among the funders of the early school desegregation cases that he brought.  I didn't know that.  But, you know, I would meet these folks in the neighborhood.  I'd meet them in our home and other homes.  And I knew about the environment in which I was reared, even though I didn't have that much contact with them as a little kid.  But certainly the contributions they were making and the extraordinary intellect that they exhibited was an inspiration to me.
Story_ID: 102604
Speaker 1: Are there any, any memorable incidents at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] that you'd like to share with us before we move on?
Speaker 2: No, I think we've covered most--the most memorable thing is that on the commencement weekend my senior year, I proposed to my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] and we got married (laughter) in a beautiful setting that overlooks the Pioneer Valley. It's a war memorial on campus.  So, it was corny, but it was great.  And she accepted.
Speaker 1: Now, what year was it that you graduated?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: That's the year of the March on Washington.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I was a marshal in that march.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the summer after I graduated.  So, I was trained as one of the marshals to try to make sure that nothing happened, and to contain anything that did happen.  And I remember, you know, going down on Constitution Avenue that morning at about 5 a.m. to receive the training, and then watching the busses come in.  And I didn't get up close to anything that was going on, because we all had stations where we were assigned.  But it was an incredible experience.
Speaker 1: Who trained you, and--
Speaker 2: Well, the organization--Bayard Rustin ran all the logistics for the march.  I don't know who handled the training of the marshals under him.  But there were some, you know, people who were older than we were who taught us how to, you know, if there was any kind of thing going on that was problematic, we shouldn't confront anyone physically.  What we should do is grab hands and surround the person and just try to contain the situation, and call the police and have them come in.  But we weren't to confront anyone physically; we weren't to engage anyone physically.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you aware of any threats?  Or was the government, like, on alert for specific threat?
Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of any.  You know, I subsequently read that there was a lot of preparation, and the government wasn't happy.  J. Edgar Hoover was not a happy camper about it, which is no surprise.  And [President] John F. Kennedy was not happy about the march at all.  So, I've read some subsequent accounts of it, but I didn't feel it that morning.  It was a very moving and festive occasion.  And, you know, it was just an extraordinary feeling.  Many people were involved in it.  My mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] was in the march, and my wife's parents were in the march.  So, it was one of those memorable events in one's life.
Speaker 1: Did you have a feeling at the time that this was a history-making event that you were in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't know what would come of it.  It was too early in the evolution of the Civil Rights Movement to know what else might come of it.  And that contrasts, interestingly enough, with the march that I observed on the morning that F. W. de Klerk delivered the speech in February of 2000, excuse me, February of 1990, announcing the end of apartheid and the release of Nelson Mandela.  I was in Cape Town that day, and I woke up that morning to the sounds of thousands of people gathering in Market Square.  And I put on some jeans and grabbed my camera, and went down and played photo-journalist all morning.  The feel of the march was similar, except that you knew that black South Africans had won.  They didn't understand the full magnitude of what they'd won.  But the proximity of victory and the taste of victory was sweeter and clearer, because they knew something glorious was going to happen.  You didn't have that feeling in '63 [1963] about what exactly was going to come of it, and when.  So, it was a quanti--qualitative difference in how the two felt.  But both were, would rank as two of the most moving experiences I've ever had in my life.
Story_ID: 102605
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that fall, did you, did you go to law school?
Speaker 2: I went straight into law school [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut].  It was the custom thing to do.  Number one, the Vietnam War was starting to hover over people's lives, so you didn't particularly hang out if you didn't want to.  I didn't know anything better that I wanted to do.  I got married that December.  So, I just, I just moved on, as most undergraduates did, right into law school.  I didn't have a particular theory of what I wanted out of law school.  As a matter of fact I sort of floated through the first two years, taking the required courses and working.  Our first daughter was born the middle of my second year.  And so, I worked about twenty or thirty hours a week while I was in law school.  And it wasn't until my third year that the whole idea that I might be involved in service in some form, particularly around helping young people, became sort of a defining way in which I wanted to think about my career.  But I was pretty late crystallizing it.  As a matter of fact, I remember at the end of the number of courses I took in law school, I kept wondering why I was torturing myself by taking this stuff that I wasn't terribly interested in.  I had one interview with a law firm during the fall of my first year.  And it was one of these big, you know, majority firms.  And I think I was about ten minutes into the interview, and I looked at the fellow who was talking to me, and I said, "This is not happening.  I mean I'm not interested in what you have to offer, and you're not interested in what I have to offer, so it's nice meeting you.  But this is, this is not for me.  This is not what I want to do."  But on the upside, Yale Law School ranks to this day in my experience as the most extraordinary educational institution I've ever encountered.  Amherst was great, but the typical Yale Law School--
Speaker 1: We were talking about Yale Law School.  How did you--not that it's a difficult choice to choose Yale Law School, but how did you end up choosing Yale Law School?
Speaker 2: Yale Law School was the only graduate or professional school I applied to in my senior year.  Yale Law School was legendary in the, the great lawyers who had helped to write the briefs in the celebrated civil rights cases and school desegregation cases were often teaching at Yale Law School.  Some of the most renowned young people, people like [HM] Marian Wright Edelman and Eleanor Holmes Norton, they were at Yale Law School.  [A.] Leon Higginbotham [Jr.] graduated from Yale Law School.  So, I wasn't exactly sure I wanted to be a lawyer, but everything I knew about Yale Law School told me that it was a remarkable institutionally academically, and that it had an extraordinary faculty that was committed to social justice, and had a student body that was consistent with people who wanted to be leaders in fields that intrigued me.  So, I didn't apply to any other law school and I didn't apply to any other graduate school.  Had I not gotten into Yale Law School, I might have--I mean the fallback that I was thinking about was the Columbia Graduate School of International Affairs, but I didn't apply there.  So, I rolled the dice, and I came up with (laughter) whatever the dice come up with when you're lucky, and I got in and I went.
Story_ID: 102606
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. Now, you say you got interested in activism, community activism, towards the end of your--what happened that got you--
Speaker 2: Well, it was probably always in the chromosomes.  My mother [Charlotte Schuster Price] had been very active when I was growing up, and she was--you know, I mentioned my parents helped to finance some of the school desegregation cases.  My mother was active with the Americans for Democratic Action in Washington, D.C. in the late forties [1940s] and early fifties [1950s].  She was part of the people from the League of Women Voters, who were fighting to bring the vote to Washington, D.C., who were fighting for desegregation.  My parents had joined the All Souls Unitarian Church which was headed by A. Powell Davies, who was leading the fight in Washington for desegregation.  So, she was quite an activist. It was probably latent in me, and began to blossom toward the end of my college career.  And not only did I participate in the [1963] March on Washington as a marshal, but the previous year I was part of a group of college students from New England who'd gone down to picket the White House.  I mean, I didn't join the Freedom Ride; I didn't do anything brave.  I didn't place myself in any physical risks, but I could see the stirrings coming.  And I chose Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] for that reason; it felt like the right place for me, given the interests that were beginning to crystallize.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You were at Yale Law School from '63 [1963] to--?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay.
Story_ID: 102607
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you involved in the Democratic Convention in '64 [1964] at all?
Speaker 2: No, I was married, and a father with a child (laughter).  So I was involved with trying to earn money to help pay the rent.  And when I went through Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut], as I mentioned, I worked twenty to thirty hours a week outside of class.  So, that was all-consuming.  I had summer jobs that were designed to bring in income.  Now, what I did was I worked in the legal services program in New Haven as a law clerk.  And I ended up joining legal services when I graduated from Yale Law School.  But I was drawn--let's keep--remember there was a robust Civil Rights Movement underway, obviously.  But it was also the beginning--stirrings of the anti-poverty movement, the urban oriented anti-poverty movement.  And that's where I gravitated.  I gravitated towards the efforts in the North where I was living to deal with inner-city poverty, which to my mind was a legitimate a cause as--a compelling a cause as the civil rights causes.  Certainly, poverty was palpable and was real, and I could do something about it where I lived; at least I could try.  And that's, that's what ultimately drew me to the legal services program and helped define the balance of my career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you do in legal services, the legal services program?  And what were some of the issues in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I worked in the Hill neighborhood of New Haven.  I was one of the lawyers working out of the neighborhood office of LAA [Legal Assistance Association].  I handled criminal cases, I handled civil cases, I represented people in divorces.  I represented people who had purchased furniture and who had gotten stuck with owner's contracts.  I became interested in representing community organizations.  And so I became the lawyer for a number of neighborhood-based groups that were founded; I got their incorporation.  I also served as staff for a citizen's commission called the Hill (unclear) Citizens Commission on Police Community Relations.  Because we had lots of problems with police brutality and racial profiling, even then in 1966 and '67 [1967].  And we created this ad hoc commission, and I staffed it.  I wrote their reports, I presented their testimony, did the research.  And I became increasingly drawn to the community-based organizations that were working in the field.  And frankly, I was less attracted to functioning as a traditional lawyer representing individuals who had issues.  So, oftentimes when you got involved in an individual case, there's so much trouble that can come into a person's life; that you were trying to repair a lot of damage that had been done.  And I wanted to try to be more involved on the front end, and on a proactive basis.  And that set the stage for me to leave legal services after only a year and a half and get involved in grassroots organizing in New Haven.
Story_ID: 102608
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any training from IAF [Industrial Areas Foundation] or any of the--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --Saul Alinsky groups?
Speaker 2: No.  I'd heard about it and read about it, but I just, I learned at the feet of the people who were doing the organizing in New Haven [Connecticut].  And, you know, we didn't have that many professional, we had lots of community-based groups.  This was a very fertile time.  The Black Panthers had started a chapter in New Haven, and there were neighborhood-specific community-based organizations led by people who might be considered traditional in their orientation, or others who might be considered radical.  There was, New Haven had a lot of community-based organizations.  And the [New Haven] Black Coalition, which I was asked to head in the aftermath of the riots in 1967, was an amalgam of all these organizations.  It was an umbrella group for these kinds of organizations.  So--
Speaker 1: There were riots in New Haven?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  In August of 1967, New Haven erupted, lots of fire and looting and burning.  Our office where I worked was burned out from underneath us.  And it took quite a while for New Haven to put itself back together again.  And after the riots in the summer of '67 [1967], this group called the Black Coalition was formed to try to put the pieces back together again, to get more constructive agendas developed, you know, housing and community development, and also to build a political agenda to get more African-Americans into city government, on the City Council and that kind of thing.  But yeah, New Haven joined the pantheon of cities that blew in the sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102609
Speaker 1: And New Haven [Connecticut], about what size is New Haven you'd say in terms of--?
Speaker 2: About 140,000 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was then.  But it was considered the model city in the early to mid-1960s.  It had a visionary mayor, Dick Lee, who believed passionately in the role and the future and the vitality of cities.  He made a lot of mistakes in his urban renewal program, in bulldozing some neighborhoods and some architecturally significant structures.  But he did so in the spirit of believing in the possibilities of cities.  But he was a bulldozer politically, as well.  And so, there were these struggles in New Haven and elsewhere, over the extent to which the affected communities would have a say in what would happen in their neighborhoods.  There was the notion of maximum and feasible participation built into federal legislation, that community groups should have a decisive voice in policies affecting their neighborhoods.  And traditional politicians, of course, didn't accept that.  And so there were constant struggles over that, and the Black Coalition was in the thick of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the neighborhood leaders that you remember?  Do you remember any of their names?
Speaker 2: Well, the founder of the Black Coalition, and the first chairman, was a fellow by the name of Henry Parker, who was a schoolteacher who went on to become the State Treasurer.  And he ran for mayor a couple of times, and went on become State Treasurer.  There was a fellow named Alphonso Tindall, who headed the Dixwell Community House, a very wise kind of a bear of a man, a wonderful mentor of mine.  And there was a fellow who was quite an activist, by the name of Courtland Wilson who worked for Yale University.  Erika Huggins, the widow of John Huggins, who had been killed out at USC [sic, UCLA, University of California, Los Angeles] in a shootout in the cafeteria of USC, and moved to New Haven where John Huggins' family had lived, she started up a Black Panther chapter there.  It caused a lot of heartburn in the city.  It did some good things, but it caused a lot of heartburn.  Bob Bowles [Robert Bowles], who ran the Urban League in New Haven.  Minister Abdul-Karim [ph.], who ran the Nation of Islam mosque there was on our board.  I have very vivid memories of all those folks.  Willie Council [ph.], Ron Johnson, Fred Harris, all street activists.  It was interesting times; a lot of books have been written about it.
Speaker 1: It sounds like a lot of activity.
Speaker 2: Per capita, there was a tremendous amount of activity.
Story_ID: 102610
Speaker 1: And in the midst of it all we had Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --presided over by Kingman Brewster [Jr.], who was considered the most influential university president in the United States.  So, New Haven was a magnet for activists, a magnet for money.  And it was quite a laboratory for people who were interested in cities, and how to make cities work.
Speaker 2: I'm glad we didn't skip over this, you know, because this is real important, I mean, that Yale being the center of all this.  I know all the activity that surfaced around the University of Chicago--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when you have a big university like that.
Speaker 1: Well, and Brewster was the man.  I mean, Brewster got his picture on Time Magazine's cover.  He was the focal point, in some respects, of the May Day rally that was held to support Bobby Seale.  And the other thing that the activists were hoping to do was to topple Brewster.  Because Yale was the symbol--he, the president, was the symbol of Yale.  And he was so revered that folks came to town to try topple him, but he outfoxed them.  He, when they arrived on the New Haven green loaded for bear, he-- you know, he'd previously given a speech that he was skeptical that a black man could get a fair trial in the United States.  And they said, "Dag, that's what we believe.  He shouldn't be saying that."  (Laughter).  He just took the air out of that balloon.  And then he said something to the effect that, "We realize that a lot of you have come from far out of town and may not have accommodations.  We have plenty of room in our dormitories. If you'd like to stay with us, please feel free to."  And these are the protesters who had come to topple his reputation.  "Feel free to stay with us.  We serve breakfast from 8 to 9.  But if you get up late, we'll keep the kitchen open till 11" (laughter).  And he just turned the tables on them; he was a master at that.  There's a fascinating book out about Brewster, called "The Guardians."  He's a man of [Boston] Brahmin background, blue blood background, who helped to transform Yale into a much more inclusive university, which spawned one of the first Afro-American Studies departments in the United States.  And the Black Student Union headed by people like, dear friends like Don Ogilvie [Donald Ogilvie] who's now deceased, and Glen DeChabert, now deceased.  And a whole lot of other black students who were on campus at the time were partners with Brewster in some respects, adversary in other respects.  But together, they transformed Yale into a university that was both more inclusive and more devoted to meritocracy than ever before.  Because it had been an institution that favored the children of alumni, and was kind of a closed place.  But it became a much more open place, and a much more competitive and intellectual place as a result of Brewster's leadership and the pressure provided by the black students.  It's a fascinating story.
Story_ID: 102611
Speaker 1: Did you know, was Reverend, was [HM] Eugene Rivers there at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No, he must have come along--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: --yeah, later.
Speaker 1: There's a story that he took classes there and he got involved in something, and he wasn't a student, he wasn't even registered.  He was an activist on campus.  Okay, so you became the executive director of the Black Coalition of New Haven?
Speaker 2: Right, in the spring of 1968.  I held that position for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of things were you trying to accomplish?  What goals did you establish?
Speaker 2: Well, we did a lot of training in grassroots organizing.  We actually conducted courses on grassroots organizing for the purpose of trying to strengthen the voice of community organizations in the political process, particularly the decisions that the city government would make about the allocation of urban renewal funds and model city funds.  We sponsored a cultural festival.  And I think of the most audacious things we did, was the summer after the riots, we decided to have a concert in the Yale Bowl, which is in an upper-middle class neighborhood in New Haven.  It was called "Soul in the Bowl."  We charged two dollars, because we wanted everybody to be able to come.  And we decided to have a love fest.  Everybody was anxious that there was going to be another riot.  And we said we were going to go in exactly the opposite direction, and make a statement that we don't need that.  And it was a big success, and made a powerful and positive statement.  Many people who were active in the Black Coalition became active in political organizing.  And there was a group called the Magnificent Seven.  And we'd had maybe one, maybe two aldermen out of thirty in the city government.  And then all of a sudden, for a lot of the organizing that was done, not by the Coalition which was a non-profit group, but by a lot of the people who were active in the Coalition, and they were doing this on their own.  We ended up electing, or there were elected about seven people to the City Council, which was the most that the city had ever seen.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is something.
Speaker 2: A couple years after that, I think in 1969, Hank Parker ran for mayor.  He lost and ran again a couple years after that, and then he ended up being elected State Treasurer in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a particular organizing style that you taught?  I mean, I asked you earlier about the--
Speaker 2: It was a lot of improv.  I don't want to pretend that it was, it was the result of a lot of studying and a lot of mentoring.  And we were figuring it out as we went along.
Speaker 1: So, you were there for two years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: From sixty--
Speaker 2: In '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: From '69 [1969] to '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Yes, from '69 [1969] to '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102612
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: I joined a small urban affairs consulting firm in New Haven [Connecticut] called Cogen, C-O-G-E-N, Holt, H-O-L-T, and Associates.  Basically, Joel Cogen, who was a good friend of mine, approached me one day and said "If you ever want to stop advocating for stuff and start actually doing it--if you ever want to stop advocating for affordable housing and actually start developing affordable housing, you ought to think about joining this firm."  And I accepted that offer.  I initially went in as a senior associate, and eventually became a partner.  It was a very interesting firm; it opened me to much broader horizons.  Because in addition to a lot of consulting work we did in New Haven, I served as a development consultant for non-profit housing groups that were building low and moderate income housing.  I also, for the first time, got an opportunity to do program evaluations for the Ford Foundation.  And a fellow by the name of Mike Sviridoff, who had run the anti-poverty program in New Haven went down to Ford as vice-president of National Programs.  And he had known of me, and I guess respected my work, and he brought me in as a program evaluator.  And as a result of that, in my, you know, late twenties when I was with this firm, I got to evaluate the programs of the National Urban League and the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, and I got to meet the people who were my professional role models.  I mean, I got to meet with Whitney Young and talk with him.  I got to meet with Franklin Thomas.  I got to meet [HM] Vernon Jordan, [HM] John Lewis, and Charles Bannerman.  So, all these people who were distant heroes and role models of mine, suddenly I came into contact with them.  And it just reinforced my desire to continue to operate in the realm of community development and empowering our people, and I came of age professionally.  I wanted to be like those folks.  They were the kinds of professionals I wanted to be when I grew up.  They were smart, they were polished, they were committed, they were serious about their work, and they produced results.  So, they were my professional role models.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102613
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that time period about things you accomplished that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well, if you were to go Norwalk, in downtown Norwalk [Connecticut], there's a housing development that I was rather instrumental in.  It was sponsored by a non-profit church group, but I was the developing consultant on it.  So, it's there.  One of our major projects was the garage built in the air rights over Route 34 in New Haven.  I got one of the first environmental permits right in the aftermath of the environmental protection legislation.  So, that garage is, (laughter), I guess I've some initials in it somewhere in the concrete that it's made out of.  I learned a lot about community development corporations, and how to run them and how not to run them.  I mean, I was exposed to at least one in Georgia that was a pretty shoddy and shaky operation.  And I learned a lot about the importance of if you're going to give grants to organizations, you've got to monitor and evaluate what they're actually doing, and not just when it's convenient for them.  But you've got to sort of keep an eye on--as [President] Ronald Reagan used to say, "Trust, but verify" that good stuff is actually happening.  But on the upside, I mean, I saw what was accomplished by groups like the (unclear) the Delta Foundation, and the Mississippi Delta, and the Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant] Restoration Corporation.  I saw those programs as they blossomed.  I saw the leadership, I saw the beneficial impact on communities--the housing that was built, the jobs that were created, the homes that were restored.  And it was just, for someone who cared deeply about cities and inner cities, it was a defining experience for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I should have asked you this.  But what's an example of a bad development--community development?
Speaker 2: Well, there was one in rural Georgia that was pretty famous, and it got a lot of press.  And I and others representing the foundations that supported it would visit it with plenty of advance notice, and everything looked to be fine.  But there were some rumors about it.  And one day the Atlanta Constitution sent a reporter out there unannounced.  And they discovered that a lot of the stuff that they said was happening and a lot of stuff that you saw happening when you came on a pre-announced visit, wasn't in fact happening when nobody was around.  And so, the foundation asked several of us to go back down to visit, and to examine some of the questioned activities.  And we found that much of it was a facade, and that there were transactions that were dubious--prices that were alleged to be paid for property and then resold to the organization, where in fact somebody was skimming some money off--just all sorts of very strange practices that were, you know, shady or actually against the law.  We reported that to the [Ford] Foundation, which was aghast.  And actually, a couple years later a lot of people were indicted and imprisoned as a result of the massive scam that was underway.
Story_ID: 102614
Speaker 1: Now, did you, you were at Cogen and Holt [Cogen, Holt & Associates] until '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed there until '76 [1976].  And then a new mayor was elected in New Haven [Connecticut], a man by the name of Frank Logue.  And he approached me about becoming the human resources administrator for the city, and I was intrigued by it.  I have, I have sort of moved between active and contemplative positions throughout my life.  So, if you consider the Black Coalition [of New Haven] an active consulting contemplative reflective--back to inner city government to start running stuff again.  And I was asked to run the agency that was responsible for after-school programs, Head Start programs, senior citizen programs, and the like.  I wanted to get my hands on the administration of something.  I wanted to acquire experience, you know, actual operational responsibility for major programs in the goldfish bowl of the public sector.  So, I accepted the offer to join the Logue administration.  I did that for two years, and then out of the blue came the approach from the New York Times to join the editorial board of the New York Times.  It was something I never in life expected, and it was too tantalizing a prospect to turn down.  So, after two years of city government, I left.  I must also say that mayors in New Haven then, as now, served two-year terms.  So, no sooner as a mayor is inaugurated, then he's running for re-election.  And the relations between the mayor I served, who was a good person, and his constituents, who were very, very rocky. Toward the end of his first term I'd gotten the initial call from the Times that the mayor barely squeaked through in the re-election.  And I thought to myself that my career, my mortgage, my family's economic viability is tied to his politics, and I don't like that kind of vulnerability (laughter).   So the opportunity to join the Times and to move into a more secure and predictable situation materialized.  It was very tempting, plus the Times is the Times, one of the great institutions.  So, and it was an opportunity for us to, frankly, leave New Haven.  I wasn't looking to leave, but I'd always been curious whether there would be something that might lure us away from New Haven.  And this was such an extraordinary opportunity that it all came together, and I accepted the offer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 103194
Speaker 1: --New York Times Editorial Board.  So, what was that--I mean this is--you had no idea that you were going to be--
Speaker 2: No.  I got a call from Max Frankel, who was the editor of the editorial page at the time, which ironically, I ran into him in the subway today.  And he said, you know, "Some folks have suggested that you'd be a good candidate for the editorial board of The Times."  And I said, "Well, is this a group you get together for lunch about two or three times a year and talk about editorial, you know, how the newspaper's doing?   And he said, "No.  It's writing editorials on a full time basis."  And I was, I was stunned.  It never had occurred to me.  It turned out that my friend, Mike Sviridoff at the Ford Foundation, who was sort of a mentor to me, had put my name in play, along with the names of other folks who'd done evaluations for the Foundation.  I went down for an interview with them.  I wrote a couple of trial editorials, it went well.  They brought me back in for an interview with Arthur [Ochs] Sulzberger, the publisher; that went well.  The offer came.  And on January 1, 1978, I started as an editorial writer for The New York Times.  And never in my--
Speaker 1: Had you written any editorials before?
Speaker 2: I'd written a little column for our newspaper called "The Crow."  I'd written one or two articles for publication.  I'd written a lot of Foundation evaluations, but I'd never done that.  My father [Kline Price, Sr.] died in 1973.  He never got to see me climb up on the national stage.  I know how incredibly proud he would have been when he learned that. And when I was with the Black Coalition [of New Haven] he always said "What is that?"  You know, he was a doctor.  He said, "What is the Black Coalition?"  (laughter).  But if I had said, "I'm the editorial writer for The New York Times, he would have just burst at the seams with pride, and I thought about that when I took the job.  But it was a great experience, becoming a member of the editorial board.  At the time it was like joining the faculty at one of the great academic institutions.  You got to write editorials on subjects that were of interest.  We each had five or six areas that we wrote about.  I wrote about education, urban policy, criminal justice, employment issues--programmatic issues, not economic issues.  I got a chance to learn about a field I knew nothing about, which was the regulation of telecommunications, right there.  We were each responsible for suggesting the subjects that we wanted to write editorials on.  And in my experience, at least about 97 percent of the editorials that I suggested were approved.  And the editorials that I wrote, subject to some editorial tweaking, not substantively, became the editorials that appeared in the paper.  So I had a world view, I had an agenda, and I got a chance to play it out with The Times.  There were only a handful of instances where it veered off into different directions.  But it was, it was a remarkable experience.  There were about eleven or twelve of us on the editorial page, and we each produced about three editorials a week.
Speaker 1: Can you remember, now did you write under a byline or was it just a--
Speaker 2: No.  The editorials are the unsigned pieces that appear on the editorial page.  Now, every so often you also had the ability to write signed pieces, which were called editorial notebooks that appeared all the way at the bottom of the page.  Most of our work product was the unsigned editorial, where you were writing on behalf of the institution, not on behalf of yourself.
Story_ID: 103195
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you ever write one that agitated a lot of people?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember there was a time when Andy Young [HM Andrew Young] got into a dust-up with, over the fact that he had met with the Palestinians.  And this is when he was Ambassador to the United Nations, and he met with the Palestinians.  And some efforts began, to see whether there was any basis for a conversation around reconciliation with the Jewish community.  There was a lot of questioning about whether he had any knowledge or any right to delve into those kinds of subjects.  And I drafted an editorial notebook that I wanted to sign.  But I couldn't get it, couldn't get it published.  It upset me for a while and then I realized, you know, I don't own this paper.  I don't own any stock in the paper; it's not my paper.  So, they have a right to decide what goes in and what goes out.  I wish it had gone in, but that was, that was a concern.  There also was a debate about the Fairness Doctrine in broadcasting, which required that broadcasters carry certain kinds of programs that served the public interest.  I believed in the Fairness Doctrine.  I thought that it was a reasonable quid pro quo for the use of the public airways for free.  The newspaper felt that broadcasters were a part of the 1st Amendment family, like the newspapers themselves.  And they didn't want anybody telling anybody in the 1st Amendment family what they should and should not carry.  So, it was interesting.  I wrote an editorial, and the paper ended up using about three-quarters of it.  But when you reached the punchline, or the conclusion, it went off in an opposite direction on me.  But it wasn't my paper, it's their paper.  And so, I was writing for the paper and expressing its perspective.  So it had the right to, you know, its view on the editorial page.  So, they used most of my work product, but not my conclusion.  Those were about the only two situations in which I felt that the views that I held very strongly, and the editorials that I had written, did not reach the paper.
Speaker 1: What did you write, you think, that had the most impact, or that you'd gotten feedback about that had the most impact?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember there was, there was a debate over the efficacy of Head Start.  And right during that period, some of the early results of the evaluations and the parity of pre-school programs came out, and they were favorable to Head Start.  And I seized on that to editorialize on behalf of public investment in early childhood education.  I think those editorials helped that issue, and I wrote a lot about public education, in particular, the work that people that Jim Comer [HM James Comer] and Ron Edmonds [Ronald Edmonds], people who refused to accept the bleak prognosis that there wasn't much urban schools could do to improve the life prospects of minority kids; people like Comer and Edmonds, and others felt differently.   They developed demonstration programs to try to prove differently, and I wrote about their work.  So, I used that voice and that platform to try to proselytize for improving public schools, instead of abandoning them.
Story_ID: 103196
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you wrote a book on getting your child the best education possible.
Speaker 2: Right, it's a book called "Achievement Matters."
Speaker 1: Was that informed by some of the articles you wrote for The New York Times?
Speaker 2: To a degree.  But it was informed primarily by the work of our [National] Urban League movement in promoting the notion of academic achievement; we did a lot of good work there. And it was informed by the fact that I'd been a mentor, both when I was in law school and later to young boys who were struggling in school.  And as I tell people, I'm a retired kid.  So it was informed by the fact that I'd been a child that had experiences dealing with the schools.  I knew how important it was for parents to be deeply involved in the schools.  And lastly, it was informed by a good deal of research, so certainly by [HM James Comer] Jim Comer's work and the work of others.  But there were many influences that shaped the content of the book.
Story_ID: 103197
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, oh, did you know James, did you know [HM] James Comer?
Speaker 2: I know him quite well.  I first met him when we lived in New Haven [Connecticut].  And I actually lived across the street.  The first home we bought in 1968 was across the street from one of the first schools where he worked.  And our eldest daughter enrolled in that school, so we were exposed to the school development program very early on in our own experience as a family, and his experience as a school reformer.  In getting to know him, he became a very dear friend and mentor.  He and his wife [Shirley Comer] are very close friends.  In getting to know him, we discovered that he'd gone to Howard University Medical School [Washington, D.C.] and had taken courses from my mother-in-law, who had taught all the medical and dental school students who had gone through Howard.  She was an anatomy professor.  And he also knew my father [Kline Price], who had taught in the clinical program there.  So, there was an instant personal bond there.  And I revered him then and to this day, and thought the world of his work, and I do to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's been a major influence in my life.
Speaker 1: Right.  I thought there should be some connection with--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --New Haven and Yale [University].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 103198
Speaker 1: Now, well tell us about WNET.  Now, you started there in '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a little restless at The [New York] Times, you know, writing in those five or six areas.  I was a little worried about the economic situation there.  We'd had a couple of strikes that hadn't yielded much economic benefit for members of the editorial board.  And this was the time when inflation was running very high.  I began to worry that if I was perceived in perpetuity as a writer, people would forget I could actually run things, do things, and administer things.  So, I was keeping in mind that this movement back and forth between contemplative and administrative were active.  I wanted to get my hands on running stuff again.  I didn't know what I wanted to do, but I figured I'd recognize it if it materialized.  And I was approached by the station, which was looking for someone to run the metropolitan division of Channel 13, which was basically the station you watched--the local programming, local fundraising, local direct mail.  I accepted that position, and I was fascinated.  And I said I'd never thought about television; that came out of the blue as well.  About year and a half into my job there, I was asked then to become the head of the national production operation, which was really a lark, as I barely knew how to--I didn't know how to operate a VCR, and I'd never had a television camera in my hands, in my arms.  But I became the head of the division that produces Great Performances in Nature, and American Masters, and Childhood, and all of those great series associated with public television that came out of the station.  And it was a fabulous four and a half year run.  It was one of the most thoroughly enjoyable jobs that I've ever had.  The people were wonderful; they were passionate about their work.  I got to travel to Europe about six times a year, and go to the television festivals in Cannes [France].  I negotiated co-production deals on the beaches of the [French] Riviera.  I mean it was a lark, it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you left there in '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: Right.  The presidency of the station opened up, and I made a run for the presidency.  I had run two major divisions of the station.  I felt that between my experience in public television and my academic background and prior background, that I should be, I should be president.  And at a minimum, I felt that I should be taken very seriously as a candidate.  And I wasn't, and I was furious.  And because I wasn't independently wealthy, I didn't quit on the spot, which I would have loved to have done.  I was in a funk for about six months when I did not get that job.  And it was my oldest daughter, who is deeply spiritual, and remains so, pulled me out of the funk.  She saw me moping around the kitchen one day six months after the decision was made.  And she said, "Don't worry about not getting that job.  You're being saved for something more important."
Story_ID: 103199
Speaker 1: I went to the Rockefeller Foundation, and had an extraordinary experience.  But then when I was picked to become the president and CEO of the National Urban League in 1994, I knew what she had seen; that was the more important thing that I was being saved for.  But I got to spend six years in the foundation world, to have a chance to generate ideas.  Rockefeller is a very proactive foundation; you don't just respond to proposals, you develop ideas, and you then persuade the foundation to invest in them.  And as a result of the work we did there, we persuaded the National Guard to create a Youth Corps for teenage dropouts, which is an idea that had interested me for a long time.  I presented the idea to them, and from that conversation and with the support of the foundation, came a program that exists to this day called the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe Corps, which has been very successful for dropouts.  The National Commission on Teaching & America's Future, a major commission on the future and the importance of quality teaching in our schools, got started around my desk.  The Coalition of Community Foundations for Youth got started as the result of a speech I gave.  So, we had the ability to generate ideas, to put ideas in play, and then match them up with the resources of the foundation.  It was a very, very, creative way to operate, and it was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 103200
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how you got involved with the [National] Urban League.  Now had you been a member of the Urban League?
Speaker 2: I had not been a member of the League, but when I was the head of the Black Coalition back in New Haven [Connecticut], I had a lot of interaction with the Urban League in New Haven there.  The head of the League, Bob Bowles [Robert Bowles], served on our board, and I thought very highly of him.  The League always struck me as a serious organization, focused on performance and results.  But when I was Cogen, Holt [& Associates] doing the evaluations for the Ford Foundation, I got to meet Whitney Young, who was heading the League at the time, before he passed away.  I got to meet [HM] Vernon Jordan who took over once Whitney had died.  And I got to meet [HM] John Jacob, who was running the San Diego Urban League, and he became Whitney's successor.  So I met, in the course of my work with Cogen, Holt people who became three of the national presidents and CEOs of the Urban League.  I've always considered that to be, in my estimation, in my scheme of things, one of the two or three jobs I most wanted to do in my lifetime.  And when John Jacob decided to step down, they started a search process that went on for a number of months.  And then I got a call indicating that I was on the short list of people who were being considered.  The chair of the search committee and the search consultant wanted to meet with me.  We had what appeared to be a very productive meeting.  I decided to leave nothing to chance.  They asked me to write some responses to a series of questions.  I called and raised them, by not only writing a response to those questions, but I sent them a whole lot of other material as well.  We hit it off, and in the late spring of 1994, I was chosen to be the president and CEO of the National Urban League, and I couldn't have been more thrilled.  I mean it was, as I said, one of the two or three things that I most wanted to do in life, and a dream job came true.
Story_ID: 103201
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the Urban League--I think in popular culture, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] has been well known, in terms of what it does.  I mean, but people know of the [National] Urban League, but they're really not sure what the Urban League does a lot of times.
Speaker 2: The Urban League is the oldest and largest community based movement empowering African-Americans to enter the economic and social mainstream.  We do that work by helping children do well in school, and encouraging them to do well in school; helping people buy homes, get jobs, improve their skills, get on the voting rolls.  The Urban League operates at a national level, and is in about 115 cities around the country.  The NAACP is principally a volunteer movement, and there are several thousand chapters.  So, it has a much louder and higher profile and presence.  So, the agendas and the aspirations for our people are virtually identical.  The methods of operation are quite different, historically and otherwise.  The NAACP has been focused over the years on law, and on civil rights, and on grassroots organizing.  The League historically has been focused on economic and educational issues, and focused on direct service.  Here's a person with an issue or a need on our doorstep today.  How can we help that person improve their situation?  And in addition, the League does research and advocacy.  But the methods are, the aspirations are similar; the methods complement one another.  There's a division of labor between the two, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The research provides a resource for those who are trying to make--
Speaker 2: Right.  The League launched the State Of Black America, you know, over a quarter of a century ago.  It's a signature publication.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And both the League and the NAACP began around the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're the younger sibling.  The NAACP started in 1909, and the Urban League got started in 1910.
Story_ID: 103202
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, tell me about what was going on at the [National] Urban League when you got there.  I mean, all these things are ongoing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what were the issues and the challenges when you--
Speaker 2: Well, we had a variety of issues.  We, there were financial challenges.  We were running a bit in the red, and we had to, we had to stanch the outward flow by squeezing down the size of the organization.  I think the perception of the organization and the agenda had become a bit diffused.  So, we tried to sharpen the focus by concentrating heavily on the development of young people and the academic achievement.  Our mission and the way people perceived us was not terribly distinguishable, as you noted from the NAACP.  So, we debated whether or not we were really a civil rights organization.  And we came to the conclusion that while we do civil rights and we have a great history, that's not what we do most of the time.  So, we developed this formulation that we are the oldest and largest movement focused on economic empowerment, getting people into the mainstream.  Those were among the kinds of things we did.  We had some affiliates that were having survival issues and effectiveness issues, and we worked on, you know, shoring up the infrastructure.  Our board was comprised of people who believed deeply in the Urban League.  It did not quite have the level of clout that we wanted, so we reconstituted the board.  We had a modest endowment that was shrinking, because we were running deficits.  We stopped, as I said, the hemorrhaging, and then we launched an endowment campaign that resulted in tripling the size of our endowment.  So we did a lot of work focused on the external agenda, but also we did a great deal of work on trying to shore up the infrastructure of the organization.  But as you said, this is a work in progress.  So, organizations need to be engaged in a perpetual process of examining their strategies and how they function.  And in addition, the world changes around you.  And the world after 9/11 is radically different from the world when I got to the League in 1994.  When I got there, one of the hottest issues was relations between blacks and Jews.  That's not that big of an issue today.  Education wasn't that hot an issue in the African American community then.  It is a much bigger issue today, as we understand the stakes that are involved.  So, we try to address the needs of the organization that I found in 1994, building on the strengths and the contributions of those who have gone before us, and setting the stage for the next generation to take over.
Story_ID: 103203
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were with the [National] Urban League until 2003?
Speaker 2: April of 2003.
Speaker 1: All right.  And why did you leave?
Speaker 2: There were several reasons I left.  I think a nine-year run is a good, healthy run by any standard.  When you look at the tenure of most corporate CEOs and most college and university presidents, eight, nine, ten years is a strong run.  Secondly, I thought things had gone quite well, and I wanted to leave when everybody and I felt they'd gone well, rather than having people say "Why in the hell did he stay on so long?"  I didn't want to stay past my prime.  The travel was grueling.  I was on the road approximately four weeks out of five, and two weekends out of five, for nine years.  That ceases to be funny after a while (laughter).  I feel very strongly that you, that organizations, in order to retain their vitality, have to be regenerated with new leadership and new ideas, and that younger generations have to take over.  I mean, I reached the decision that I felt it was time to leave as I approached age sixty-one.  I believe that it was time for the forty-year-olds to take over.  And the best way to do that is to open up an opportunity.  So, there were a variety of reasons.  I wanted to recalibrate the balance between my personal and professional life.  So, there were six or seven reasons that made it very clear that it was time to go.  And the book came out in the fall of my last year, and I felt that that would be a terrific note on which to leave.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the--
Speaker 2: "Achievement Matters."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was the highlight, I guess, of your tenure with the Urban League?
Speaker 2: There were two.  I feel wonderful about the contributions we made to making academic achievement a signature issue for the League, and a signature issue for the African-American community--understanding the importance of academic achievement and legitimizing it as an aspiration for kids in overcoming the ambivalence that some of our children have about achievement.  So, I feel very good about our contributions there.  Secondly, we had a lot of organizational issues at the League.  And I think we addressed many of those by tripling the endowment, strengthening the board, and fortifying the performance of a number of our affiliates.  So, those would be two that I would say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 103204
Speaker 1: That brings us to, from 2003 to the present.  You've been at Piper Rudnick [LLP]--
Speaker 2: Just over a year.
Speaker 1: A year, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're a senior advisor?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what do you, what exactly do you do?
Speaker 2: Several things.  You know, I got to meet a number of very important people in the corporate world while I was with the [National Urban] League.  So, I'm trying to introduce the firm to those companies to help generate new business, or to strengthen the relationships we already have with them.  We've also launched a practice focused on serving the needs of major non-profit and philanthropic organizations, and I help conceptualize that.  I play the lead role in conceptualizing that, and I co-chair.  I also serve on some boards.  During the six-month hiatus between the time I left the League and the time I joined the firm, I spent a good deal of time working on a memoir which I have virtually completed, and am now shopping to see if I can get a publisher.  I did it in reverse this time.  Instead of shopping for a proposal and getting a publisher and then writing the book, I wrote the book, because I had a lot of time on my hands.  And I wanted my children to have it, whether I found a publisher or not.  And now, I'm trying to see whether I can interest the publisher in it.  So, those are the kinds of things I spend my time on.  I serve on several corporate boards and a couple of non-profit boards.  So, I've got a very full life.  And I've gotten more control over my life than I've had in a long, long time.
Story_ID: 103205
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, what are your future goals?  Do you have any?  I mean, I know you're doing this now.  But do you have any, are you looking beyond this to do something else?
Speaker 2: No.  I'll be sixty-three my next birthday.  And my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] and I in January will celebrate our forty-first wedding anniversary.  She has indulged my haphazard career of moving back and forth all the time, all the travel.  I think we have earned the right to spend a lot more time together, and time of our choosing and the places of our choosing.  So, having more control just for the two of us to enjoy one another wherever we want to, and to travel as we want to, is a major priority. Being with our kids and having more time with them.  They're all grown, but fascinating and wonderful people; with our son-in-law, a major, major priority.  I enjoy this firm [Piper Rudnick LLP] a lot.  I want to contribute to it, and I hope to get the memoir published.  And if I do, that will trigger a whole set of activities that will be fun.  Every so often, I'm invited to give a speech.  I spoke the other day to the Annual Conference of America's Second Harvest--great food and anti-hunger movement.  Recently, I went to Savannah [Georgia] to address a back-to-school rally, and continue to promote the message that achievement matters.  So I've still got my finger in some of the things that I do.  I don't give speeches by and large for honorary; I just do the ones that I want to do, to keep my hand in it.  So, that mix of activities is very gratifying for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 103206
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  It's kind of a reflective question.  What are some your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: My primary concern today is less racially specific, but we're caught up in it.  And that is, for generations there's been a social compact between America and its working people.  That, if you play by the rules and you work hard, you'll be able to join the mainstream and lead a reasonably comfortable life--send your kids to college, take a vacation, buy a car.  This society is built around your success.  Now, we fought in knocking down the barriers of segregation, we fought to get access to that game.  I worry today that the quality of life for the working people of this country, for the middle class of this country, is eroding before our very eyes.  College tuition at public colleges and universities are increasingly out of reach for working people.  The middle class is shrinking as a proportion of the American population.  The number of people who lack health insurance is shrinking.  Housing is soaring.  The cost of housing is soaring even as wages are flat.  So, I worry that the social compact between America's middle class and working people and society is unraveling.  We talk about an ownership society, taking more control.  To me, an ownership society means if you have a problem, you own it.  You know, if you don't have a pension on the job, well, you've got to go figure out how to get a pension.  If you don't have health insurance, you've got to go and figure out how to do it.  So, I worry that the compact that we have struck over the generations, that if you work hard and play by the rules, you will enjoy a reasonably comfortable life in this society.  It's coming unglued, and that dissolution of that compact affects African Americans disproportionately, and it could call into question whether there's really a stake in our society for those of us who don't succeed all the way at the top, like some of our people have.  That's my most fundamental worry on the domestic front.  And like all citizens, I'm worried as hell about what the terrorists might have in mind.  The war that we've launched in Iraq, I think is wrong-headed.  It's dissipated resources, it's alienated us from allies in the Arab world and in the developed world that we need in order to ferret out terrorism.  So, I think we've taken our eye way off the ball there.  And I don't know what the war against terrorism [War on Terror] portends, but I don't feel safer today than I did prior to 9/11, and I don't think we're pursing the right kinds of strategies.  So, as a citizen--in both cases I'm worried more as a citizen about what's happening domestically and internationally than I'm worried as an African-American.  But I worry deeply that we're going to get caught up in both of those phenomena, and we'll be hurt by them.
Story_ID: 102272
Speaker 1: When you look back at all the things you've done, are there any major things that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Not a thing.  I decided that I wanted to have as much fun as I could professionally, as long as we got away with it financially.  When you look at the pattern, I'm in my ninth career.  So there's a level of, a combination of curiosity and restlessness there.  I mean, I suppose I could have stuck with something a lot longer.  I have great admiration for people like Jim Comer [James Comer] who has stuck with his agenda and with his work throughout his career.  I guess that just wasn't my nature.  So, we're all different.  And I've been blessed to be able to enjoy many different kinds of careers, to try many different kinds of things, whether it's editorial writing or television.  I got to do the job, the kind of job I always dreamt of having.  And in few of instances did I ever dream and scheme of getting those jobs; I never plotted my career path.  Again, they materialized.  I worked hard to, I guess, to put myself in a position that I might be considered.  I wouldn't, I wouldn't do anything different.
Story_ID: 102273
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think that there are places that are better off than they might have been.  There are programs and initiatives that exist which might not have existed but for my role.  I mean I think the National Urban League is a stronger organization today than it was when I got there, just as it was a stronger organization under John Jacob than it was under [HM] Vernon [Jordan], and a stronger organization under Vernon than it was under Whitney [Young].  So, we all built--I think I contributed to helping the position of the League fiscally, in terms of the strength of its board, and in terms of the agenda for the 21st Century.  I feel very good about what I contributed there.  I look at the National Guard Youth Challenge Corps, that would not exist but for an idea that I planted with the National Guard and the National Commission on Teaching America's Future, one of the most important national initiatives to promote teacher quality, which got started around our desk.  I'm not saying that there wouldn't have been that kind of work otherwise, but there were a number of--the National Coalition of Community Foundations for Youth is around a dozen years after we helped get it started.  So, there are concrete institutions that have made concrete contributions that were spawned either solely or partly by me.  I look at public television, and there were great series that we created.  The American Masters series got created on my watch.  I'm not the executive producer who came up with it, but I was responsible for the division that made it possible, and other kinds of series.  So, in each of those, along the way I can look back to concrete contributions that I think have made the world a better place, you know, in modest ways, in incremental ways.  I think that we made, the League made a very significant contributing to getting our children, our organizations, our communities, our parents, focused on the vital importance of academic achievement, on the vital importance of literacy--of not being ambivalent about the fact that our children have to do well in school and have to be academically prepared if they expect to succeed in life.  I think we contributed to turning that attitude in a positive direction, and mobilizing a grassroots, pro-achievement movement.  I feel very good about those contributions.
Story_ID: 102274
Speaker 1: All right. Tell us something about your family, and what your children are doing.
Speaker 2: Well, they're all interesting, wonderful young people, and now not so young.  My eldest daughter is a designer, and for many years was a choreographer of water fountains, the integration of light, music, and water.  If you were to go to the Bellagio Hotel in Las Vegas [Nevada] and look at that magnificent water show out in front of the hotel, she choreographed several of those numbers.  And she's sort in a transition to the next part of her life.  She does design work for Moveon.org, and for Action Against Hunger.  So, she's got a very strong social consciousness.  Our middle daughter is a lawyer turned public radio producer.  She lasted in the law only six months longer than I did, before deciding that wasn't who she was either.  And she totally reinvented herself as a public radio producer, starting as a volunteer and learning the field, and ended up being a producer with a wonderful series called "On the Media," which is broadcast nationally over at NPR.  She's now pausing to figure out what her next move is, as she climbs to a higher plateau.  Our youngest daughter, she started out in the field of youth development and then went into fundraising work for a children's theater.  She came up with a very powerful idea of a spiritually oriented performance festival, one that would try to connect people in more powerful, higher plane in the aftermath of 9/11.  And she got a grant from someone who asked whether she'd like to try to devote a year to making it happen.  And she's onto a very powerful idea, and I hope it flies.  And our son-in-law, who's married to our oldest daughter is a very talented theatrical and industrial designer.  And so, we're blessed to have three beautiful daughters in every sense of the word, and have such a wonderful son-in-law.  And young people who are, who have a deep sense of social conscious--I know when I talk about an issue or something I'm doing--if I can't explain it to them in a way that makes sense to them, it's not right.  (Laughter).  I mean, they are--and my wife is the same way.  Their sense of what's right and wrong and just is so very strong that they are a barometer for me in judging whether what I'm doing makes sense and is the right thing.  And I can't ask for more than that out of, out of my wife and our children.
Story_ID: 102275
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think you need to go over?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of.  It's been pretty exhaustive.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, but I mean a fascinating set of questions.
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a professional explorer who left a constructive mark at every destination.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you, Sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 102276
Speaker 1: This photo is of my, the wedding day of my parents. They got married at St. Philip's Church in Harlem [New York City, New York] in 1935.  On the far left is my father's mother [Irene Price].  Next is his mother's sister.  The two young people are, let me see.  One of them is my mother's brother's daughter.  And another is my mother's sister's son.  The little fellow is one of the people who joined his parents in crossing over, and I've never set eyes on him.  Next, among the adults, third from the left is my mother's mother [Cora Schuster], my mother's father [Augustus Schuster], my father [Kline Price] and mother [Charlotte Schuster Price], and my father's brother.  And that's a photo from 1935, their wedding right outside of St. Philip's Church in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my brother and sister-in-law, my brother, Kline, who is a physician, and my sister-in-law, Baby Drew Price, who is the eldest daughter of the legendary Charles Drew.  The picture was taken probably around 1975 or so.
Speaker 2: All right, good.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my brother and me with my mother outside the house that we rented in Oak Bluffs in the Highlands every summer from 1941 to about 1948.  That's a load of stuff that we'd just caught right off of the lagoon, not the lagoon, the harbor in Oak Bluffs.  And that picture looks like it's probably around 1946 or 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my mother and father, Dr. Kline Price and Charlotte Price.  Looks like they're walking down the street in Washington, D.C.  I would guess that picture is from the mid-'40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Solo picture of my mother, probably around the same year.  That picture is down in Charles County, Maryland right outside of a house that we renovated.  And we renovated that in 1940 terms, 1949 terms, not 1999 terms.  So, basically it's an old farmhouse that's been passably restored.  And it's the house that my grandfather, my father's father, lived in down in Charles County when he was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a slightly faded picture of my brother and me.  That's probably 1944 or 1945.  I look like I was probably about four or five years old, and he's five years older than me.  You can see we don't look much alike, although if you went back and looked at a lot of pictures of the family, you'd see both of us reflected in our ancestors.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Now this is the most valuable picture I've ever taken.  I met Jackie Robinson in 1953 when a sportswriter by the name of Art Carter, who is the father of the young man opposite me, came across the street in Washington, D.C., he lived across the street.  And he said, "The Dodgers and Jackie are coming to town on the way north to spring training.  Do you want to meet him?"  And I said, "Surely, you jest," or its equivalent (laughter).  And I got my picture taken with him, and it was published in the Afro-American.  Jackie wasn't just a hero to me, he was a deity because of the role he played in obviously integrating major league baseball, but also because of his outspokenness, his leadership, his strength, his bravery.  And there's no picture with a celebrity I've taken since then that means as much to me as that one does.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting picture, I'm on the left.  I was an editorial writer with The New York Times at the time, and I was part of the group of journalists who appeared on Meet the Press.  The format back then was there wasn't one interlocutor the way it is now with Tim Russert; they had several visiting journalists.  And our guest that day was [HM] Vernon Jordan, my predecessor twice removed as the president of the National Urban League.  I would put that picture around probably 1980.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's actually on here.  It's--
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-One, [1981], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Just before, probably just as Vernon was stepping down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture from my tenure with the National Urban League.  I went out to Los Angeles [California] for the gala dinner and got to meet all sorts of wonderful celebrities.  There's Denzel Washington and his wife [Pauletta Pearson Washington] on the left, and [HM] John Mack who is the president and CEO of the Los Angeles Urban League, and of course, Magic Johnson on the far right.  Denzel was being honored that day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the fascinating things about running the Urban League was all of the world leaders you get to meet.  President George [W.] Bush came to address our annual conference in Washington, D.C. in the summer of 2001.  And this is the picture right after I'd introduced him, and presented him with a copy of the State of Black America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me with former Vice President, Al Gore, who was running for president.  He spoke at our annual conference, and I like to pretend that I'm his running mate (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, his running mate (Laughter).
Speaker 1: President Bill Clinton at the (unclear) Annual Conference in the summer of 1997 after he had been, excuse me, '99 [1999], no wait a minute, '97 [1997], he was first elected in '92 [1992]--the summer of '97 [1997] in Washington, D.C. after he had been elected. Amusingly enough, that picture was taken outside of the men's room.  And there was a sign right up there above, between us, which said "Men."  And we decided that was self-evident, so we erased that.  (Laughter).  But this is a picture of the two of us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture with her own self, Oprah Winfrey, who we honored a couple of years ago at the annual dinner at the League, and with Mike Critelli, the CEO of Pitney-Bowes, who's the chairman of the board of the National Urban League.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my wife [Marilyn Lloyd Price] and me overlooking Lake Como at the Bellagio in Italy.  Right after I left the League, we went to Italy for two and a half months and served as the presiding hosts at the Study and Conference Center run by the Rockefeller Foundation.  It's one of the most beautiful settings on earth, and that's a picture of the two of us with that backdrop.
Speaker 2: I've heard about that place.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's to die for.
Speaker 2: Looks fantastic.
Speaker 1: You know, the last day on the job with the Urban League was April 11th, and on the 14th we were on the airplane.  We didn't get back until the end of June.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my eldest daughter, Traer, and her husband of nearly ten years, Steve Mitchell, a wonderful young man.  And I think that picture may have been taken in Venice [Italy].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of myself with my mother, who is a wonderful lady, who will be ninety-two in early October.  She's still capable of walking ten to fifteen miles a day, and quite the activist and role model for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my marvelous and beautiful wife, looking out over Dubrovnik in Croatia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our middle daughter, Janeen, the lawyer turned public radio producer, a wonderful young woman, as are all of our kids.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is our youngest daughter, Lauren.  That one was taken in the Amazon in Ecuador.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Lewis Latimer's former residence.  It's now the Latimer Museum.  It's where I used to stay when I was in college.  I'd come up to visit my Aunt Louise, who was Lewis Latimer's daughter.  And I was coming up to see a girl that I was dating in Brooklyn, and basically I would stay there.  Aunt Louise was telling me about all the great things Uncle Lewis did, and all I wanted to know was how to get to the Midland in Brooklyn.  That house is now a museum.  I used to stay in the front bedroom and spend the night and weekends.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture from the Achiever's Society induction ceremony out in San Diego [California].  One of the things that I'm proudest of is we borrowed an idea that had gotten started in Florida, creating a community based honor society, and inducting youngsters who had earned B averages or better into that Achiever's Society.  And these are some of the youngsters who had been inducted in previous years, and they presided over the ceremony to induct the new group of kids.  That day we took in 350 young people, all of whom had B averages or better, and half of whom of boys.  And we had a thousand people in the church that day.  And these young kids in the picture are all the kids who were inducted and appeared in the African American newspapers.  I mean, we really showed that you can turn the attitudes of young people around.  The top picture, I don't remember the names of all the people involved there.  So, and plus it's fading, so you might just want to work with the one down below.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of George Latimer, who is my great-great-grandfather.  George Latimer escaped from Virginia and went to Massachusetts in the late 1840's.  The abolitionists rallied around his cause and kept him from being recaptured, and he became a cause celebre around the start of the Civil War.  He had several children, one of whom was Lewis Latimer, the famous inventor.  And another of whom was Margaret Latimer, who was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Lewis Latimer, the celebrated inventor, who is my great-uncle, great-great-uncle, I guess, and who is the son of George Latimer the escaped slave, and the brother of my great-grandmother, Margaret Latimer.
Speaker 2: He invented the filament for the lightbulb.
Speaker 1: He joined, he was part of--
Speaker 2: He was a pioneer--
Speaker 1: --yeah, of the Edison group.  And also, if you ever rode in the Pullman cars on the trains, remember the pop-down toilets and sinks?  You press a button and the sink came down?  It was made out of aluminum?
Speaker 2: I never--
Speaker 1: See, you're too young for that.  But if you rode a Pullman car, a sleeper car, way back in the '40s [1940s], they had the toilets built in, and the sink built into a little corner in the wall.  And you'd just press a button and up pops the toilet, and down pops the sink.  And he was very involved in the invention of those.  I think those may have been his.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Irene Payne Price [ph.], who was my father's mother.  She was very active in Mount Zion Church in Georgetown, which is a famous and old African-American church in Georgetown.  And she was quite the actress.  She ran a drama group at Mount Zion Church, quite a grand lady.  If you ever see pictures of her right next to my dad, you'll see the resemblance was amazing.  You don't see these things until--like I'd be looking at my mother for years, and you get that picture of us together and you can see from whence I came (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's the picture of a crowded Mount Zion Church, gathered to see one of my grandmother's theatrical productions.  I gave a speech in that church.  I got an invitation from the, there's a chapter of the Eastern Star named after her.  And I got an invitation to come speak there.  And I could feel the spirits, her spirit's there, it was something.  And I met people who'd known her, even though I'd never met her, to the best of my knowledge.  I think she died before I was born.
