Story_ID: 117269
Speaker 1: Okay, well I can't tell you the occasion, but I can say that that was taken in the 1950s, in Brooklyn, New York [New York City, New York].  And that's my parents and myself in our apartment in the housing projects, Gowanus Housing Projects in Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: That should a--my, my prom picture from--gee, I can't remember whether that was high school or college.  It may have been--probably was college.  Oh, I don't--I can't say--I can't say which one it is, but that's, that's what that was, prom, yeah.
Speaker 1: This was taken in the student newspaper office at NYU [New York University in New York City, New York].  And they're calling out to somebody I suppose.  Those were good times at the student center at the university.
Speaker 2: This is the 'Foxtrappe' magazine, which was a magazine that I edited that was a companion to the Foxtrappe Club--ta--Town Club here in [Washington] D.C. that was--had its heyday in the mid '70s [1970s]; in fact, it opened in the mid '70s [1970s].  Yeah, and I'm in there someplace in the--there's my photo there.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's our crew at the news--school newspaper at NYU called the 'Washington Square Journal'.  And I still keep in touch with almost everybody in that picture.
Speaker 2: Who's she?
Speaker 1: Jo [sic, Joan] McCoy is her name.  She use--sociology major, and she went on to teach at NYU, and she's probably still there.
Speaker 2: Do you wanna just identify the names?  You don't have to describe each one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you're able to describe--
Speaker 1: Sure, sure.
Speaker 2: --from left to right.
Speaker 1: That's, that's Andrew Kagan, Joan McKoy, Terence Bertele, Nancy McKeyan [ph.], myself, Nancy Bundt, Robert Oppedisano.
Speaker 2: And there I am in my official portrait for the college yearbook at the School of Commerce at New York University.  And NY--NYU just opened a campus right here in Washington, which is not too far from here as a matter of fact.  Oh, oh, the--oh yeah, they had another picture of--I thought I put a bookmark in here.  I guess--maybe, okay, it was--they had the picture of all the activities.  And I was active in the student government, but I don't think I'm--I can't find that picture, but they do have one of the--of the school paper so let me find that one.  And I was not in a fraternity.  That's whole another story.  That was for when they had segregated almost (word?) fraternities.  Yeah, and so they--and NYU had several schools--three main schools--so this is just one of them.  This was sort of the business school.  This is the radio station.  And there's [HM] Odetta [Gordon] stopping in.  How nice.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was the 'Washington Square Journal' office.  I was co-edit--I was co-editor in the spring of 1968 and then there's the other co-editor.  We were roommates, Andy Kagan.  And that was at the top of the (unclear) Student Center on, on Washington Square Park, which has been since demolished, and they've got something even bigger and better.  In those days you could just--anybody could just walk in when I--when you've gone there in the last few years, they've got all kinds of security and everything since.  It was at that even--that started even before [September 11th, 2001], when they were having, having those truck, truck bombings and everything.
Speaker 2: I'm sure that's one of the historical significance of the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bob McGruder--
Speaker 2: Bob McGruder.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this, this is a diversity award given by Kent State University, where Bob McGruder [Robert G. McGruder] was the first black editor of the student paper.  And he went on to become editor of the 'Detroit Free Press' and of the American--of the Associated Press Managing [sic, Media] Editors Association.  And they give out this award every year to somebody who embodies diversity efforts, and so I got that this year--in 2010.
Speaker 2: This is the Ida B. Wells Award that was just--that--I just got that in January.  And that's given by the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] and the Medill School, which is a journalism school at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].
Story_ID: 117548
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: All right, Richard Prince, P-R-I-N-C-E, and Richard is spelled R-I-C-H-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  It's Everett.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: E-V-E-R-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: All right, July 26th, 1947, in New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Journalist.  Right now I'm a columnist for the Maynard Institute for Journalism Education.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 22nd, if I recall correctly, 2013 [October 22, 2013].
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 117549
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.  We've asked everybody else these questions, so.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do, do you have a, a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food.  That's interesting.  I have to think about that.  At the moment, it's--I just have a category of favorite food, and that is whatever is healthy--healthful, and low calorie, and will just, just to help my--improve my health.  That's, that's what--that's my main criteria these days.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue I think is a good color, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't get to go on too many vacations (laughter).  So, let's just see.  Do I have a favorite vaca-?  No, I can't say that I do, 'cause I don't go on vacation that often.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm trying to think of what it is 'cause I'm always saying it and I, I--say to myself.  Oh, well, all right--well, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, all right.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's how--that's how it goes (laughter).
Story_ID: 117550
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side, but separately, then we'll--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --put them together.  So can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Her name was Audrey, A-U-D-R-E-Y, Elaine Prince, and her maiden name was, was White.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when is her birda--date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, she was born in New York City on December 29, 1924.
Speaker 1: All right, and so what do you--what, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Her mother, my grandmother, had just passed away at age 100 last year.  And she worked in Macy's Department Store as a buyer for many years, lived in New York.  I think she's--she wa--before that she was in New Jersey and, and Philadelphia, as I recall.  She had a sister who married one of my uncles, and so that--so that that sister became my relative from both sides of the family.  And I met my great grandmother when I was young.  Her name was Sister Stella they used to call her, and she also lived in Harlem.  And that's as far back as I go on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you--have--as far as you know have your ma--ma--mother's people been in New York, I mean as far as your historical memory goes back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all in New York.  I, I don't know anybody who's lived anywhere else other than New York--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on that side of the family.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, there've been black folks in New York a long time, so.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Now she didn't--she didn't (unclear) start out in New York, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She, she was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I believe and in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know much beyond that.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  She was in the North.  She wasn't in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She has no--there, there--there's no--Southern roots--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know of any Southern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --connections there.
Story_ID: 117551
Speaker 1: All right, so--all right, so, so, so these are--you know, your, your mother's pe--people basically have a history of living in the urban Northeast.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Basically Philadelphia, New Jersey--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --New York.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And wa--wa--what kind of jobs did they do?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  Other than my gra--my, my grandmother-well, my mother [Audrey Elaine Prince] of cour--she worked in the post office, but that was when we moved to Long Island.  But I don't know--there was somebody in--one of my relatives was sort of a preacher, but I didn't know too much about, about that.  His name was Dr. Simon.  We used to call him Dr. Simon.
Speaker 1: What, what denomination was he?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't--it was--it was--it was--it was a--not one of the traditional denominations, so I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was this like a storefront--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't--it wasn't--or, or I only saw him in his house, not in, you know, a church setting.  So that--I don't know too much about that.
Story_ID: 117552
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what about your grandfather?  Did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now my grandfather was Jonathan Prince, came from Saint Kitts in the West Indies and as did my grandmother, his wife.  And they, they were really the dominant side of the fam--of my family, 'cause he had five children, who are all--who my--who are all my uncles.  And they all lived in, in Harlem in New York.  And he was a--he came--I don't--I figure--I don't know exactly when he came here, but it was in the early part of the 20th Century.  And he worked as an elevator operator.  And--you know, I guess there's some parts of the family who are--that are still in Saint Kitts 'cause there are relatives there.  But that's, that's that part of the family.  And they were, you know, Harlem [New York] based and oriented.  I remember I was talking with another friend who mentioned Thelonious Monk, and turns out that one of my uncles and he were good friends because they were both musicians in Harlem.  And I have another uncle who, you know, was also musically inclined.  He plays the harmonica and all of that.  So, my family I guess is basically--and, and that cultural side of that West Indian side is, is, is more prominent in my family.
Story_ID: 117553
Speaker 1: All right--now did, did, did your mother have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, no, she [Audrey Elaine Prince] didn't go to college then.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up in--now did she grow up in Harlem or--
Speaker 2: I believe she--well, I don't think she grew up in Har--she grew up in Manhattan [New York].  I don't know if it was Harlem [New York] at that point.  Because in, in those days, you know, black people were living in other parts of the city other than Harlem.  I remember my dad [Jonathan Joseph Prince], for example, went to DeWitt Clinton High School, which is in the Bronx or in Upper Manhattan.  And they--before they lived--before our family lived in Harlem, they lived down on 52nd Street.  I think a lot of other black people lived down in that part of Manhattan as well.  So they were really based there.  And then when I was--and I was born in Harlem in, in Sydengham Hospital.  And when I wa young--we're gonna get to that--we moved to Brooklyn [New York] and so there were more childhood friends who, you know, we--I met when I--we were in Brooklyn and then we moved out to Long Island [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so but, but your mother grew, grew up in Manhattan?
Speaker 2: I believe so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Manhattan, right.
Speaker 1: And did, did she talk about her high school days at all?
Speaker 2: Well, she [Audrey Elaine Prince] met my dad [Jonathan Joseph Prince] I think in those days, and that's about--that's about as, as far--much as we talked about the--her high school.
Speaker 1: And you said her mother, you know, worked for Macy's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as a buyer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your mother ended up working for the post office, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did she, she finish high school--did, did she marry your father first?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother?  Oh yeah, she finished high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All Right.
Story_ID: 117554
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's go on to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Jonathan--Jonathan Joseph Prince.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and pla--place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on July 2, 1924, in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you go on that side?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as--I can just go back to my--the grandfather I mentioned--his father, who came from sa--Saint Kitts in the--in the--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --West Indies.
Speaker 1: --that's his, his father?
Speaker 2: That's his father, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Oh, okay, all right, I'm sorry.  I got it mixed up, but so his, his father came from Saint Kitts.  Are any stories from the Island--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, he never--now and then there's some pe--people will come--go down there and try to find some relatives and, and I said that we're still down there, but--and they, they all--when I said the culture of that side dominated--we went to--when I was in my early years--went to the church that a lot of West Indians went to, called a Moravian church; in fact, there's one here in Washington too--and I was surprised that not too many people had heard of that denomination, because I guess it's predominant among West Indians.  There--there's a lot evangelizing there.  But in any case, yeah, we, we went to that church and there were a lot of other West Indians will be from that community who attended that church.
Speaker 1: Okay, now wa--was that that church in Harlem [New York] or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's one--yeah, one of the--that--that's--it was call the Third Moravian Church, and it's still in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your father ever go back--I mean, go to--now he was born in New York, but--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --did, did he ever go back to living--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm not--I'm not sure whether he ever went to Saint Kitts, but he has been to the islands.  (Unclear)--I'm, I'm not really sure whether he actually went to Saint Kitts or not.  I know one of my uncles did.  I'm not sure about whether he did.
Speaker 1: Now you--did you get the sense that your, your father's people missed Saint Kitts--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--otherwise, why the--why would they leave?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well (unclear)--there are people that go and, and they come up, and they then go back and stay awhile--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --and go back again.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The others that leave, like, like (unclear) never--with the intention of never going back.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And so--do you have any sense of why, why, why they left--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I think it was just a better life here in the states.  I think a lot of people lived--(unclear)--lea--leave the islands because, you know, there's the, the economy is not so good, and there's not enough jobs, or whatever.  And so this, this is the land of plenty supposedly.
Speaker 1: It's--in--interesting that we see it as a vacation place, a place that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --we relax.
Speaker 2: For us, right, right.
Speaker 1: But if you had to live on an island, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was--and see the same thing all the time--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you would kind of wanna get out of it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, any rate, so we, we don't know the exact reason, but they did come up to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I assumed it was--it was together (unclear) for a better life.
Story_ID: 117555
Speaker 1: What did your--did your father go to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he [Jonathan Joseph Prince]--
Speaker 1: --high school--
Speaker 2: --he went to--yeah he--
Speaker 1: --high school too?
Speaker 2: --gra--graduate from DeWitt Clinton High School [New York, New York] as I said.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I went to school--went to college, he decided to go to college for a while too, so he went to Queen's College [Flushing, New York] for a short time, because I guess he always wanted to go.  And this was--and my going sort of motivated him to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now did your father serve in the war?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in World War II.
Speaker 1: Did he go overseas?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in, in, in Europe.  I'm trying to think of where in Europe.  He was--he was just a--you know, he was--he was just a--just a--an ordinary soldier.  He wasn't an officer or anything, but he was--he was there with--you know, in World War II fighting with everybody else.
Speaker 1: And did he have any stories about the war?
Speaker 2: No, he--the only stories I heard about--from, from my, my--not just him, but my uncles who also were in the war, was about the discrimination.  And so they would always tell you that--about the discrimination, not necessarily in Europe, but in the U.S., you know, when they came back and how the--how the black troops were treated when they came back from the war.
Speaker 1: Which was not good, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and there was segregation and all that stuff, but nothing about, you know, heroism or any of that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117556
Speaker 1: So, so is there a story ha--of how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they knew each other just from being in school, as best as I can tell.  And--
Speaker 1: Were they, they in the same high school?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I don't--I don't think so, but somehow they were in the same circle.  I never really pressed them about, about those details, but they were just all in the same circle and you know, they, they be--they had the same friends and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  And is, is there--so they, they knew each other and then they--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --basically just--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, they were in the same circle I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's no story about how their eyes met or how they--
Speaker 2: No, I, I--but I'm sure there is, but I just never asked about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 117557
Speaker 1: Now, when you--when you think about your parents' personalities, there, there sense of humor, their dispositions--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --their--how they walk and talk and--
Speaker 2: Yes. --what they look like--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 1: Who do I take after the most?  I would say that, in terms of what I ended up doing, being a journalist, I guess my dad, because he was always--and is still--interested in current events and--yes, I would say my dad and, and from that point of view.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117558
Speaker 1: What were their personalities like?
Speaker 2: What were their personalities like?  Well, my mut-mother [Audrey Elaine Prince] was very practical, which is a good thing.  And you know, I guess like most black people back in the '50s [1950s], we were working.  What women were, were in the--in the general society weren't--that, that--they were basically housewives, but you know, we were working in addition to because we wanted to--that's after the war, you know, when they--after, you know, they came back from the war, and I was born, my brothers were born.   And it was the booming--you know, the '50s [1950s].  People were moving to the suburbs and trying to get a better life.  And so they were into that, and so that's why they were able to move from Harlem [New York] into Brooklyn [New York] to Long Island [New York].  And you know, that was just the story of mobility.  And so they were definitely into that and into saving--and saving so they could, you know, do better and have--make sure that their kids could do, do, do well and better than they did and all that.  So that's, that's the kind of parents they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and not just that, I mean the whole--you know, strivers, you know, moving forward, all of their friends and all of the people who moved out there to Long Island.  That was a way to move up the ladder, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Have your kids grow up where there's grass and all that instead of just concrete.
Speaker 1: All right, right.
Speaker 2: And good schools and all that stuff.
Story_ID: 117559
Speaker 1: Now do you have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know about all that (laughter).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--yeah, I know something about--a little bit.  Now, do, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two brothers, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and, and what are their names and what are they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, one is a foster brother named Richard Coleridge, and he's a cook, and he still, still lives in our town in Roosevelt, Long Island.  And my other brother became a Muslim, so he changed his name to Ugima, which is his first name, U-G-I-M-A.  And he, he sort of--I'd say--he lives there, there as well; in fact, he lives with my dad now.  And his life really revolves around the Mosque and doing, doing Muslim outreach and visiting people in prisons and--you know, all those, those kind of things.  So that's--so they--that's--yeah, the--those are--then I had other kid--foster siblings when I was growing up younger, but they went back to their birth parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117560
Speaker 1: Now is there any story behind the name Prince?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, except that it's an interesting--I get a lot of reactions to it from people (laughter), but no I don't know of any story behind that name.
Speaker 1: Okay, there are a lot of Princes in colonial times are here on this--I know your father's from the islands, but--
Speaker 2: Grandfather, yeah.
Speaker 1: Great grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) with the name--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it might be.  I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Prince Hall.  I mean, there, there--Prince for first name and last name in the seven--1800--I mean the 7--1700s, 1800s--a lot of Princes.
Speaker 2: Right, even the musician in the--in the 2000s (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 117561
Speaker 1: Okay, but--okay, now do you have a--an first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A first childhood memory?  Let me think about that.  Well, I--my first childhood memory really is just being--I guess playing around in the, the projects in Brooklyn [New York].  You know, we'd play out in the--in the--in the public areas in the projects.  And once we got to Long Island [New York], my dad grew up--had grown up in Long--in New York in, in, in the city--played these city games like potsy--  I don't know if you know about that--where you just--you can just draw on the--on the ground, and you had to--you throw around like a plate or whatever and hit certain parts.  You'd try to aim for certain parts of what you--of the diagram that you had drawn on the ground.  And then the kids would jump rope of course, the, the girls especially.   And those are really the, the memories I have of those kind of childhood memories.
Story_ID: 117562
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now was, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, was church a big part of growing up?  I, I did--we did join the Presbyterian church, which was up the street from us in--when we got to Long Island [New York], and I was active in that as a ch--as a kid.  The Sunday school--I remember they had a youth Sunday where I got to deliver the sermon, myself and also a next door neighbor.  And it became sort of a social circle.  I, I do remember very distinctly, we were all there after John F. Kennedy was killed.  That was where people--we were gathering after something, and I just remember that it was--people were complaining that, that, that everything was sort of turned off that whole weekend.  It was nothing but mourning.  You know, everything was--there was just this funeral music on television the whole weekend.  And then, I think, that's when Ruby [Jack Ruby] shot Oswald over the weekend.  I, I was in school at the time when the actual assassination took place.  But that church was--it was also kind of--well, it was--you, you can't really talk about that church without talking about the whole community.
Story_ID: 117563
Speaker 1: And the community of Roosevelt at that time was changing in the '60s [1960s], this was the time of integration and all and, and changing neighborhoods, and they were trying to--and Long Island [New York] was changing as well.  There was a phenomenon of blockbusting that was going on then.  I don't know if you know about block--or, or your listeners-Wa--well, tell us--
Speaker 2: --will know about block--
Speaker 1: --te--te--tell us what it was about.
Speaker 2: Block it--blockbusting was when the real estate people would threaten white people on the community with saying that blacks were gonna move in, and that would depress the property values and then they could--could--they could get, get the houses cheaper.  And so that happened in, in Roosevelt, Long Island.  'Cause there was a separate part of town where the blacks were, and so then that kept expanding, expanding and so that today it's almost all black.  But the church was part of that, and they had more liberal whites who were the pastors of that particular church that I was--where I was.  And as I said, this was the time of, the you know, the [President John F.] Kennedy administration and civil rights and all that, and they were into (unclear).  And it was--it was an interesting, interesting time to grow up at--people had--we were doing our part by boycotting Woolworth's [Woolworth Department Store] and picketing and all that--all that.  And the minister I remember was encouraging me to--you know, to read and took an interest in, in my intellectual development and all that, so that was good.  And the same thing happened in, in school.  I do remember I went back and read and I was surprised at what I was writing then about the principal.  He was also white, but who also wa--was faced with--you know, this--I guess this growing number of, of black students and took an interest and was considered--you know, was a liberal, I guess, and that--liberals was real--was real big I guess in that time and place.  And actually the church was part of that.  The church changed on with the time.  Some people left and went to other, other, other churches.  Some people stayed.  And I remember my dad told me a story about one of the women in town who was white.  And somebody said (unclear) what is the--what is--what are you doing hanging around here and everything on our, our street.  And she said, your street?  She says, you know who that, that sta--that sign is named after?  That's my family (laughter), you know, and I'm not going anywhere (laughter), and so it was a--that was--those were the kind--that was the kind of era it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117564
Speaker 1: So when you--when--you grew up on what Roosevelt--
Speaker 2: Right, Roosevelt, Long Island, right.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt, Long Island, yeah.  And so what was your--did, did your neighborhood have a name, you know, that you--
Speaker 2: No, that--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no, they didn't--no, it was--it was a small enough place that you didn't need that (laughter)--names to the neighborhood names.  I think it was only one mile square, the whole--the, the--and it was an un--it was an unincorporated village.  So it's part of the larger town of Hempstead [New York], but it was its own school district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everybody in town went to the same high school, even though they were, you know, elementary schools for the various parts of town.
Speaker 1: So, so your neighbors they, they--you moved into like an integrated neighborhood, but, but it became all, all--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --white neighborhood.
Speaker 2: --well, I moved in an integrated--no, I moved into a--Long Island was very segregated.  They, they--we'll say it was the most segregated part of the country even.  Levittown [New York], for example, had restrictive clauses when they built the place--it was a Levittown in Long Island, and there was a Levittown in Pennsylvania and other places like that--so that when the people came back from the war with the G.I. Bill, you know, they couldn't just go just anywhere because all those restrictions were still in effect.  So Roosevelt was--they had--you know, a certain part of town where they--okay, this is where blacks can live and this is where whites will live, and that's the way it was.  So it wasn't--it wasn't that, that it was integrated.  It became--the, the high school became integrated because there was only one high school for the whole town.  So the people from the black part of town and the people from the white part of town also went to--all went to the same high school.  And so that was--that was where the integration took place.
Story_ID: 117565
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so when did you start school?
Speaker 2: When did I start school?
Speaker 1: Well, where?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, where?
Speaker 1: I know--wa--would--did you do kindergarten or--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I went to kindergarten, but I just only stayed there three days (laughter), because I told my parents that I already knew all that they were teaching, you know, because I guess they had taught me all that stuff at home.  And so, so I went to the first grade instead of a kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like 1953?
Speaker 2: I guess somewhere in there.  I'm not sure exactly when the '50s was [1950s].  But so I was always then a year ahead because of that--of the other people on--in my grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 117566
Speaker 1: So, so was your--so the school was integrated in terms of the black and white--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the school--well, it depends on what school you're talking about.  I started--we started off going to a private school in--that's where they took me out of pri--the kindergarten, which was a public school, put me into a private school that was in Brooklyn [New York].  And that was kind of integrated.  And I do remember--now this is a childhood memory.  I do remember that was sort of my first ex--experience with racism, where one of the white kids had a train set and he invited me to his home to see it.  And we went to--you know, I was--we were looking at the trains and enjoying them and then his father came home.  And I just remember him saying, Daddy, are you mad?  Daddy, are you mad, you know (laughter) that he brought home this black kid well from school, you know.  So I think I left shortly after (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now how old were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was--I don't know.  I guess I could have--I must have been in the very early grades--you know, 1st--2nd grade.  It had to be before I--before fifth grade because that's when we left to go to Long Island [New York].
Story_ID: 117212
Speaker 1: Okay, so grade school--now, did you have any black teachers in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did as a matter of fact.  I had--one in particular was a man named Mr. Moseley, who became--he was a sixth grade teacher, and he became the principal later on, after I left.
Speaker 1: Is this in Long Island [New York]?
Speaker 2: In Long Island, correct.  And he was notable because he was black--a black man, and 'cause you didn't see too many black men and still won't see too many black men in elementary schools as teachers.  And so he was--he was--it was good that he became much more interested in me once my--much about my parents because, you know, they came up to the school and established a rapport and--yeah, took more of an interest.  Well, I guess once they know that your parents are, you know, interested in your education and serious people and all that, then the--then the teachers become more--you know, more interested in you too.  So he was--he was a good man.  In fact, we had a reunion many years later with--it wasn't John Mack--it was Dr. J., Julius Erving, who also came from our town--and some other people just to could come by and thank him.  Because I think it was--maybe he was retiring, or it was some occasion like that, and--so that was good.  You know, as I said earlier, that was a generation of strivers.  You know, that was part--part of the air--the Civil Rights Movement and the war--you know, the baby boomers, the war was all over, and we're gonna move on up and get into the middle class, and break down barriers, and you know, we have to be twice as good, and all that stuff.  So, that's, that's the way we grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was part of it too I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so wa-what do you think the percentage of black students were when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: In the grade school--well, I didn't get to Long Island Grade School until the 5th grade.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And there I think it was majority black, if I recall correctly.  We didn't have that many white students that I can think of in elementary school.  So maybe it was, oh, maybe 80 percent--70 percent, something like that.
Story_ID: 117213
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now when did you gravitate towards--or you--did, did you--did, did you show signs of being a writer when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I remember I wrote a--I drew a--my parents had given me a, a, a toy bus, and it had Bell Town on there.  And I drew a, a front page and called it the Bell Town News.  And so, I didn't think anything of it until some (laughter) years later people thought that (unclear) remarked upon that.  It was something I did, you know, so I guess I was always interested in that.
Story_ID: 117214
Speaker 1: Now did you--did, did your parents bring a lot of papers home or did they--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, they were always interested in the news and everything, so we--in fact I delivered the paper, 'Newsday'.  And that was another interesting experience.  You, you got to see the neighborhood, neighborhoods, and there were a lot of--there was a Jewish area of town as well.  I think I delivered there too, and so then I became acquainted with Jewish food, which I hadn't before, you know.  And people would, from the holidays or whatever, they'd give you this food, and I'm saying I didn't, didn't know.  I wasn't (unclear) it was something or other that I had not encountered before, so yeah, it was--it was--it was actually--by that time in high school, you know, it was pretty cross-cultural.  And one of the differences between New York and here in Washington where we are, is you have white ethnic groups in New York, and you don't have them here in wa--in, in D.C.,  so that you had, you know, Italians, and Polish, and Jewish and this, and that, and the other.  And, you know, they all had their different cultures that everyone learns from each oth--each other and they--we all--I think we got off on the Jewish holidays because there were enough Jews that--who, who couldn't be at school anyway, so they said we might as well just make this a holiday.  And then all the Catholics, you know, came to school with their--with, you know, ashes on Ash Wednesday and, and that kind of thing.  And I think the Hebrew school--the Jew--the Jew--this is Jewish kids have to go to Hebrew school, and so, you know, you--we did--it was multicultural, let's put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Although we didn't have Hispanics and Asians back then.
Story_ID: 117215
Speaker 1: All right, so, so, so you--your family got that--what, did they, they get the 'Times' [New York Times] and the 'Daily News' or the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, we were the 'Daily News' we were strictly--this is the--working--working-class family.  So yeah, we were the 'Daily News' and, and 'Newsday'.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which were both tabloids, although 'Newsday' was not the kind of tabloid the 'Daily News' was, but it was, you know.  And even the 'Daily News' wasn't the way the 'Daily News' is now.  But yeah, so we--I read, read that.
Speaker 1: Well, what, what about the 'Amsterdam News'?  Did you get that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it--maybe it came at the house, but I, I, I wasn't that much of a, a reader of the 'Amsterdam News'.  Af-after all, we had 'Ebony" and--I don't know if we got 'Jet', but we certainly got "Ebony" so
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got the, the--to the black press more through magazines than through newspapers.
Story_ID: 117216
Speaker 1: So, now were there any mentors in grade school?
Speaker 2: Mentor--you mean like adult mentors?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oth--other than Mr. Moseley I guess.  You, you know you mentioned--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was somebody who was a mentor.
Speaker 2: He wasn't really.  He was just--he was just a good teacher.  He wasn't--I don't--I wouldn't consider him a mentor in that sense because, you know, I didn't see him outside of the--of, you know, the classroom.  So no, I don't think there were any mentors that were in that sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't all that interested in hanging around with adults teaching me things (laughter).  I mean, I, I got enough of that school (laughter).
Story_ID: 117217
Speaker 1: Okay, so did--now you have any a-as-aspirations to be a writer as as a--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know what--
Speaker 1: --grade school student?
Speaker 2: --I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know what I wanted to be then, you know.  I did work on the school paper in high school, which was called The Main Spring.  And, and we did have a newspaper advisor, and I did teach--take typing.  I remember because I thought that typing would be--and, and also shorthand, Gregg Notehand they called it.  Because I, I would--I thought that might come in handy if I was going to do that.  So I guess I had it at the back, back of my mind, but I don't think I was consciously pursuing it and saying I'm gonna be this--or maybe I--maybe I did think--I, I, I, I didn't really think of it that consciously, but I guess I was going in that direction.  And, of course, once you get to be a senior and all you have to choose a major if you're gonna be in college, so I chose journalism.  But I also chose to go into--to the business school so that I would have a, you know, an underpinning besides journalism, a business--business journalism.  So that's what I did when I went to, to college.
Story_ID: 117218
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were--so, so I, I take it you had good grades in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to have good grades.
Speaker 1: And what, what was the name, name of your school?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt High School [Long Island, New York].
Speaker 1: Roosevelt High School.
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School.  And the story behind that is that we just had a junior high school at first, and then the students would go to the neighboring towns.  You had Freeport [New York] and Hempstead [New York] are the two neighboring towns in Long Island, but those--so those towns eventually decided they couldn't take us anymore.  So we had to build our own high school, and we just added a grade until it became a high school and built a new one.  And we were the first graduating class, and even had a planetarium, which was considered novel at that time.  So we were the first graduating class of that--of Roosevelt High School--Junior-Senior High School in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay so you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you graduate near the top of your class in there?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't recall them ranking the, the students, but we--I guess I was in--they--but they did have the tracking system, which I later discovered was, was considered discriminatory and illegal in some places.  But we had tracking systems so that the smart kids are with the smart kids, and the dumb kids are with the--well, I wouldn't say the dumb--it's the, the, the lar--the, the students who were--learned at a, a different pace were with likeminded people.  And so I was in--I guess in the--in the classes where--so you knew who was smart and who was even smarter (laughter), and I was I guess in, in the smart track.
Speaker 1: When you--when you say that, though, it reminds--minds me that people did think of it that way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: These are the smart kids and these are the dumb kids--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So if you didn't make it to that class then you're (unclear)-- Right, right.
Speaker 2: --you're a dumb kid--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --smart one.
Speaker 1: Right and that was before they had automatic--these automatic promotions or social promotions as they called them then--so that, you know, you just got left behind--left back if, if you didn't make it, and so you didn't want that.
Story_ID: 117219
Speaker 1: So, now were you the first person in your family to--you know--
Speaker 2: To go to college?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were, were your parents excited about this?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, after all--I mean, they, they had worked for this.  (laughter). This is like I told you, we were strivers, and so it was it expected that this would happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not just--and not just them, you know, the whole--you know, all the people--all of our peers.
Speaker 1: But you know, there are peep--parents show it in different way--some people act excited; some of them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--they don't--you know, they act like it's a normal thing that--they expect that and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: But we don't--and it's--you know, and so I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, they were excited because I got a scholarship, so that's when you really show your excitement, when that envelope comes in the mail and not only do you accept it, but you--you know, you, you get that scholarship to, to go on with it, so that was good.
Speaker 1: So this is like 1965 when you graduate--graduated?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I had started in '64 [1964].  I graduated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Or, or after it was '69 [1969], but, but I was in the class of '68 [1968].  It was--but technically it was '69 [1969].  That's a whole different story.
Speaker 1: From, from high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  High school [Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School in Long Island, New York] was '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: You came out in '64 [1964], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]. All right, so--
Story_ID: 117220
Speaker 1: Okay--all right 1964 there's the Vietnam War starting up; there's a--
Speaker 2: And the Beatles are just coming--
Speaker 1: Beatles are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --come, come out.  Right, that was--that was a big--a big thing.
Speaker 1: Right, that was the big thing in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: And, and I remember this guy--I, I put out a put out a poll in--of the students when I was in-the school paper about your favorite acts, your favorite music people.  And all these--this is '63 [1963], I guess--all these votes for James Brown came in, and I hadn't heard of James Brown.  I said, wow!  Who--what is this, you know.  And then--
Speaker 1: You hadn't heard of James Brown in--
Speaker 2: In '63 [1963], 'cause he didn't become really big at--(unclear) general public, you know, until--you know, 'Papa's Got a Brand New Bag';'Out of Sight'-and those--that didn't happen until '66 [1966] and '65 [1965].  So, about--but those earlier--you know, he was already--and so I learned something, you know.  And then the Beatles, of course, were really, they won the poll.  But it was--and then we had--we had the Top 40 Countdown and, and there was all--and so there was--integration was in the air.  It was also part of the, the music people were listen to.  You know, the radio stations were integrated and the music they played.  It didn't become as segregated as it is now, you know, with all these--
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --narrow casts.
Speaker 1: --black radio station--
Speaker 2: Oh, we did have that too.
Speaker 1: Did you have it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had that, and we had the black-Jocko [Douglas Wendell "Jocko" Henderson] was one of the big black disc jockeys in New York.  And he would have--he would have a TV show, a dance show on Channel 13, which is now public broadcasting in New York, and he would give--he would--he would headline shows--put together shows at the Apollo Theater.  And our parents were very big on the Apollo Theater.  They would take us kids to the Apollo Theater on Saturdays for the matinees and you could stay late.  And that's their Harlem influence because of all the influences in Harlem, and they enjoyed the shows also.  But, you know, it was--in fact I still--you know, I'm, I'm very thankful they did that because, you know, the Apollo Theater [New York City] is legendary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117221
Speaker 1: All right, so, so, so your cultural life around--I mean, were you influenced by--now with the--you, you mentioned the [President John F.] Kennedy assassination in '63 [1963] and all the TV coverage of that--
Speaker 2: Right, that weekend--
Speaker 1: --and all--
Speaker 2: --anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the March on Washington was in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the--my parents took me to the March on Washington--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--
Speaker 2: --and that's--
Speaker 1: --that's--
Speaker 2: And so people--well, I said you know, we went to--you know, we, we demonstrated in front of the Woolworth's [Woolworth's Department Store] and all that 'cause we were part of--you know, we wanted to be part of the mainstream, you know, of, of black thought at that time and integration and all that stuff.  But I did go to the March on Washington, and I'm certainly glad fifty years later that I did because, you know, fifty years later when they're asking people who went to visit the March on Washington, I could say, you know, I was there and what that was like.  And for I, I--interesting enough, we never got to see Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech because the buses had to--had--you had to get on the buses to go back, and he was the last speaker and we couldn't wait that long.
Speaker 1: So the bus actually left before the--
Speaker 2: Well, Martin Luther King wasn't--you see that's the thing, that Martin Luther King wasn't really all that at that time (laughter).  Now you would--to think--to hear people talk you'd think that Martin Luther King was the only person that all--who spoke that day.  But, you know--and that's one of my pet peeves is that the whole Civil Rights Movement's been turned to Martin Luther King and that's it and, you know, when we were growing up, you know, we had Stokely Carmichael, we had Martin Luther King, James Farmer, Whitney Young, [HM] Vernon Jordan, you know, Malcolm X, you know (laughter)--all these people, you know--James McKi--Ford McKissec [sic, Floyd McKissick], James Farmer--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you know, and it was all these people.  And, of course, you can't forget the women, you know, [HM] Dorothy Height, and, and, and some of the other pep--other women who were down there with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  But all these people contributed to the Civil Rights Movement, and they all had different roles.  And so it was more than just Martin Luther King.  I mean, Martin, he had nothing to do with the Brown v. Board decision [Brown v. Board of Education 1954], you know, or the Freedom Rides, you know, or integrating the boardrooms and all that stuff.  And all that was going on at the same time.  And so and all these people--all those other people spoke at the March on Washington as well. In fact, it was the Labor Movement that took--that was the, the big--you know, they were--that did the lion's share of the organizing to get people down to that march.  And at one point, I remember they were--they were--they were afraid that there wouldn't be enough black people going because there were some many people--white people from the Labor Movement who were going.  But in the retelling over the years, Martin Luther King has been blown up so much that everyone else is just (laughter) nonexistent--A. Philip Randolph, Bayard Rustin--well, he gets a little play now.  But, you know, the way it was was the Civil Rights Movement was a movement of lots of folks.
Story_ID: 117222
Speaker 1: Well, you know, Whitney Young's niece made a movie, a documentary on him.  Yes, she did--and it just came out this year on PBS.  And the reason she had did that is because--she said people had forgotten him, you know.  And, you know, there was tension between Whitney Young's approach and Martin Luther King's approach and, you know, he looked down--you know, you're in the streets there and you know, why don't you stop marching; you ain't gone get anything that way, you know.  I'm sittin' here chillin' with the big boys (laughter), you know, that kind of thing.  And, you know, so you need to--you know, you need many different tracks.  And even today I went to--you know, Henry Louis Gates is putting out this, this PBS series now on the history of African Americans.  So he, he had a--they--he and PBS had this big program with the National Press Club last week in which he had a panel discussion of himself, Julian Bond, Charlayne Hunter Gault, and John Lewis.  And he said, well, you know, that we made them so large that we made a mistake in not emphasizing economics more, because we still have these problems with jobs and, you know, mobility and all that.  And--but that's when we tried to take that tack, that's where we got slapped down hardest.  And I say that just to say that, you know, Whitney Young's approach was get in those boardrooms, get those jobs.  You know, and that's--and today the Urban League still is known for--and that's its biggest thing is getting jobs and working with businesses.  So you need that as well as, you know, the marching in the streets and all that stuff.  So, you know, the mul--Civil Rights Movement was multifaceted.  That's all I'm saying really.
Speaker 2: Now was this--now--so you went down on a bus--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --under whose auspices were--wa--wa--
Speaker 1: I can't remember--
Speaker 2: --was it a union or the--
Speaker 1: I can't remember who it--who sponsored the buses.  I just know that they--the union, unions were active and so were, you know, the civil rights groups obviously.  But, you know, we just all got on the bus and--
Speaker 2: Wasn't a church or, or--
Speaker 1: I don't think it was the--a church.  I'm not--I don't think it was.
Speaker 2: Okay, they were all--
Speaker 1: Well, church people participated.
Speaker 2: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I know had sent groups; CORE[Congress of Racial Equality]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --had their own buses.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we just went with--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't--I don't know who exactly--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was responsible for those particular buses but, but, you know, going from New York-taking six hours and everything--because we didn't stay overnight.  So you went down there, you stayed awhile and did your thing, and then had to head back so that you got back at a decent hour.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very similar to the Million Man March--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, I was here by, by then so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, some people did the same thing.  They rode down--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --then they went back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as I'm sure the same thing happened on the fiftieth anniversary too, you know.  So that was a--it was--like I said, it was--it was good being part of history and everything, but I didn't remember Martin Luther King.  And I don't remember anybody else saying oh, we're gonna miss Martin Luther King (laughter).  They just said, okay, yes, we gotta get back?  Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 117223
Speaker 1: All right, so, so this--you, you come out of high school in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  And we, we were talking about the issues in those days.  So at that juncture, you--how did you--wa--wa--what kind of counseling did you have about college?
Speaker 2: Counseling about college.  Well, I was told that journalism wasn't a good pers- good field for a black person to try to get into because it was--you know, it was--it was not integrated very much.  But I didn't pay it--I mean, I, I just sort of rolled my eyes when I heard that and just said this is what I wanna do so I did it.  And it helps to be, you know, prepared when the doors are open.  That's what--I guess that's the way we're all taught.  And so that's--you know, that's, that's what--I guess that's the preparation I got ment- mental preparation--let's do it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117224
Speaker 1: So NYU [New York University, New York City]--I mean, so how did you come to choosing NYU as--
Speaker 2: Well, I came to choose NYU because they gave me it's--the biggest scholarship and plus it was I--I think I applied to Queen's College [New York], and Long Island University [New York], and NYU.  And so NYU was the--was the most--had the most to offer and so I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I could stay in the dormitory in everything and that's why--so I had the advantage of being close to home but didn't have to live at home, so that was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was like being away but still being close enough to go home when you wanted to.
Story_ID: 117225
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what was NYU [New York University] like in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: NYU was--well, NYU was Greenwich Village, so that was exciting because, you know, it had the whole history of the Beats--the Beat culture and all that.
Speaker 1: And this is the--this is the age of the--you know, this is post Beat [Generation]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but, but it was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --folk singers were all there--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --a lot of--lot, lot civil rights activity and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember--I remember--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Bob Dylan--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bob Dylan.
Speaker 2: Peter, Peter Paul and Mary and all that--Joni, Joni Mitc--Joni Mitchell, Judy Collins.
Speaker 1: Grove Press [Publishing] and all that--
Speaker 2: Right, all that stuff, right.  All that was in the Village, and so it was exciting to be--actually be there at that time.  'Cause I--'cause I do remember going to Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California] later on, and it was all over and I was so disappointed (laughter) 'cause I'd missed it; I'd missed everything (laughter).  But I was there in the Village and it was in--I remember reading the 'Village Voice' from the very day I got in the--went to New York, and I didn't stop 'til much later.  And what else was New York like in '64 [1964]?  Well, that was--you know, it was--it was sort of bifurcated because I was in the business school, and those students there were not into--interested in, in all that hippie stuff (laughter).  They were there--you know--I guess mommy and daddy--you know, they wanted to be bi--go into business and get a good job and--or be accountants or whatever.  And also they--NYU had a nickname of NY Jew, because there were so many Jewish students who went there.  And I don't think the Jewish parents were gonna tolerate (laughter) (unclear).  No, there were a lot of--there, there were a lot who were into all that anti-war and, and all that stuff, but basically--especially if you were--well, I'll say that it as bifurcated.  There were some who were into that, and there were some who said, look, I'm, I'm here to--you know, to get a good job and, and do--they just--their mentality was not--as you can see--you'll see from the yearbook you'll see.  Yeah, people weren't take--having their pictures taken in love beads and all that.  They were (laughter)--they had suits on, you know, and so, so there was that. Now racially speaking, NYU was a liberal school.  And there were a few blacks there, and there, there were--in particular, I remember some who, you know, I could consider role models who were active in the student government and all that, but there was a difference between--fraternities.  It wasn't a strong fraternity school, but actually in my school and the School of Commerce, I was involved in--I got involved in the student government--in student politics, and student politics was really run by the fraternities.  And so you had your Christian fraternities and your Jewish fraternities, and some of the Jewish fraternities did have some blacks in them.  I don't think any of the Christian fraternities did, but my roommate, who was going out for one of those Christian fraternities, wanted to get me into one--recommended me, but I got blackballed because there were a couple of people who said we can't have a black person in this fraternity, and so, so I never--I never joined a fraternity.  They had some black fraternities up at some of the other schools, in New York City College for example, but I didn't feel like going--having to go to City College just to be in a fraternity.  So--and, and I didn't really--I wasn't really big on being in a fraternity in the first place, so, so I didn't join.  And it became interesting when, when I ran for office, and I was in this fraternity system where the fraternities are backing--some fraternities were backing this candidate; some--so, I was an independent because I wasn't in any of these fraternities.  And so that was interesting, and I ended up winning, which was even more interesting, and that--I think that it had something to do with the Civil Rights Movement also.  You know, people said this black guy is running; maybe I'll vote for him, you know.  Who knows?  I don't know what was in their minds, but it was good.
Speaker 1: It's kind of like a reverse backlash or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, people--you know, like I said, people--it was the era of good feeling--I mean, you know, John Lindsey was mayor and, you know, he was this--you know, white liberal--sober--silk stocking liberal they called them--limousine liberals--the, the derisive term.  But, you know, it was--it was interesting.  There weren't as many blacks as I would have liked to have been there, which is of course I'm sure natural.  But you know, you just--it was--it--it was interesting learning about how other people, the other half lives I guess.
Speaker 1: ...
Story_ID: 117226
Speaker 1: Na, na- now that fall was the--was the election for president, right, in '60--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was John--in fact I think I got a job or volunteered in the Johnson [Lyndon B. Johnson] campaign or, or either, either John--either in the Johnson campaign or working for one of the television networks.  They just needed some college kids to do certain things, so I think I was one of them, 'cause I remember the LBJ buttons and all that.  And then late--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "Johnson v. Goldwater [1964]."
Speaker 2: Yeah, Johnson versus--yeah.  And I'd done it in high school.  I'd done a paper on Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] too-'The Conscious of a Conservative'.  And so that was interesting, but, you know, it, it was--you know, I would--we weren't really in the main--in the thick of any of that stuff.  It was just--you know, we were--were observing and interested like we would be interested, but we weren't doing it.  And then later on we had, in '68 [1968], Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy] running for the Senate--and was president, but also for senate.  Wait a minute.  When--what year did he run for Senate?  I guess--oh, yeah, I guess it was--it was--it could have been '64 [1964] also, because it was after his, his, his brother died.  So, yeah, so--and I was much more interested in, in Bobby Kennedy because a: he was local, cause he was running from New York to be senator, and, and he was exciting.  I remember he came and campaigned in, in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York].  We--people went to see him and somebody gave him a pizza, and he asked for a fork (laughter), which was a no-no of course.  And then later on, Gene McCarthy [Eugene McCarthy] ran too.  And you know, that was--you know, you had the people who, like, who were for Kennedy and those who were for McCarthy.  It was, you know, that kind of campus and everything.  And you also--but you also had, as I said, you had these conserve-young conservatives--Young Americans for Freedom and Young Republicans and all that.
Speaker 1: Right, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They were there also--so.  Not everybody was into the anti--whole anti-war thing, but lots of people were and we--I think we--was, it was fun to go take over a building and all that.  That was that, that era.  And I remember going up to Columbia [University in New York City, New York] where they actually did take over the building-SDS [Students for a Democratic Society]--and all that and wrote about it for this--for the paper.  So I was active in the student government and also in the school paper.
Speaker 1: Now did--now did--now this was like--'64 [1964] or '65 [1965] as a last year of the life of Malcolm X.
Speaker 2: It certainly was and I was on the subway the next day after he was killed. I remember it because the, the subway--I used to go up the--up to Harlem [New York] to get my hair cut, and went up that following day after he was killed and the subway train would not stop at 116th Street, which is where the Audubon Ballroom was where he got killed, because I guess it was just a police scene.  So I always remember Malcolm X in that way, that--you know, it was--that was--but that was--like I say, that was just part of--when you think about all those things that happened back there in the '60s [1960s], it just seems like it--to me and it was--it was just part of the way things were going back then, you know.  You just keep your head down.  I wasn't there to be getting caught up in all those events (laughter); I had work to do and yeah my whole life to live.  And so that's, that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 117227
Speaker 1: So in--now did you have any special teachers or role models at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York], in terms of journalism?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we liked the teachers we had in journalism, and--but they--we liked them also because they left us alone too.  Because later on I came to--come -and even right now--I'm writing about interference by school administrators in--you know, in student, student newspapers.  It just happened--this just happened at Grambling yesterday--Grambling State [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And fortunately we didn't have to--have any of that to deal with.  Although that we did feel strongly--and in fact I felt strongly enough about the prospect of that happening or any interference at all that they made plans to go independent of the university, which happened after I left.  But there was interference in the sku--student government where were there was a rather strong--strong student advisor, who once told me if I didn't like the way that he was recommending, that I could go to LIU [Long Island University.  And I, I did get my chance in writing for the school paper to use that anecdote and name him (laughter) as having said that.  So, so long live the power of the press (laughter).
Story_ID: 117567
Speaker 1: Any rate, well--
Speaker 2: You wanna talk about the Star-Ledger?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Star, Star-Ledger.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the Star-Ledger is a--is the predominant newspaper in Newark, New Jersey.  And in fact, I think it's the predominant paper in the State of New Jersey.  And I got a job there because while I was in school, I ended up being in the Society of Professional Journalists [SPJ] called--it was called Sigma Delta Chi then, and so they had an induction ceremony.  And attending the induction ceremony was the managing editor of the Star-Ledger.  And he apparently was looking for some young black people to bring into the staff, at least in a part time area as an intern or whatever.  Because they had a sense that something was--you know, this was the time of unrest, '67 [1967], and something was going to happen, and sure enough it did.  So I was there working--I got a job there working on the weekends and in the summer.  And in the summer of '67 [1967], the editor assigned me and the actual reporter who was on staff--they only had one actual black reporter named Ernie Johnson, Jr., and another--a copy aid, was a clerical person--to go out and canvas the black community of Newark and to find out--get the mood of, of Newark.  And so while we were doing that, the riots broke out, and so they had us turn in all--turn in all of our notes, and they had a story 'Why the Riots Happened', you know, that they ran at--in the Sunday paper.  And, of course, during the riots, I remember being sent up Springfield Avenue, which was the main street in the black community where those riots took place, being to the hospital to, to get, you know, whatever they needed to get to, to, to get and, and being, being flummoxed I guess when they--I would call in and they'd say oh, this boy done got shot in the leg, and they'd say was it the right leg or the left leg?  I was thinking was it the right leg or the left leg, who cares (laughter).  But, you know, these are the things I guess when you--I guess they want that level of detail when you're--you, you learn to be a journalist that, that quickly.  And I remember a woman who was--who was well known in New York as a local television reporter, big and blond, and tough as nails, and she was interviewing this woman--this, this, this woman who had lost her--her child had been hurt or maybe even killed I'm not sure, but she had this, you know, very solicitous--yes, tell me more.  Oh, did that happen?  Did that happen?  Then, okay, cut, we got enough, so and so, and it was--(laughter) it was--it was an awakening about, about how--you know, how I, I--how certain journalists, I guess, can behave.  And the other thing I remember from that period about journalists was the New York Times was the--of course--was the predominant newspaper in the area.  And they would have a stringer down there in Newark.  And I remember that that, that I would be out--something had happened in Newark, and I was covering it, and this other  fellow was covering it.  And he would call the Times and say okay, I have this happening, this happening, this happening, blah, blah, blah.  And they would say okay, well, stay right there; so and so will be right down (laughter) from the office, you know, the--and that's the person who--whose name would be on the story, the person that sent it from New York whereas the guy was there all the time (laughter).  So, you know, it was--it was--it was fun--you know, you learn--you learn how, how the news business operates, you know, when you're there.
Speaker 1: ...
Story_ID: 117568
Speaker 1: But I, I enjoyed-- You know, being in a newsroom and everything and, and learning from the people in Newark [New Jersey].  And they had the Black Power Conference that took place there where Chuck Stone organized.  And I went to--I covered that.
Speaker 2: Now, now, now this is in--I just wanna ask--
Speaker 1: Yes?
Speaker 2: --you a couple of things.  This is in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This is before the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There--there's a riot in, in Newark.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, they had the riots--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan].  All our--you had--
Speaker 2: --Watts came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Sixty-eight [1968] was late.
Speaker 2: --in '66 [1966] I know.
Speaker 1: Watts [Los Angeles, California] in '65 [1965], yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had all these.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So that's why--that's why the editors there had a sense that, you know, my city might be next, you know, so I wanna be sure I have--you know, get my bases covered, to get ready in case this happens; and he was right.  But, yeah, the--
Speaker 2: What, what was the cause in--what, what, what did people say was the reason in--
Speaker 1: In, in Newark?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, Newark was different be--than the others because--I forgot what the origin was, but there was a lot about people coming back from Vietnam and having weapons.  I've forgotten--it was twenty-six dead or something like that, but it was--it was--it was a little different from what happened in the other places.  And it was--I, I can't remember the details because it was so long ago, but that, that experience at the Star-Ledger had far reaching consequences for me personally because after the riot was over they--the governor appointed a commission--Governor Hughes, Richard Hughes--called the Hughes Commission, I guess it was.  And it was--one of the recommendations was that because the [U.S.] National Guard was all white--because in those days in order to get to--you have--to get it--getting into the National Guard meant you could avoid the draft, but the only way you could get into the National Guard is if you knew somebody.  And, and most of those people were white, but practically all of them were white.  And so the Commission said that one of the reasons--one of the things that exacerbated the whole riot was the fact that the National Guards people were all white going into these black communities, and that just made things worse.  So you need to integrate this National Guard right away.  So I knew that because I was working at the Star-Ledger even thought I didn't live in New Jersey.
Story_ID: 117569
Speaker 1: So I applied for the National Guard and got in, and that's--that was a good way for me to get out of the draft, otherwise I could have been in the draft like everybody else when, when my, my, my student deferment expired.  And so I spent, you know, the next few years going up to New Jersey for the week--for once a month for the weekends and then in the summer for the summer--summer camp--in the National Guard.  And then eventually I transferred down here to Washington because I was by then working at the Washington Post, so I went to Andrews Air Force Base.  But that was--you know, I was in the right place at the right time, so it was another advantage of, of being in Newark [New Jersey].
Story_ID: 117570
Speaker 1: The other thing is that was changing was the terminology was going from negro to black at time.  And I remember putting black in one of my stories, and the white rewrite guy was saying, wel l, we can't use black just because the people on the street corners say black, you know.  And so it remained negro (laughter) (unclear).  And you know, we used to--we had that--you know, we had the--that fight again when African American came, came in, and by then--
Speaker 2: In, in, in those --
Speaker 1: --brought it back--
Speaker 2: --days--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I, I, I've often--we, we discuss this in these interviews and there is a certain point, around '68 [1968] or so it, it flips.  And, and it may have been--be another earlier date or some pa--parts of the country, but did The New York Times start to use it or who--
Speaker 1: Well, I--
Speaker 2: --who was the--
Speaker 1: --I don't know about The New York Times.  I think [HM] Charlayne Hunter-Gault had a, a role in, in deciding when the Times would start using black rather than negro.  I've forgotten what that was, but I mean, I remember--'cause she had a--they started a Harlem bureau in New York and she was the head of it, and that came up then.  But there was--particularly, you know, in the Black Power Movement, and here we just had the Black Power Conference that covered--people are saying black.  You know, they weren't saying negro anymore.  In fact, some people--of course, people were deriding the term negro.  I remember even Malcolm X was saying negro means never show you grow, you know (laughter).  So anyway, so, so, so you wa--you know, it--it's just one of the--one of the fights that black reporters would--you know--
Speaker 2: I, I know--
Speaker 1: --would have, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the, the, the mainstream--I mean, leaders like Roy Wilkins or Whitney Young pra--probably would have been in favor of still using negro, I would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I, I can't--no, I can't remember what, what--
Speaker 2: But, but I think--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean, the way it would break down in our--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't think--I don't think I ever heard--I never heard Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] use black until after everybody else started.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: I mean, or in fact he may have still been saying negro when he as killed actually.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: In fact, I can't think of him--can, can you?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, I think that it could be.  I think he probably--those terms were--even when, when negro was the preferred term, it wasn't the exclusive term.  I mean, people were saying black and negro or even Afro-American, because there was a--Afro-American was, was, was one of the choices then too.  So I don't think everyone--and people were--and some people were still saying colored, like my grandmother who had just died at 100.  In fact, she still to her--to her (laughter) dying day was saying colored.
Speaker 2: Can, can you think of when the Star-Ledger or, or, or subsequently the [Washington] Post or--can, can you think, think of some event or something that, that kicked them all over the hill with black?
Speaker 1: No, but I thi--but, but they all have style books and so there was--I'm sure there was a point whereas--where there was a written policy about whether to use that.  And I know that--in fact I had a hand in creating some of those when I--by the time I--by the time I was in Rochester.  And we adopted the policy of call people by what they wanted to be called, so if they wanted to be called black, you say black.  If they wanted to be called negro, you say negro, whatever it is--or African American.  And I--we thought that was probably the fairest way to, to go about it.
Speaker 2: And just back to Charlayne Hun-Hunter-Gault.  Did, did, did, did her usage of the term, you know, make a difference in them.  You, you were suggesting it didn't.
Speaker 1: Well, she had--I, I think at the Times, it did.  She didn't just use it.  I think she, she recommended that the paper use it.  I think that's the way it happened, and so, you know, they considered it, and I think they--I, I don't--I can't tell you the details of, of, of that, but that' usually the way it works.  Because, you know, reporters just don't--can't--they don't edit their own copy and their own stories, and so the editors have to buy into whatever you're doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 117571
Speaker 1: So what--when you were on the--now you graduated in '68 [1968], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], now that's--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I (laughter)--that--that's a story.  I ended up--I, I graduated in, in '60--technically in '69 [1969], even though I was in the class of '68 [1968].  And the reason that happened is that I, I was--I'd--I, I took a course and then dropped it, but I didn't drop it in time.  So they--so I couldn't get into another course when I was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  Meanwhile, I had a job offer waiting for me here at the Washington Post.  So I had to start at the Washington Post in June of '68 [1968], so--but I was still three credits short of graduation.  So I decided to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] because I'd always wanted to see what a black school was like, and I took a course in black literature there, and it was wonderful.  I had Professor Arthur P. Davis.  So I took the course, but I also, because I was in the [U.S.] National Guard and the Reserves got called up to my--from my time of active duty.  So on my way to--I finished the paper that was due for the course, and on the way to the airport or wherever I had to, to, to go to, to, to, to report for active duty, I dropped the paper addressed to the professor in the library mailbox and on the Howard campus.  Well, it turns out that the professor didn't get it for a couple of months (laughter) on our campus.  And that delayed everything, so I couldn't graduate in September as I had planned, and didn't graduate that, that--'til the following January, so that's why I say '60--it was technically '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but I say that also and just point out that what when people talk about HBCU [Historically Black College and Universities] sometimes, I know what they're talking about (laughter) about some of the inefficiencies and bureaucracies.
Story_ID: 117572
Speaker 1: All right, but, but so you started working for the Washington Post in '68[1968].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Now how did this come about?  What, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, just as the, the editor of the Star-Ledger knew that something was gonna happen in Newark [New Jersey] or might happen and needed some, some black people around so did the Washington Post. By that time, I believe the Kerner Commission had already reported, and the Kerner Commission was a national commission appointed to investigate the causes of the riots.  And they concluded that the, the press was one of the problems as well, and that the negro story was not being told, and they needed to get some people who could tell it.  And the Washington Post had its own riot in Washington right after the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination and, you know, it had a long-lasting effect in Washington.  I mean, they didn't begin to recover from that riot on--in--on U Street and H Street un--until maybe the '80s [1980s].  So they, they, they had a reporter call up my school and said have you got any, any black reporters--any black students who I could talk to who might be good for us to hire.  And so they recommended me.  And so I went down and I, I was instantly impressed by the number of black people they had in the newsroom because, you know, at the Star-Ledger there was I think one (laughter), you know.  And so I said wow, this is something.  And so I was hired, and unfortunately, as soon as I got there, I could only stay about six weeks or so before I had to report to active duty, which I hadn't told them before getting hired.  But I went off and then I did my active duty and then came back.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they're obligated to bring--to let you come back?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, you--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, once you're--if you're going for military service I think they have to.
Story_ID: 117573
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so, so you went away in, in, in (simultaneous) '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went away in '68 [1968] and I was--I wa--I went to Lackland Air Force Base in Texas for the basic training and then Keesler Air Force Base, which is in Biloxi, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: So, so this is the Air Force Reserve or--
Speaker 2: Oh, the Air Force--International Guard and then the Air Force Reserve.  Then I went on to Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi in Biloxi, and that was also another interesting experience with race.  'Cause I stayed on the base and--but one time--one night we, we decided to go off base, and we went to this bar and we ordered something.  And the Asian woman behind the bar said "I'm sorry, we don't serve the negroes (laughter)."  And here she's a foreigner, and I'm the one who's born in the U.S.  And so my good liberal friends with me go, "this is outrageous."  I said wait, let's just let's just leave (laughter).  I don't wanna start anything in Mississippi, you know.  So I went back to--so we went back and I never left base again when I was in Mississippi.  Now fast forward to 2006, when I'm down in the net--the--what was then the National Conference of Editorial Writers took a trip--a tour of the Hurricane Katrina area and the damage that was done.  We went to New Orleans; we went to Baton Rouge; and we went to the, the cul-the Gulf Coast of Mississippi and Alabama.  And when we were in Mississippi, we met with the editor of the Biloxi paper [sic, The Sun Herald], the--oh, I can't think of the name of the Biloxi paper for the time being--the time being.  But anyway I had mentioned the story to the editor and he apologized on behalf of the citizens of Biloxi.  That was--I thought that was a nice gesture on his part.  It wasn't his fault, you know, but he was from down there I guess, and it was just interesting.  I thought--I think it was--Jeff and Davis said they had a home in Biloxi too.  I think they had a--
Speaker 1: He did--he did--he did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was--it was damaged by the storm and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, 'cause they pointed that out to me, you know.  And so you can't escape it if you're anywhere in the South.  'Cause like I said, in Alexandria [Virginia], there's a Jefferson Davis Highway--anywhere in the South they've got all this Jefferson Davis stuff.  But anyway, so I just thought that that was nice of him and after all that--all that time to apologize for the way Mississippi had been.  And it wasn't too long after that--when they had an anniversary of the Freedom Rides that--who's the Republican who was the governor of Mississippi who was the head of the, the, the Republican National Committee.  I can't think of his name.  But anyway, he apologized to the Freedom Riders also thir--30 years later or 40 years later for, you know, what they had done to the Freedom Riders.  So, it--I guess--I guess it shows who was on the right side of history and who wasn't.
Speaker 1: I guess so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, this is--okay, so--and so you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that was all about the (simultaneous) (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so, so, you, you--you're, you're, you're in the--in the International Guard--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and are for--how long before you get back to the [Washington] Post?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--the--that was--that was a short term--I, I, I sta--I stayed--I on--I didn't have to be on active duty but for so long, a few--a for--like four months I believe it was, and after that I could--I--we, we would--you served on the weekends.  Once a month you go for your training and in the summers maybe two weeks, and that's it.  So--and I was able later on to transfer into the Air Force Reserve at where they--which met a Andrews Air Force Base, so I didn't have to keep driving up to McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey all the time.  So that lasted until about the early '70s [1970s].  And it was difficult trying to maintain a military look, you know, with your hair cut just right and no--you know--you know, you have to look military and exist as a civilian, during the years when, you know, afros were (laughter) all that and everything else so, but you know.  One did what the best one could do.
Speaker 1: So this kind of squared you up for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to do that and--right, right, right.
Story_ID: 117574
Speaker 1: So during those early days at the [Washington] Post--now this is like when [Robert "Bob"] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein were doing the--
Speaker 2: Right, that was in '72 [1972] in Watergate [1972].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Seventy--yeah, they're doing the Watergate investigation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And before that they had the Pentagon Papers, but that wasn't--that wasn't really reporters involved.
Speaker 1: Right, right--unclear)--
Speaker 2: That was the editors who, who did that and [Danieal] Ellsberg--you just took out what Ellsberg had and went with it.  But yeah, so I was there at the Post in those--in those years covering--well, first I started out covering the Poor People's Campaign was my very first assignment in '68 [1968].  One of them--yeah, a number of reporters was sent down there.  Then later on I was assigned to the, the city hall, which is called the District Building here, and now they call it the John Wilson Building.  And that we had a--you know, there, there were always fighting for home rule because Congress still has jurisdiction over the District of Columbia, and all they would let the District have at that time was an appointed mayor, who the president appointed.  That was something that Johnson started, and then Johnson started, and then Nixon continued it--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--like Walter Washington.
Speaker 2: Right, Walter Washington and, and the city council, which was also appointed.  And it was majority Democrat when Lyndon Johnson was appointing them, and that became majority republican when Nixon came in.  But they were pushing for full--for, for you know, more complete home rule, and they finally got that in 1974.  Walter Washington was the first elected mayor, 'cause he had been the appointed mayor.  So I was covering that, and I was also covering--after that, I covered the school system.  And they had a, a woman come in from Chicago, who was rather afrocentric, named Barbara Sizemore [HM Barbara A. Sizemore], and that's why I covered her arrival and stormy tenure.  But in the middle of all that was in 1972 was when six other young black reporters and myself filed a complaint with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] against the Post.  And we were then known as the Metro Seven.
Speaker 1: Now this is--this is big in, in terms of black journalists and--
Speaker 2: Right, right we--where we did--that was something we did.  We had Cliff Alexander as our attorney, who had been chairman of the EEOC and secretary of the Army.  And--'cause otherwise we--you know, we wouldn't have known what we were doing (laughter) 'cause we didn't know about--we didn't know beans about the, the legal side of, of EEOC, but he did.  And he advised us to seek goals and timetables from the Post, and the Post resisted.
Speaker 1: So this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is what now to--
Speaker 2: We, we, we, we proposed a plan--we, we, were rather disciplined in our negotiations with the Post.  They thought that, you know, okay these kids are complaining, you know, we'll, we'll sue them and throw 'em this bone and that bone and, and talk it out.
Story_ID: 117575
Speaker 1: What were the initial--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what was eating at you all, as a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: I, I, I know it sounds obvious.  In these days you, you, you-
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--No, no, it's not that obvious.
Speaker 1: --It's a good question.  It--we, we, we each had--it was each--we had noticed things that we didn't like.  You know, Shirley Chisholm was running for president.  How come nobody was covering her?  They were--they closed down the Africa bureau.  Yeah, things like that.  The editors who were over the city news actually lived in the suburbs.  (Laughter) You know, so all--so those kinds of things you were--you know.  And this might have happened at other papers as well, but they didn't--the [Washington] Post's mistake--if you wanna call it a mistake--was they had enough of us who could talk about it and, and coalesce.  If you just have one or two people in the newsroom who are of color, you're not gonna get very much done along those lines.  Well, we had enough.  We had nine started out, and so we were able to--and then we--and then one of the- Leon Dash [HM Leon DeCosta Dash], who was one of the--one of us--knew Cliff Alexander and brought--he brought us in and said well, you know, he believes in the fact that we need to open up the press a little more and, and guided us into asking for goals and timetables.  And so instead of being at the table pouring our hearts out and having them, you know, assuage us that way, we were very disciplined.  Only one person was gonna speak during the entire meeting, and we were there to ask for goals and timetables, and they refused to have goals and timetables.  They said this was quotas and we don't believe in quotas.  In fact, Ben Bradley said, the only quota at the Washington Post is a quota on quality (laughter), and so--and so we said, well, thank you very much.  And when we went back and--we started off by asking twenty questions about those--that spoke to the very things you asked about--what was eating us?  We asked why is nobody covering Shirley Chisholm?  Why is the African bureau being closed?  Why did this happen?  Why did this happen?  Why is this the case?  Why is that the case?  Why has there never been any bla--have there never been any black editors over here or over here or over here.
Story_ID: 117576
Speaker 1: Well, let, let me--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ask this question--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before we go any further.  You said you started with nine?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then if I ended up--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We ended up with seven.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened to the other two?
Speaker 2: Well, the other two--we had another fellow who was very religious, and he said that Jesus is my editor and God is my publisher.  And so therefore he was gonna let the Lord handle the situation for him and, and--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --not--and not--and drop out of our group.
Speaker 1: Who's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that made it down to eight.
Speaker 1: And who did he think Ben--and who did he think Ben Bradley was?
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So, so he dropped out.
Speaker 2: He dropped out, so that became eight.
Speaker 1: And who, who is he?  Can you name him?
Speaker 2: Well, his name is Joe Whitaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did, did, did he continue in journalism?
Speaker 2: Yes--well, for a little while longer he did continue, but then he eventually dropped out.  And now he--
Speaker 1: In fact, I, I want you to name everybody--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --you named Leon Dash [HM Leon DeCosta Dash] and yourself--
Speaker 2: Well, we have Leon Dash, who's now teaching.  He's got a nice chair at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign in Urbana-Champaign, Illinois]; Penny Mickelbury, who's a, a novelist in Los Angeles now; Mike Hodge, who became an actor and is now active in the Screen Actors Guild, in fact he's running for office, high office, in that--right now, in New York; Ron Taylor, who's a native Washingtonian, who is still a journalist here in Washington.  He's now write, write--copy editing for the 'Afro' [The Baltimore Afro-American]; myself, and there's Bobby Bowman, who just retired after having worked--he did a lot of diversity work in, in the news industry.  He was diversity director of the American Society of News Editors for example, and, and that, that--so that's six.  I must be leaving somebody out--oh, Ivan Brandon, my, my best friend, Ivan Brandon, who--also another native Washingtonian, who is now retired.  He, he eventually--he was promoted to--wanted to be--to be an editor at--after all this took place at the [Washington] Post.  Then he left and went to the Virgin Islands and worked down there, and came back and got his consulting work and is really basically retired.  So, then the last person is, is most interesting and that's a guy named Herb Denton, who went to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] with Don Graham, the publisher of the Post and also served in the Vietnam with him.  And so he dropped out at the very last night before we had the press conference.  He just couldn't go through with it, because he felt that--
Speaker 1: He was too close to--
Speaker 2: He would be betraying his close friend--you know, his friend, the Graham family.  So that's how it became seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, ironically, that Herb, you know, ascended into the management at the Post after all--after that and I think (laughter)--I'll leave it and let you draw your own conclusions.
Story_ID: 117577
Speaker 1: So Washington--so here you are; you're the, the Metro Seven.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you got your demands in; you got, got--well, I don't know if it was what you call them demands or what did you call them?
Speaker 2: No, we just--it was--we are, are--I don't what you call them either.  We, we pro--our proposals.  We proposed that these things be done.
Speaker 1: You had these goals and you had timetables--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for--
Speaker 2: --goals and timetables.
Speaker 1: And Ben Bradley, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--well, no.  The [Washington] Post didn't--and so the--so we said okay, finally, after our negotiations then we, we filed the complaint with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and held a press conference to announce that we were doing this, and that was that.  They had their lawyer, Joe Califano.
Speaker 1: Joseph Califano was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Joseph Califano, right, right, who became the secretary of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the Post lawyer.  And we had Cliff, but the EEOC found in our favor and said well, yes if you have a case here, if you wanna go to federal court, you know, you have grounds.  But that would require, you know, money that we didn't have to pay a lawyer to do--to go to the federal court, so we didn't pursue it anymore.  But it had other effects in that it encouraged other people in other publications, particularly women, to do the same thing and to make demands of their managers.  Newsweek was a--was a big--another example, women at Newsweek, The New York Times, and then later one of the most famous cases was the New York Daily News, where they actually did go to court and had a trial and everything.  And the New York Daily News was found guilty of racism basically.  And they got a nice settlement out of that.
Story_ID: 117578
Speaker 1: So did things change at the [Washington] Post at all?
Speaker 2: Well, they changed somewhat, and there were some instant promotions.  As I said, my friend Ivan Brandon was promoted.  They brought Dor-
Speaker 1: The person that didn't--wasn't a part of it.
Speaker 2: Right--Dorothy Guilliam was--became an editor of the style section.  They brought in David DuPree, who was a sportswriter, to integrate the-I don't think they had any black people on the sports desk, and they made some other changes.  But, you know, that's just the whole history of diversity in the news business, which is now what I--what I track.  And there was an effort at the Post and el--elsewhere to, to be more inclusive, but these things wax and wane and by--actually there, there was a big milestone in 1976 when the American Society of Newspaper Editors, which includes all the editors or most of the editors of the papers, set--decided to set a goal of having the, the population of people of color in these newsrooms equal the population of the country.  And they set a goal of doing this by the year 2000.  Well, they failed miserably by, by the year 2000, but they said it was just a goal, you know, something to strive for.  And some people did, so that's a good thing.  But now we're gonna reset it and we want it to happen by 2025, which is where it is now.  But it's actually gone down; it was backsliding because the recession came in and, you know, these, these people, news executives, you know, that was the last thing they wanted to think about was diversity.  They had to think about survival of their product, of their publications, because of the competition from the internet and loss of ads and all that, and the bad economy, without realizing that there was a pa--parallel trend that was happening.  And that was the influ--the increase of, of people of color in the population, particularly Hispanics.  And that if you want to--your paper and products to sell to the new America, to be the browner America, then you need to have a browner newsroom.  But that--people haven't made that connection and so therefore which we're still sort of backsliding.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where there recriminations from the [Washington] Post to--
Speaker 2: Were there recriminations?
Speaker 1: Did people get fired or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no, no, the Post--
Speaker 1: --through the Post.
Speaker 2: --fortunately wouldn't do--wouldn't do that, at least nothing overt like that, because they like to think of themselves as liberal and people who do the right thing.
Speaker 1: So no harassment or hazing or--
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no, not that I could think of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you never can tell, you know, what might have happened subconsciously, you know, but--since you can't tell, you can't say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117579
Speaker 1: Now, this is around the time period of the formation of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].
Speaker 2: Right, 1975.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah and Leon Dash [HM Leon DeCosta Dash] was one of the people.  He just sort of represented us at the founding of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in '7--in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: And so, so did your group stay together as a--as a black caucus or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we--no, no, we, we, were all friends, and we just had our fortieth anniversary reunion in--that's '72 [1972]; I guess that was in--was that in--2012 I guess it was--last year.
Speaker 1: This is of the seven, right?
Speaker 2: Of the seven, yeah.  And so we've all kept--we're considered--because that was kind of a--you know, a great bonding experience that I guess we just took with us for the rest of our lives.  Because, you know, we had senses--it was like sensitivity sessions and all that were going on, you know, because--you know, we were doing--we were in a--all in this together, and it was--stakes were, were pretty high.  So we--but we didn't really work together, in terms of, of trying to create more change.  We just did it in our ways or but maybe with other groups.  It was just sort of a mindset that we all developed.  As I said, you know, Michael Hodges doing this and the Screen Actors Guild [SAG], and you know, I'm doing what I'm doing, and Bobby Bowman went on and became a diversity director and--you know, so that kind of thing.  We all--and, and I--and I should point out that we didn't all do--we're not all doing this just because we were in the Metro Seven.  It was--because we grew up during the Civil Rights Movement, and that's just the way we were all brought up, that, you know, this is a struggle we're in, and we each have to do our part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117580
Speaker 1: This is a time period, too, I might point out, that all the--a lot of black professions and tea--black teachers organized; the black social workers organized--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --black police officers organized.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, and black fireman,  you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --nurses.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, you can even go down the line.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Everybody--all the black professionals--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were organizing some kind of national--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --organization type.
Speaker 2: I hope they all had better (laughter) luck than the black journalists.
Speaker 1: Well, they, they probably would tell a story--a struggle, you know, of trying to maintain the group and trying, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --fix their goals, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: It all was a big success sto--I mean a huge success where people got everything they want--that, that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that story doesn't exist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But people did form these all these organizations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's good I wish them all the best.
Speaker 1: Just, just put it in historical--I just wanted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's good--
Speaker 1: --so anybody watching this knows all that was going on at the same time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 117581
Speaker 1: You were around during the, the Watergate [1972] hearings and all that, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I was busy--you know, I wasn't involved in Watergate.  That was--the Watergate to, to me and--I was helping education at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Barbara Sizemore [HM Barbara A. Sizemore] and the school board.
Speaker 2: Barbara Sizemore and, and all that.
Speaker 1: What were they--what were, were the issues in, in D.C. education then?
Speaker 2: Oh, the same, same things they are now, which is why aren't--what aren't black kids learning?  As it--as in trying to, to do things with the schools, with the--you know, now they're trying charter--they're just trying different things, but then they had open classrooms--and we're gonna try it and maybe that'll work.  And then they had--now they have charter schools; maybe that'll work.  Some people are offered vouchers, maybe that'll work.  Barbara Sizemore's approach was something she had in Chicago [Illinois] that she called CAPTS, which is Community Administrators Parents and Teachers and Students forming sort of a--you know, a coalition to addre-dress the issues and to work together.  And she changed it around and called it PATCS here in D.C., with a P instead of a C at the, the top of it.  Later on I worked for an organization called Communities in Schools, and they had the same philosophy, that the problems of kids in schools are really the problems of the community and of the home.  And, you know, you bring all that with you--all that baggage with you when you come to school, and so the best thing to do is to have the community deal with those problems so that when you are in school you can devote your full time and attention to learning instead of worrying about, you know, the fact that you got--your feet got--your shoes got holes in them and, and you haven't had breakfast--you know, those kind of things.  Or you, or you've got domestic violence going on in the--in the--in the--your mind is on that while you're--while you should be paying attention to the teacher.  So the whole approach by getting--that problem of getting communities and parents more involved in their student's learning is a continuing one that it was a problem then; it's a problem now, and the, the influence of oneself--you know, the outside world, you know.  I mean, they're listening to the rap lyrics and all that, you know, this--so this--and that--the sagging pants--all the--all these things.  You know, the, the, the influence of the outside world on, on your own value system and your approach to learning is still an issue, and all of these--all of these interfering effects that are going on can be countered if you have a strong home, if you have good home training, as they used to say, and you've got a stable home and good values (unclear) there; but too many people don't, and so that's what we have.  And we haven't really as a society found a way to, to deal with that.  In fact, you know, I've met a lot of ways society is pulling kids in the opposite direction.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Popular culture is such a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --powerful thing.
Speaker 2: So, so, so you were covering--
Speaker 1: Education.
Speaker 2: --education and, and, and Barbara Sizemore's activity--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --pretty much.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what--now I know she eventually left.  I know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, she had a baby--
Speaker 2: --Ruth Love came and she left.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Michelle Reed came and she left.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I mean, and then there are a lot in the middle in between there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Vincent Reed was another one who people liked--Floretta McKenzie.  Vincent Reed ended up working at the Washington Post too as part of that outreach.  So, yeah, they've had people come and go in the school system. Someone--somebody else can deal with all that now (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's a tough, tough--
Speaker 1: It is, it is, but as I said, I think it goes back to, to you know, your, your home training.
Story_ID: 117582
Speaker 1: Did--how do you think that, that your coverage of it differed or, or, or, or differed from that of whoever covered it before you came on?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say this and that is I think I had a different approach to--just to journalism rather--not and--not just covering the schools.  And I think I grew up at a time--came up at a time when we were there to help the community and to cover the community--to report on the community.  That's what the Kerner Commission said the role of black reporters--that's why they needed to hire black reporters in the first place, because there was this big gap there, that our story wasn't being told.  Just like, you know, 'Freedom's Journal' said, you know, to the--(unclear)--spoken for us [John Brown] Russwurm and [Samuel Eli] Cornish.  Whereas the--there is a counter trend going on that was in its height in the '80s [1980s], which was careerism and you know, the, the iGeneration, Gecko and all that stuff, well, that had its counter in journalism too.  And you mentioned [Bob] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein; well, that was part of it too.  People wanted to be the next Woodward and Bernstein, and they wanted to be--you know, to get--be on this fast track in their careers.  And so you're really not gonna be on the fast track in your career if you're worrying about how am I covering the community.  You're really worrying about how can do this splashier story that will get me on the front page all the time. In fact, that's what they would say as one of the things that--we didn't co--talk about Janet Cooke, who was caught making up a sta--story about the heroin addict.
Speaker 1: Who--were you, you at the [Washington] Post, though--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I'd left by then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --thank goodness.  But, you know, a part of--you know, the, the first thing I thought of when I heard whole story is--you know, how the editors would say: we wanna see you on page one more; we wanna see you on page one more, you know.  And she would say: okay, I'll give you something (laughter) for page one, and sure--and that's--and that's what had happened.  And the, the pr--the priority, you know, isn't always on, on, on exploring your community.  I remember when a new editor came to the--to the Post recently it was said.  You know, there's whole big cit--sections of this city that I don't know a thing about, you know, and I don't get by reading paper.  Well, that's because they haven't put a priority on explaining what's going up there in the Northeast or Southeast, or in this place or that place.  Now, of course, they will say that they do, but you know, it's--you, you have to--there's a way to tell--them--get it--I mean, it's, it's not just--this is not just true in journalism; it's true in movies also.  You know, certain storylines sell in movies.  Well, it's the same in, in, in journalism.  I mean, now where you can--you can parachute into a foreign country and tell a certain story that fits everybody's preconceived notions, and everybody say oh, great story, great story.  Well, that may not be actually what's going on at all, because you haven't been there long enough to really find out (laughter), you know.  So, so I guess that's one re--one way you could say that my approach differed from that of others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 117583
Speaker 1: You, you, you see--now Janet Cooke, that, that took place in '81 [1981] I think it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by that time I was in Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: She won the Pulitzer Prize.
Speaker 2: And they had to give it right back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when we interviewed [HM] Milton Coleman, who was--
Speaker 2: Oh, you did.
Speaker 1: --her editor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I, I was surpri--you know, I mentioned it to him.  I didn't really know he was--he had been their editor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at the time I mentioned it.  And he told us about an hour's worth of Janet Cooke stories.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, he and also Bob Woodward was her editor too.  He was over at the (unclear) at the time, so that was one of Woodward's--the parts of Woodward's career that people don't wanna talk about (laughter) very much.  But, you know, what can you say?  That's what happened.
Story_ID: 117584
Speaker 1: Now you covered the '77 [1977] hostage drama involving the Hanafi--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I--yeah, I wasn't the only one.  I was just--I was just on--one of the people who was, was assigned to go up there.  And that was a--that was a big drama in the city, so then that's when one of the black journalists got--was killed down--
Speaker 1: This kind of set--
Speaker 2: --in the--(simultaneous)--building--
Speaker 1: Wa-wa-what happened--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the Hanafi--if I recall correct--well, they were--they were sort of a, a, special sect of the Muslims, and they, they--right off 16th Street in Washington [D.C.] near Rock Creek Park, I think they, they had a house that they were--they--there was a seize going on.  I've forgotten what prompted it, but they wouldn't come out and, and, and it was big.  You know, they had all the, the police and the helicopters and everything.  And they also I think wanted to take over the District Building, and that's when the young reporter, Maurice [Williams]--I can't figure out Maurice's--he got shot.  In fact, [HM] Marion Barry got shot as well--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was in--
Speaker 2: --in the elevator.
Speaker 1: --Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] Howard student, right.
Speaker 2: Right, Howard student, yeah.
Speaker 1: Howard student.
Speaker 2: Maybe he was an intern there who was just work--he was working there for part of his class work or something.  I can't rem-- Maurice Williams I guess it as-- Maurice Williams.  And so that all took place.  And I was just--by that time I was general assignment and so, you know, when something like that happens it's all hands on deck.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Maurice Williams.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Maurice Williams.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All hands on deck, and so I was a part of that, and, and Max Robinson, who-and--too bad he passed before you could get him on The HistoryMakers.  He would have had an interesting story to tell.  He was one--a popular local anchor at the time here on WTOP, Channel 9.  And he was able to help negotiate the end of that by talking with the--'cause the Hanafi people had a--felt a rapport with him.  And I say that he, too--he had an interesting story to tell because, of course, he went on to ABC News when they had the three anchors, and didn't fare well there, and talked about racism, blah, blah, blah.  Then he passed away not long after that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Max Robinson we--is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone we haven't interviewed yet.  Yeah, well, we can't interview him now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 117585
Speaker 1: So, now in '79 [1979], you accepted a position as, as metro editor and the Democrat and Chronicle--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't metro editor.  It was an assistant metro editor.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --assistant--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the Democrat and Chronicle in Rochester [New York].  Now that, that Democrat and Chronicle is the morning paper in Rochester, New York, but it also is owned by the Gannett Company and--which is the largest newspaper company in the--in the country.  They now own USA Today.  They created that in 19--1982, but their headquarters at that time was in Rochester, so that's why I went there.  They said that, okay, we'll we bring up you here to our, our--we (unclear) in Rochester working on paper and then you--we, we can watch you, blah, blah, blah.  And that was interesting, being in Rochester, New York, because that was the smallest city I'd worked in (laughter) after being in New York and in Washington.
Speaker 1: This is  interesting.  You say this is the home of Gannett.  Now this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where the--
Speaker 2: Right.  Frank Gannett, who the company's named after, was based really in New York and so they own a lot of the newspapers in New York: Binghamton, Ithaca, Rochester, and some other places.  Then in 1982, New--Al Neuharth had this dream of a national newspaper and--which became USA Today.  So they launched it in Washington, moved the whole company to Washington, and now they've got this wonderful campus out in Mc--McClain, Virginia.  But this was his dream, having a national newspaper, and he did it.  He was visionary.  And they cut down on costs in the beginning by bringing in people from all the Gannett papers as what they call loaners.  They would be loaned for, for, four months or six months, and the home paper would still kay--pay the salaries so it didn't come out of USA Today's budget.  And that's how it got started.  And Neuharth recently, recently passed away, and I went to the service whereby coincidentally he, he delivered his own message at his own funeral.  He taped a--he videotaped a message to be delivered.  It was in high-definition by the way, at the three funerals of the memorial services after he--after he died.  And you sat there and watched Neuharth tell you what he wanted to tell you.  And one of the things he told you was, you know, be--dream big and be true to your dreams, you know.  You know, I--if I listen to everybody who told me that this is a crazy idea, I wouldn't be where I was, and USA Today proved it. Now the other thing about the Democrat and Chronicle and about Gannett, it was they were very committed to diversity, particularly Neuharth, and they didn't just talk the talk and say we need to have more diversity.  They tied your salary if you were a manager to your progress on diversity.  Which is something the others did not do, and so that produced results.  So they were serious about diversity, and they were serious about--in, in terms of women and also people of color--promoting them, giving them opportunities, but they were also serious about profits.  Because if you didn't make your profit quotas, then, you know, you were out the door also, but they also wanted to see that diversity.  And I talked to John Quinn, who was the chief news executive at the time, later on at the twenty-fifth anniversary of USA Today, or the thirtieth.  I can't recall.  And he told me about how they staffed USA Today.  And, you know, white people would apply for certain jobs.  And he would say I'm sorry we have enough of those (laughter), you know.  We need some more of these.  And they had a rule about the front page, above the fold.  You had to have a person of color or a woman, you know, every day on USA Today and on all the section fronts.  And it made people, you know, reach for--you know--maybe people that they hadn't thought of interviewing.  But you have to be serious about these things, and they set an example.  And that's one of the reasons--ways I was brought into the Democrat and Chronicle in Rochester, because I think they had started a program called Partners in Progress, which was a, a diversity program.  And so I came on being at the right place at the right time. And it was--it was fun because I--at a small newspaper you get to do more things, and so at, at, at the Democrat and Chronicle I, I did work there as an assistant metro editor, and I worked on the--with the main news section.  And I ended up working on the editorial page where I was a columnist, and editorial writer, and I also edited at various times or in combination, the, the op-ed page, which was reader written--the readers would--could write essays themselves and sometimes they were college professors or other people like that.  But they would write--and that was what--that was a good way to involve the readers.  And even though I stopped writing those editorials in 1994, I left the editorial page, I'm still active in the Association of Opinion Journalists, in fact I chair the diversity committee, so I keep a hand in that way.  And I'll--you know, I use all that--all that knowledge of how those pages work and doing that.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 117586
Speaker 1: Is there a significant black community in Rochester [New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  One of the things that--one of the reasons I liked Rochester was because it was the home of Frederick Douglass and it was the home of Susan B. Anthony, and those are some powerful pillars to--you know.  And so I got very--you know, I would do a lot of research on, on Douglass and what, what he was doing when he was in Rochester.  They had the 'North Star' newspaper there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the founding home of The North Star.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly.  And Susan B. Anthony was also in, in, in Rochester, but about thirty miles outside of Rochester is Seneca Falls [New York] where they had the first women's rights convention.  And so that became a, a hub for that kind of activity.  And Douglass, of course, was at that women's rights convention as well.  So I enjoyed that, and the also--another interesting thing I learned about, about that area of Upstate, it was a hotbed of ab--abolition activity.  And I guess you've heard phrase, n-word in the woodpile.  Well, I found out that that actually originated in that area, because freed slaves would hide in the woodpiles on the shores of Lake Ontario waiting for the bi--for the boats to come in and take them across the lake to Canada.  And then when someone was discovered, that's what the phrase that people used (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: That's referring to a real specific--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --explanation.
Speaker 2: Now somebody else told me that there was another re--they heard a different reason for that phrase, but that's the one that I, I discovered.  And so, and I say it was--it was fun, and they--it's--they have a substantial black community there.
Story_ID: 117587
Speaker 1: Is that the Kodak town?  I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Kodak was the main industry.  And at that's--it was kind of sad in a way because--because Kodak was the main industry when digital--when the photog--when digital photography came in and all these comp--competitors like Polaroid--first Polaroid, then digital photography.  It really cut into Kodak's business and, and they had to keep downsizing and downsizing until finally, you know, I think they--they may be in chapter nine [U.S. bankruptcy code] for all I know.  And Xerox also was another--and Bausch and Lomb were the three big companies there.  And I don't know that all--I, I think Xerox is probably not as--not what it once was as well.  But that's one, one, one setback--one, one detriment of having Kodak there was that.  The other is the--is the pollution that was caused in part--those parts of town.  There's one side of town where you have all these chemical pollution from all the ko--chemicals that Kodak was using to make all that film and everything, and it just seeps into--you know, and--and I was there right after Three Mile Island [1979] happened.  And you know, so, we became sensitized to, to all that, but it was--it was interesting and it was--I also liked it because it was close to Canada, and I could go to Toronto for the weekend sometimes.  In fact, I even went--they have a train called VIA Rail, which is like Amtrak, and I took it all the way out to, to Nova Scotia, to Halifax, Nova Scotia, where they also had a--some black history, because that was where a lot of the blacks who fought in the [U.S.] Revolution went because when the--when the--who, who, who fought on the--for the British in the Revolution I should say--went when the British lost.  Then the same thing happened again in--after the War of 1812.  And so it--they have a black cultural center up there, and it was--it was just fun to discover all these things.  And the other good thing about--I'll say about Rochester is that in that (unclear) Upstate New York area, I got to explore--you know, sa--go to some of the Native American reservations--Onondaga [Reservation]; reservations outside Syracuse [New York]; there was one Mohawk reservation right at the very top of New York State where there was Akwesasne.  There was something going on, they had some trouble, so I said oh, good let me go check this out.  And then there was another down by the Pennsylvania border was called Salamanca, which was a town that the Indians--ah, let me--let me see--the Indians had said--leased to the United States for ninety-nine years, and the ninety-nine years was up when I was up there and so they wanted it back (laughter).  And that was an interesting thing to cover.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Did they get it back?
Speaker 1: I think they--I don't know.  I've gotta go back and check 'cause I--I think I left Rochester about--when it was still playing out--they were negotiating. And--but that was--that was good because right now I'm involved in, in covering all the, the diverse journ--groups of journalists--the Hispanic journalists, Asian-American journalists, Native American journalists, and African-American journalists.  And I went to all their conventions this past summer.  And when I was at the Native American Journalists Convention, somebody asked me that--well, did you ever, you know, get to know Native Americans before you started doing that?  I said of course, you know.  In fact, I remember when I was in--up at the Mohawk reservation, Akwesasne, when the Native American woman said well, "you know, I think--I think there are really more Native Americans than we think because a lot of them are passing for black (laughter)."  And I said, "passing for black (laughter)?"  Who would ever think of something (laughter).
Story_ID: 117588
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we're--so through the--so, so you stayed there until '93 [1993], in--
Speaker 2: No, until--yeah, 1994.
Speaker 1: --in Rochester [New York]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I never really--
Speaker 1: --in ra--Rochester--
Speaker 2: --thought that I would--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --be there that long, but it just happened, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there a highlight to your stay--
Speaker 2: in Rochester?
Speaker 1: --there, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, I was active in the--in the ra--in the black journalist group called--was just called the Rochester Association of Black Communicators.  And one of the highlights was we--when the mov--when Spike Lee's first movie came out, 'She's Gotta Have It', we, we showed it, and had one of the star we--stars, tra--Tracy Camilla Johns, the, the female lead, come up there to Rochester.  And it was--it was--it was a nice community about we did it and, and had tickets--we sold tickets and all, all over town and made a big deal of it, and that was good.  So we, we enjoyed that.  We also put on--we--got to know about the history of blacks in film because of Eastman Kodak and the George Eastman House, which has a, a very good film library and so, you know, especially all those early films--Oscar Micheaux or Micheaux, as I'm told it's actually pronounced.  And as I said, we learned a lot, so that was--it was good.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had--you had a rich cultural life in Rochester.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I, I tell--I--you know, pep--I, I, I just tell people that--you know, people tell me--I'm in Alexandria [New York] now, and there's a lot of history there.  And, and I went to the museum, and have all this stuff that went on in the Civil War and that--but I--my approach is, you know, there's, there's history everywhere.  Everyplace has a history (laughter);  you know, so just dive in and see what it is.
Speaker 1: Right, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're right there's a history of activism in Rochester--
Speaker 2: Yeah, which is good.
Speaker 1: --that goes way back
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Susan B. Anthony--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Frederick Douglass.  You can't get any--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --more strident that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, even if you have to go back a hundred years (laughter).  I tell you, though, because I, I remember that when I was--this was there in the '80s [1980s] when I was there.  I remember the city council was debating whether or not they should take a position on apartheid and--you know, because they were--some people say, well, you know this is--what's this got to do with Rochester.  We're just a city, you know--foreign policy.  And then I came down to Washington [D.C.] to visit, had a big sign on city hall: Free South Africa.  (Laughter)  There was--there was no discus--no debate at all about whether or not they should take a stand about South Africa. So--perhaps the activism doesn't completely transfer (laughter) over the--over the generations.
Speaker 1: There's a difference in a big city I guess than the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well and also, the, the, the, the influence of the black community was much--is much bigger here in Washington than it was there.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 117589
Speaker 1: Okay, so what took you out of Rochester [New York]?  I mean--now--
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: --was that--was that position that you attain--obtained before you left, 'cause you started off as assistant--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I ended up being the editor of the op-ed page.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I always wanted to come back to Washington [D.C.] because, first of all, everyone else was leave--was going to Washington.  That was the other thing.  The people who worked at the newspaper (unclear) the USA Today, which was here, and just people in general were gravitating to, to Washington.  And then--and I never intended to stay there forever anyway, and I had a lot of roots here.  I mean, it's, it's root--it's wonderful to be in a place where you have a history, and I did.  I remember being in the store one time and somebody said, "Aren't you Richard Prince?"  And I actually couldn't even remember who this person was, but the, the person already knew me, and so well that's a good feeling.  It's like, like cheers you know, everybody knows your name, you know.  At least some people know your name.  And a lot of that's because of The Foxtrappe, which we'll probably talk about later, which was a, a club in--for the black middle class--20 somethings---in the--in the '70s [1970s] that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we skipped over that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we skipped over that.
Speaker 1: Now, now, it is not my fault, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, but 1975--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it started, right.
Speaker 1: --you were an editor of 'The Foxtrappe'.
Speaker 2: Magazine.
Speaker 1: --magazine.
Speaker 2: They had right one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In fact, we have a, a copy of that--the, the publication.
Speaker 1: Right, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --I'm sure of it.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--you got know a lot of people that way is all I'm saying.  And then you got a lot--lot of people just about--not being in, in the--and the work I was doing, and also because the people I befriended were, were a lot of native Washingtonians.  And that's always a help, especially in a town like this where so, so many people are, are, you know, transients.  They come in--the people in that--there's so many different levels to this--to Washington, D.C., but the people who work for the government--are, are in those appointed positions come and go with the administrations.  And the people who live here just say, you know, I've seen them come, I've seen them go (laughter), you know, and, and there's a real city too of, of real live people.  And those are--I was pleased to be able to know a lot of those folks and still do.  And so that's another reason why I wanted to come back.
Story_ID: 117590
Speaker 1: So what--did you come back to work again for the--you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't come back--I didn't--I didn't work for the [Washington] Post origin--initially when I came back.  I came back to work for that communities and schools group I mentioned.  And then after that, I worked briefly for the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].  They--their headquarters is up out at the University of Maryland [Baltimore, Maryland] campus, where I was interim Communications Director, and then for a group called the, the Center of Public Integrity, which does investigative journalism.  And this was when the incident was beginning to come into its own. And so I was editor of their online publication, which was called the The Public I with the letter I for in--for integrity--public integrity.  And so that was--that was different and, and, and useful.  And at that time I also started working part time at the Post again, and this time I worked on the foreign news desk as a copy editor.  And so that was my second time at the Post, and I enjoyed that and renewing that experience.  And also it was interesting writing a--editing stories coming from all of these foreign countries.
Story_ID: 117591
Speaker 1: You, you were there at the--at the change of the millennium, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In fact, I, I missed one of the t-shirts they gave out that--you know, the--they had a po-Post had a t-shirt that said I was there at--you know, when it became 2000 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Na--now, was, was the [Washington] Post concerned about the Y2K [Year 2000] scare?
Speaker 2: Well, they were concerned about covering it, but that's about it.  I don't think they could--they were--they thought that anything dramatic would happen.  At least they didn't let us know.  But, you know, there were parties and all that kind of thing with the--but then, I'll tell you, at that time, when it finally happened, I became so disgusted with the whole idea when I, I read about the fact that actually 2000 wasn't the--wasn't really the, the beginning of the new--it was really 2001 that was the beginning (laughter).  And all that, so I said oh, this is just--this is all just hype.  So I sort of sat it out.  You know, it was a--
Speaker 1: Now, now, is journ--are, are journalists at fault for this--I mean for the people thinking that--
Speaker 2: Thinking that--
Speaker 1: 2000 was the change.
Speaker 2: Well, people, people are used to thinking in terms of their speedometers, and you know, when, when it goes up to the zero-zero, it's a big--you know, 5000--you know, you go in for your checkup at certain (laughter)--yeah, so.  So when the--when the years change in that direction, you say it must be a big deal again.  And plus people, you know, will find--it's not just journalists, it's, you know, business and marketing.  You know, everyone's--okay we have some--another way we can capitalize on this, you know, make money off this.
Speaker 1: And the sooner the better I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah--yeah, it does.  You're, you're right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It started in 2001, not--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, well I learned that later on, but anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as we go into a new millennium here.  Now--
Speaker 2: Then we have September 11th (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you--yeah, you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you were there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for September 11th, 2001.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was at the [Washington] Post then.  I was working that day at the Center of Public Integrity, which is located right near the White House.  It's about two blocks from the White House--two or three blocks from the White House.  And so we vacated that building pretty quickly, after we were watching on television what had happened in New York.  And, and, you know, we were saying I'm not staying up in this building (laughter).  We're getting the hell out, and then--and then people trying to get home, you know, that was--that was--all that traffic, you know.  They didn't close down the subways thank God.  It would have been much worse.  But just people trying to vacate the city was something.  And it was a lot of camaraderie and, you know, 'cause everybody's in this--we're all in the same boat together.  And I got a ride with somebody who was going out to Virginia also, so it as--it was something.  But after that, as everybody knows, people were just such--I remember being on a plane and taking out my cell phone, and the pers--what is that--you know, (laughter) it could be a bomb, you know.  So people were very jittery.  And it wasn't 'til recently that they-planes--they even relaxed that rule. They had a rule here in Washington that if--when--whenever you're in a certain distance from, from the city--for about to land, you can't leave your seat, you know, and the re--no matter what, and they only recently relaxed that from 2001.  And that's because they were afraid of--you know, some, some terrorist activity might take place.
Story_ID: 117592
Speaker 1: Now you were I guess largely absent during the, the career of [HM] Marion Barry as mayor, right?
Speaker 2: No, I can--yeah, yeah, I was, but I was--I covered him when he was on--at--on the school board; that's where he started.  And before he was on the school board, he was with Pride, Incorporated and just as a community activists, and then he got on the city council.  So I, I remember driving him around after he won the selection as a school board and him chastising me for, for not taking this turn, which was shorter, instead of that (laughter) turn and everything because he knew the city so well.  So I knew Marion back in, in those days, and he really has built, you know, quite a, a base of support in this city, la--a, a lot of it because of that summer jobs program, because all those kids he gave summer jobs grew up to be voters.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think people in other parts of the country are--
Speaker 2: Don't realize that.
Speaker 1: --are, are baffled by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the allegiance to Marion Barry-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the city of Washington and what--wa--wa--what do you--you think it's those kind of programs that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like--you, you know, it's good old-fa--fashion politics.  I mean, you do for me, and I, I return the favor, and so that was part of it.  And also there was a, a not lot of I'll stick it in your eye to it as well, you know.  You know, don't tell us who to like, you know, and so that's the part of it.  But he's--he was getting into scrapes, and he's getting on in, in, in life so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Story_ID: 117593
Speaker 1: Now you're at the Center for Public Integrity.  It's 2001.
Speaker 2: Right, now but I left there in 2001 too.  I got laid off; they were cutting back, but it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 2000, now, now is there--is there a major issue that you covered for the Center for Public Integrity?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't cover, cover anything.  I was really editing.
Speaker 1: Editing, okay.
Speaker 2: I was editing and--but right after that, in 2002, became--that's when I started with the The Maynard Institute [for Journalism Education] and I was started with the Black College Wire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was still working at the [Washington] Post part time.  So 2002 was sort of, you know, a, a, a landmark year.  Now the Black College Wire was the idea of a friend named Pearl Stewart, who was also on the board of the Center for Public Integrity, and she had been the editor of the Oakland Tribune once, the first black woman to edit a major newspaper, and she was also a friend.  And she had this idea.  She'd done some work about the state of newspaper--student newspaper--at black colleges and found that a lot of them just really needed help.  And so she proposed that they would start with what became the, the Black College Wire.  And the idea behind that was that we would help these students put out newspapers on a more timely basis and to get them online, because online was now, you know, becoming more and more important.  And that's what we did, and it's--it was--it was a struggle because you found out we had to deal with administration interference in those student papers; students not yet having work habits; coming from poor academic backgrounds and yet being on a newspaper and that kind of thing. And one of the biggest things that I've--with the Black College Wire was when the Hampton University [Virginia]--the administration seized all the newspapers because they had--they had written a story about the cafeteria that the provost didn't like, and this was coming up right when there was a--it was alumni weekend, a big homecoming.  And they had all these people--alumni coming--alums coming to campus, and that's not what they wanted.  So they wanted--they, they demanded that there be a letter from the administration put on the front page explaining, you know, their position.  And the editors ran the letter but not on the front page, and so the letters--they, they sent out people--security people--all over campus to seize all the papers and destroy them (laughter).  And so they did that, and, and I guess they just didn't realize that you're not supposed to do that, that you're not the authority to do that, and which the woman later said--the provost later said.  But, but some teachers told (word?) their students they got a baptism of, of fire in that situation.  But there were--you know, there was--there was some good examples of good journalism and everything.  But, you know, if you gotta--if you're gonna get a, a job, you have to demonstrate that you can do this or you have done it, and you know, you--just putting out a newspaper once a month is not gonna get it.
Story_ID: 117594
Speaker 1: So, so how did the Black College Wire work?  At, at first I thought when I--when I heard the name--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I thought it was like a wire service the black community.
Speaker 2: Well, sort of--it, it is sort of like a wire service, but we--it's, it's not a wire service in the sense that we send out stores.  We posted them on a website, and then anybody could use the stories that were on the website.  And, and, of course, they were all edited, and so that's how--that's what--it was wire service in that sense, and it was also a website, and we worked with--I said we worked with the students and gave out prizes and all--had internships and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you actually had a in--a hands-on interaction with the students--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you had like times when you brought students from the various colleges together that were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: --part of--
Speaker 2: --for conferences.  Yeah, we had that.  And that--and as interns--they set up an intern program where they would work at, at various news organizations.  And, and I had some interns personally who came to work with me in the main Black College Wire office, which was here in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were trying to develop what you were talking about: work habits and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a, a sense of--
Speaker 2: Right, and we had students who didn't know that, you know, the cardinal rule in business is--in any business, any work, is when you say you're gonna do something, then you have to do it (laughter).  A lot of people don't realize that.  You know, students would say oh, I'm gonna do that, and then they--that story--and then they would go off on vacation (laughter). "Oh, I didn't realize you actually wanted me--realize I was supposed actually do that--I mean, when you--I mean now (laughter)"--you know, those kinds of things.  And so--but I said the big--biggest thing, though, was the preparation that they--that they got before they even got to college.  You know, to, to be a journalist you have to read and write and know how to do both, and if you haven't learned those by the time you get to college--now some pro--some people like Hampton [University] and others have set up remedial programs to get you to do that, which is good, you need more of that. But you need to, to--more than that, you need to have, you know, critical thinking skills.  And I did--it wa--wasn't a coincidence that the best newspapers are at the most demanding colleges where they teach those critical thinking skills, whether or not they have journalism or not.  Because those kids are, are taught, you know--I mean, they--they're just at a different level, you know, so that's the challenge.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How, how, halla--how big a staff did 'The [Black] College Wire' have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, we didn't have a very big staff at all.  We had myself, and we had Pearl Stewart.  And she sort of served as the publisher, where as I served as the editor.  And then we had some volunteers who came in from time to time, you know, to, to edit stories and help out in other ways planning conferences.  And then we were affiliated with a group of black communications professors at the HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] called the Black College Communication Association.  So we, we would--we had them to draw on as well.  But the problem with this--you know, with a lot of these instructors at the HBCUs is that they were overworked and underpaid, and you know, they didn't necessarily have all the time to--you know, to devote to, to some of the stuff that we were doing when they had all, all these classes to teach and everything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so it's--you know, it's--that, that stuff hasn't changed (laughter).
Story_ID: 117595
Speaker 1: This, this is a really a busy year, year for you 'cause I think that this is the year--I have a note here that journalism started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.  That--journalism--
Speaker 1: --your power.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that, that started because--well, it's a good thing, you know, in this whole age that we're in to have multiple streams of revenue and not just one, because that's what we--that was one of the lessons of the year 2000s, because, you know, people had just started losing jobs wholesale.  And if all you were depending on was that--you know, that job that used to give you the gold watch, then (laughter)--then you were in--you were in trouble, you know.  So, so that was another thing, the, the journalisms column started because there were--there were--there's one in particular website that a lot of journalists go to for their news daily.  It started off called--being called Media Gossip, and Dorian Maynard [HM Dori Maynard], who is the head of the Maynard Institute--her father was Bob Maynard, who it's named after--was concerned that there wasn't too many new--too much news about people of color in those, and she was getting tired of that.  So she asked me if I could do something for her website--for the Maynard Institute website--that would fill in that gap.  And so that's what I did, and as time went on, it became longer and, and, and more than just a part-time job; in fact, now I'm doing full-time, and it's a lot of fun.  But that's how it started, and it is a lot of work.  And I'm trying now to see if I could find some sort of business model to accommodate it so that it could continue long after I'm gone, and somebody else can pick this up and it would keep performing that service.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you know Bob Maynard?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he worked at the [Washington] Post also, so we knew each other there.  And, and in fact I went to one of the Maynard Institute [for Journalism Education]'s programs.  They had an editing program in Tucson, Arizona, so I went there for a week.  It was a managing training program.  But yeah, I knew Bob and his wife, Nancy and a lot of the other people who started the Maynard Institute--a guy named Lee White.  And it was multicultural, by the way.  It's not just black.  It's--you know, they had the Latino, Asian-American, Native American.  Roy Aarons sta--founded the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association, so it was multicultural.  And Bob brought a lot of those same--that same mix into the Oakland Tribune when he became the editor and then the publisher of it.  So it was--you know, it was an article of faith with the Maynard Institute about being multicultural.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and Maynard Institute--just, just tell us a little bit about Maynard Institute--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Maynard Institute is in--is in Oakland, California, and that's because that's where the Oakland Tribune was.  And the purpose of the May--it started in 1977.  The purpose of it was, as Bob said, "to eliminate from the lexicon: we can't find anybody qualified."  And so they started off by training--they started off by training reporters at Berkeley [University of California at Berkely], at the--at the summer program; it was in the summer, and they brought in journalists to teach young people.  And some of these people have gone on, you know, to become stellar figures in the journalism industry.  Then they started teaching editing at Tucson, in Arizona.  Then they started--then they went to management, which they taught at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] I believe, and they still do some training like that at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  They also do content audits, which means that the can examine your newspaper and talk about how much diversity they see there and how you can improve that.  And other--you know, it changes as the--as the needs go.  Now they're doing something on structural racism and what that's like, wa--why that is, and, and, and they've, they've now got a program that they're looking at the coverage of black men and boys in the media.  So they do that, and I'm glad to be affiliated with them.
Story_ID: 117596
Speaker 1: So what are some of the, the--I guess topics that you've focused on in journalisms over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the main topic is supposed to be diversity in journalism.  Now that can be played out in so many different ways.  For example, I just finished writing about this new network that, that ABC and Univision have started called Fusion.  Fusion is--it's not--it's not on the air yet.  It's gonna be on the air in a couple of weeks, and they had a preview on The Morning Show yesterday.  Fusion I geared toward English-speaking Latinos for millennials.  And when they rolled out the, the, the personalities from The Morning Show, they had two light-skinned Latinos and a Greek person--Greek-American.  The Latinos were from Venezuela and Brazil, if I recall correctly.  And this brought the--it--the question of colorism among Latinos.  Because one of the longstanding complaints among a lot of people who follow Spanish language television is that in all those novellas and everything, everybody's light skinned, even though the Latino population is a range of colors.  And so one pro--professor in particular, who was at n-NYU [New York University, New York] pointed this out on a Facebook page and then I started getting notes from Latinos saying, "hey, you see this?  You need to write about this", so I did.  And I talked about, you know, the whole history of colorism among Latinos and the--and particularly the fact that there are so many Afro-Latinos in the whole history of slavery, where there are more Africans brought to Central America and South America than were brought to the United States.  And yet all we in the United States hear about are the ones-you know--the slaves in the South and not, not what happened in, in--so, and those people are still there--their descendants at least. But they are shut out on a lot of--from the media in a lot of places, particularly like they say on television, and they--the--they all--while all of this is going on, we have in the Dominican Republic a new court decision that is taking away the citizenship of people who were born--whose par--parents were born in Haiti.  And so it's--they're right next to each other, which means all these black people ha--are now stateless.  They, they--they're not citizens of Haiti anymore 'cause they, they weren't born there; they were born in the Dominican Republic, but they're no longer--you know--and all because they, they want to whiten the population of the Dominican Republic.  Then you have Brazil, where--again, where blacks are, are--some people tell me that the majority of Brazilians are black, but they define the races differently in Latin America.  And in Brazil they define it by--whether you're white or black depends on your social class.  So where Gene Robinson, who's black, who's now a columnist at the Washington Post,  when he was covering Brazil--I mean covering South America and went to Brazil--and he came back he wrote a book called 'Cold to Cream'.  And he talked about how he was talking to a woman who was darker than he was, and she said she was white.  And that was because she considered herself of the social class, that, that would be white. And when I quoted the census figures, only six percent of the people in Brazil said they were black.  Most were--said they were mix race or white, and that's because, you know, the stigma that was attached. And so all that plays into what happens when they do the selecting and the viewing of these people on this new network called Fusion, put together by ABC News and Univision. And so I wrote--I, I wrote about that.  It's--the column is really a way for me to just use all the experiences I've had in journalism and just put them all to use, you know--column writing, headline writing, reporting--you know, all that and the things that I've learned.  And, and I had--pretty much have free range to, to, you know, do different subjects that I--you know, for exam--I would do a routine one about, about how many people of color were covering the stimulus pack--not stimulus, but the shutdown--the government shutdown.  And, and then yesterday writing about Grambling University [Louisiana] and this problem of interference in the school paper by the administration.  So my experience with the Black College Wire comes into play there.  So it's, it's, it's a lot of work, but it's fun.
Story_ID: 117597
Speaker 1: What happened at Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] anyway?
Speaker 2: Well, it's still going on.  They have--the background is that--this is where, you know, nothing happens in a vacuum.  Grambling suffered a 57 percent cut in funding.  And part of the reason for that is that when the stimulus package was passed by Congress, a lot of these Republican governors said they weren't gonna take--they weren't gonna take the money, 'cause they were against it.  And one of those governors was Bobby Jindal, the governor of Louisiana. And so Grambling is in Louisiana, and it's a state school.  So therefore the funding for Grambling got cut because they--you know, they had to--they didn't take the stimulus money, so that, that wasn't the money that could go to Grambling.  So when the money got cut at Grambling, the football team got hurt.  Instead of taking the trains to these away games, they all of a sudden having to take these long bus rides; then they didn't have money for maintenance, so you--mildew and mold was, was seen in the--you know, in the, the locker rooms and even in the newspaper office.  So the new--school newspaper decided to write about this.  One, one editor did a tweet, quoting an anonymous source about what the players were saying.  And another one organized a rally about this on campus.  So the administration decided that those two things were forbidden, and the--one got--they both got suspended.  One thought he got fired, but he--it was only a suspended later on; and the other one was revoked, but that was the penalty for that.  And people who know these things, such as the Student la--Press Law Center say that you can't do that as a university.  You cannot tamper with the content of the student newspaper because that's tampering with the freedom of the press.  You can advise them on things, but you can't punish people for what they--what they write.  And so that's what--that's where things stand now at Grambling.  The, the students--the football team is actually in protest.  They re--refused to play against their arch rival last weekend, Jacksonville State--Jackson State [University, Mississippi].  And they went back to work the day before we're taping this, but--yeah, maybe now something will be done after all this publicity about the budget cuts and the need to, to get that campus back in shape.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 117259
Speaker 1: Your style has been described as being dogged and relentless.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: I mean, that's one description, so--
Speaker 2: Well, good.
Speaker 1: --how, how would you describe your writing style and--
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: --vacuum journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, I consider that to be a compliment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that's how you get to the bottom of things.  In journalism, the culture is such that the one thing you don't want to be accused of is missing out on something because you were too soft, or you didn't press hard enough, and you--and you missed the whole story, or you wrote a "puff piece."  And so being dogged and relentless is one way to avoid that, to actually find out what's going on.  You don't want people saying, "well, this person doesn't know what he's talking about" (laughter), you know, so you should be able to have enough to, to, to buttress what you're--what you're--if it's an argument you're making or if it's a story you're writing to, to demonstrate that you actually do know what you're talking about and that you have the facts and figures to, to back it up.  So I think that's, that's a good thing. My style is--what else?  I like to--I guess you, you need a lot of sources and so, you know, you have to keep talking to as many people as possible, and you have to keep reading and finding out things.  And what's one of the reasons it takes me so long to--at--per day to, to finish a column is because you have to find out--it's not that you have to find out so much.  You have to find out about everything so that you're sure that you're not missing anything because you don't want to have people say, "oh, how come you didn't know about this?" (laughter), you know, so you have to cover yourself that way, so I guess that's my style.  I like to be--you know, you have to be in tune with people.  And now people are in the age of social media, which means you gotta be able to boil things down into sound bites or tweets under 40 characters and easily digestible because-and this is one thing--when we were talking about Gannett--this is one thing they were definitely attuned to and that is how to serve the--their readers and what their readers what.  The readers want short, digestible bites, and they were talking--back then they talked about how you could take the same bit of information and use it in different media, billboards, radio, TV, newspapers and how many different uses it has; it's all in packaging, so that's very important.  And the other thing they mentioned is that--you know, even though we were working for a newspaper, we were not competing just against other newspapers.  You're competing as everything else that's out there that's competing for somebody's time.  And so I have to be con--conscious of that also because, you know, I'm competing with Facebook, and Twitter, and the newspaper, and the television, and Netflix, and--or just doing nothing.  And so you have to make it compelling so that people want to turn to you and offer something that they can't get elsewhere.  So that's basically my philosophy.
Story_ID: 117260
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what do--what do you see--now you were--you were--we were talking about the, the, the professional black journalists are losing ground, in turn in--in term--terms of numbers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's a smaller percentage now than it was when you entered the business.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so.
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of that--a lot of them--you know, it's because, because of these cutbacks, so you have a lot of black journalist who are now in academia, or they're in public relations, or they're freelancing.  And that's unfortunate, and not just black--you know, Latinos.  It's a real problem because you have all these Latinos in the society and so few in the media.  I mean, think about when's the last Latino television anchor you saw, you know, or even a reporter out there on the--on the--on the street covering something, much less columnist in the newspaper.  And yet, you know, we have all these Latinos in the population, and, and the way the demographics are going, there are gonna be more and more.  So I think that's a problem, and I, I just wish people would--the--these people in the media would, would wake up.  The other thing that's happening is that because there are a sea of so few--or fewer--and, and then people in the media actually dispute this--they say there are actually a lot of opportunities for people who are creative, innovative, and are in tune with what's happening now, the new way of doing things.  But anyway, a lot of people think that there aren't those opportunities, and so they say, well, I can--I'm just gonna write something for the web and this--be my--do my own thing without realizing that, you know, that's nice for you, but there's not really that much money in that.  And not only is there not much money in that, but there's no training in that.  There's nothing like being around people who know a lot more than you do that you can learn from, and you don't get that if you're just out there on your own doing something.  And, you know, it's, it's all about growing, you know, and, and honing your craft and all that.  And so I think people are missing out if they think that they can just put up a blog and, and--you know, and be creative that way.  And then the public loses too because, you know, those things aren't always trustworthy, and you know, what the publish--what the public needs is credible, trustworthy information.
Speaker 1: So, so you would suggest if, if young pe--people going into journalism--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, try to get a, a spot in a mainstream paper, or, or, or--
Speaker 2: I think that--yeah--
Speaker 1: --or, or a bigger--
Speaker 2: --they--
Speaker 1: --a big--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't--(unclear)--you, you really--
Speaker 1: --to push them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they should--they should--yeah, that's true too, but as long as you find yourself growing and learning and, and getting good training, I think that's good.  It doesn't always have to be, you know, some big place.  As a matter of fact, it's off--often a good idea to work with people who really have an interest in you, you know, who, who, who wanna be a mentor, who you really find yourself simpatico with--you know, I can really learn from this person and regardless of where they are, you know.  So that's another thing that I would recommend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But do you think the opportunities are growing or diminishing for--
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: --you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think the opportunities are--I have to go with the newspaper--with the news business company line here, which is: if you are innovative, and you keep on top of all this technology, and you know about Spotify and Instagram, and you know, all these things, and know how to use them to your advantage, and then even use them to create something new--there was one editor who said--I think it was Marty Baron, he was the editor of the 'Washington Post'.  He said, yeah, we used to hire people and teach them things.  Now we hire people who can teach us things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the technology--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.  'Cause a lot of the times these young folks, you know, they know a lot more about this stuff than you do.  And you know, you should be one of those people who, you know, create something that becomes so valuable that somebody wants to snap--that happened to a guy--another guy who had one of these big companies snap up his--snatch up his website, and he made some money on that.  You know, be innovative and, and know how to use this stuff, and be, be marketable, I guess is the way is, is, is the bottom line, because you have something that they need.
Story_ID: 117261
Speaker 1: Any other advice for young journalist?
Speaker 2: Well, get your--get your skills now first.  You know, get, get as much training and, and skills, but be mark--but make yourself marketable by, by providing a service or a product that nobody else has or a few others have.  And that's the way the world works, particularly in America.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about training--I mean, what's the best--what, what are some of the best colleges to go to to learn?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know if--I think I, I would just go with the traditional ones, you know, that, that--in terms of--the ones that--where they teach you, you know, how to--the reason--one of the main things you, you learn in college is how to think critically.  And people--places that can teach that, I think, are, are the ones to pay attention to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're not gonna name names?
Speaker 2: No, because they're too many and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --you can--you can la--you can learn that at so many different places, and it also depends on the exact--on some of the people who are there.  I've noticed--one of the things I've, I've noticed about HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] in, in working with HBCUs is that some people will succeed no matter where they are.  You know, it can be a loud--the lousiest school out there, but because they have it within them, you know--just like I was saying about you can live anywhere and find, find history or find things to do or find things adventurous, that's the same with going to a school or--you know, that, that--it starts with you.
Story_ID: 117262
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now in 2010, you received the Robert G. McGruder Award from Kent State [University, Ohio] right?
Speaker 2: Right, I was (unclear).
Speaker 1: And in 2013, the Ida B. Wells Award from the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].
Speaker 2: Right, right, and the Medill School [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  Yeah, that was--those were good, and those were--I was happy to receive those and p-pride, and, and you--it's nice to feel validated.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that was good.
Story_ID: 117263
Speaker 1: So, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: No, I can't--really can't think of anything.  I mean, I'm sure that there might be here and there, but this, this--it's--thank you.  It's--this is Ida B. Wells and the Ida B. Wells Award.  It's a heavy--she's heavy.  But it's--she's good inspiration to have.  Now I can't think of anything, and, and besides it wouldn't if--you know, you only go around once in life, so (laughter), you know.  I, I--it's, it's, it's when you go back and look at the trajectory, I, I think my values have not changed over the years, and I think that's the important thing, to me anyway.  I don't think I've sold out or, or, or, or done things to--just to gain position or career advantage that I wouldn't have done anyway that be-because everything I've done has been consistent with what I've always done.  And so I think that's a good trait to have.  Now others can say you--well, you know, I'm making 10 times what you are and (laughter), I had to compromise a little, but hey, it was worth it.  That's them.
Story_ID: 117264
Speaker 1: Now do you have a--like a, a future goal that you wanna satisfy that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd like to make this, this journalisms column self-sustaining; and in fact I said in my speech for, for getting that Ida B. Wells Award that I was looking for a new business model, and if people had ideas to come forward with them.  And I got some ideas and so we're working on--but we always need more--on how to implement that.  'Cause this whole Internet has--hasn't been figured out yet, in terms of, you know, how to make it work for everybody, financially especially; creatively is one, one thing, but financially is another.
Story_ID: 117265
Speaker 1: Yeah, that when you look back again at everything you've done at this point--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what today at this juncture, though you still have more to do, did--what, what do you consider today to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: My professional legacy?  Well, I hope that, that, that what I've written has enlightened some people and--for example, one of the other things that I've--the--that I--we--I guess we didn't address this, is that in the column, I always try to include items about what's happening in other parts of the borough, particularly the, the, the parts of color of the world with journalists there, because we don't--we don't learn enough about what they're doing, what they're going through, and what they bring to the table.  And they often complain about how they're portrayed-mis-portrayed in the West--Western media.  So I think I wanna open people's eyes to the fact that, you know, there's a world out there and--you know, this goes back to some of the things--it's really nothing new under the sun, but we were talking about--you know, as we went through, we started off talking about the Civil Rights Movement way back then.  But part of that was, you know, Pan Africanism and this whole phrase "people of color" and all that, and all that can be applied to journalism and, and to anyone else who's reading about, you know, what's happening--what's happening in the United--when we were talking about the colorism among Latinos.  This is a--you know, this is a worldwide issue.  The same thing happened to people in India when the new Miss America was from India was crowned.  She was the first Indian-American, but while some white people snickered and said: oh, you know, how you gonna pick somebody like that to be Miss America as foreigner?  The people in India were thinking that she was too dark (laughter).  I mean, so this whole thing is--you know.  And at the same time that was happening, then we learned about Julie Chen and the fact that she had surgery on her eyes that the news director told her she wanted--she had to have--she should get if she wanted to appeal to Americans.  And so she did, and now she's--not only--not only is she successful, but she married the boss of CBS News.  So--but this like they say, this is the world we live in, and at least I could point these things out and talk about the role the media plays, and the role that the people in the media can play in calling attention to--you know, to these kind of things.
Story_ID: 117266
Speaker 1: You have any reflections-and I just wondered about this--the kind of courage it might take to be a, a journalist that really challenges the status quo, you know, in a country where there's no protection for the press.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: You could end up in jail or in prison in one of those dungeons like, like Solomon Northrop, which is what's happening in Ethiopia and in Eritrea and places like that.  And that's why--yeah, the, the--yeah, those--that's why those people need to know that we exist, you know, that other people in the world do know about them and, and are concerned about their plight, and they're trying to, to alleviate it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah, it's a good point.
Speaker 1: So, do you have any friends that you know that, that are in prison for, for--
Speaker 2: No, thank goodness but--you know, I try to call attention to the ones that I do know about.  But I don't think--I don't think I can say that I have any friends personally who are in those situations.  (Laughter) I mean, that, that can happen in America sometimes too (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean it could--it could.
Speaker 2: You know, so we have to be sure that doesn't happen.
Speaker 1: Well, it has in the past and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --it could happen again.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly right.
Story_ID: 117267
Speaker 1: So, tell us something about your family.  Now, are you married or--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'm not married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess in a lot of ways that's good, because I've been (laughter)--I've had such a--a life such as though--such as that I don't know whether I could actually have supported other people, you know, going through these periods.  But I, I will say that I was--I'm very grateful to have been brought up in a--an intact family--a two-parent family, raised with, you know, good values and all that.  Because while I grew up taking that for granted, I see now, especially as time has gone on from the '60s [1960s] to the present, where that's not the case was, with a lot of people.  And, you know, I just--I, I just count my blessings, you know, there but for the grace of God.  So, I--you know, I, I feel fortunate.
Speaker 1: Okay, your, your parents are still alive I think, right?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my dad is.
Speaker 1: Your dad is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's 89 now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 117268
Speaker 1: All right, well, the last question is just--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --similar to legacy, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as, as someone who fought the good fight and, and that my field of choice and, and abilities and disposition was journalism.  But I think that, you know, we--as I, I said earlier, I think we all grow up in a ta--I grew up in a time when this was just the mood of black people in journal--we were--we were strivers, we had to do better, we had to break down barriers, we had to right wrongs, and not just black people actually it was the whole general of the '60s [1960s].  You know, we thought we were the ones who were gonna change the world.  And some of us have, you know, which is good, and so I want to be counted among those.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's how I wanna be remembered (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, well great.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
