Story_ID: 639657
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's get started with this HistoryMakers interview.  My name is Cheryl Butler.  I'll be conducting the interview today.  We're also joined by videographer, Matthew Hickey, and Amy Billingsley, the Mid-Atlantic coordinator, is also sitting in today.  Let us begin with your name.  Say your full name and spell it, please.
Speaker 2: Sharon Pratt, S-H-A-R-O-N, P-R-A-T-T.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 30th, 1944, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a businesswoman, but I'm a lawyer by training.
Speaker 1: And you're known for--in D.C.?
Speaker 2: I was the first woman elected mayor of Washington, D.C. and the first African American woman elected mayor of any major city in the United States.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is July 26th, 2007 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: We are conducting the interview in my offices in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 639658
Speaker 1: I'm going to articulate some People magazine-style questions just to get things flowing.  Tell me your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite destination, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) None that I can re--think of at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And if it comes to you later on, feel free to share (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I will, yeah.
Story_ID: 639659
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family background a little bit.  Who are your parents?
Speaker 2: My parents are Mildred Petticord Pratt and Carlisle Edward Pratt.  My mother was born in St. Paul, Minnesota, but came here because of the public school system at that time for African Americans.  And my father was born in Washington, D.C. and they met at Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And you said your mother was born what year?
Speaker 2: I will have to go check that.  I--my, you know, my father was born--I say, 19-, I was born in--he was born in 1923, so my mother would have been born actually two years before that.
Speaker 1: So, she was born in 1921--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --In Minnesota?
Speaker 2: St. Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: I'm going to start with your mother's side of the family.  Do you know the history going back--your maternal grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My, my, of course, my--her maiden name was Petticord.  Her father's name was Henry Petticord.  And my grandmother's maiden name was Shuck.
Speaker 1: What was her full name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Edna Petticord, Edna Shuck Petticord.  And I don't know all of the lineage.  They were clearly of, you know, you're talking about ethnic lineage--is that what you meant?
Speaker 1: Sure, ethnic, if you know the place of birth.
Speaker 2: That, I don't--I, I think my grandfather's family came from St. Paul for many years.  He was there because of the railroad--as you know, working for the railroad system and that was a real great opportunity then for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year your maternal grandparents were born approximately?
Speaker 2: You know, I should have been--I don't know, I don't know.  I need, I need to go back and reconstruct that.  I can get some of that information to you.
Speaker 1: But your maternal grandfather was involved in the railroad?
Speaker 2: He was.  He worked for the railroad system, yeah.
Speaker 1: An educated man?
Speaker 2: Oh, a high school education.  And my grandmother, the same, sufficiently educated high school, education that she was able to secure employment in the federal government system when she moved to Washington, D.C.  I don't know that she--I don't--attended college, and I'm pretty certain my grandfather did not.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of your great-grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know, but, again, I, I'll try to reconstruct that.  I'll get it from my cousins--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --who do a little better job of keeping track.
Speaker 1: No problem.
Story_ID: 639660
Speaker 1: What about your father?  Now you mentioned, tell me his name again and the year he was born?
Speaker 2: It was Carlisle Edward Pratt and he was born January 26th, 1923.
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C., that's right.
Speaker 1: And who are your ma- your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Hazel Drew Pratt and Edward Carlisle Pratt.
Speaker 1: Do you know when and where they were born?
Speaker 2: My grandmother--both of them were born in Washington, D.C.  And my grandmother was born November--trying to think--29th, 1905.  And her--my grandfather, I would have to check.  I can find that, but he was, he was thirteen years her senior.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know what their professions were?
Speaker 2: Both of them worked for government.  They were, you know--I think he worked for the government printing office, I believe.  And my grandmother definitely worked for the government printing office for many years.
Speaker 1: Were they educated?
Speaker 2: My grandmother got--did receive a little college training, but my grandfather not.  They--my grandmother graduated also from Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And which college did she attend for a couple of years?
Speaker 2: I think Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but I need to check.
Speaker 1: Do you know your great-grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, no, I don't know, but I--that I don't know.
Story_ID: 639661
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about your childhood.  Where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born here in Washington, D.C. at Freedmen's Hospital [later Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] which was a part of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And I was born, as you, as you can tell by the date, the middle of World War II [WWII], towards the end of World War II.  And both my parents [Mildred Petticord Pratt and Carlisle Edward Pratt] were then working--at that time, she had--my mother at the Navy Yard.  And my father was in the [U.S.] Military in the World War, you know, serving in the military in World War II.
Speaker 1: When you were a very small child?
Speaker 2: When I was born, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: He fought in the war?
Speaker 2: No, he did not fight.  He was still assigned at--in, in Georgia.  Now, I've forgotten the name of the base, but I should know that--
Speaker 1: Fort Benning or--
Speaker 2: Fort Benning, of course, yes, in Georgia.  That's where he was.
Speaker 1: Do you remember talk around the house when you were very young about the war?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  You know, actually, I have just the vaguest recollection.  Most of my memory really does begin with the death of my mother because my mother was about not quite twenty-eight years old when she died of breast cancer.  And so, my sister [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] and I basically sort of got relocated when her illness progressed.  And so, we were living with my grandmother [Hazel Pratt] and aunt [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] for a substantial period of time.  And so, my first recollection of life really, I think, is the day, you know, that they told me my mother had died.  And, and, so, I don't really remember that period of time prior to that.
Speaker 1: And you were four years old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, not, that's right, not quite five.
Story_ID: 639662
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of your mother [Mildred Petticord Pratt]?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't.  But, you know, the strangest thing is that, you know, it was so very obvious to me that my youngest daughter [Drew Dixon Williams], you know, but at the time, I said, "No, she looks just like my mother."  And yet, I don't really, you know, can--and, and then we found pictures that my cousins found of my mother, and they look almost identical, you know.  And yet, I don't remember her, so to speak, so it's there.  It's--
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the day your mother passed?
Speaker 2: I remember being at my grandmother [Hazel Pratt] and aunt's [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] apartment.  I remember hanging on sort of the leg of my grandmother who I called momma.  And I, I just remember feeling, thank God, for momma and my aunt, you know.  I, I can remember that feeling.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your younger sister's response and tell me your younger sister's name.
Speaker 2: My sister's name is [HM] Benaree Pratt Wiley.  And I--we always called her Bennie [ph.] which was, 'cause Benaree was a mouth full as children (laughter), so we all called her Bennie and--
Speaker 1: Do you remember how she responded?  She was only two.
Speaker 2: Oh, she sort of--to me, what I recall, is that Bennie just grew very quiet, much more, you know, very pensive.  So, but we, you know, we were blessed.  We had a very engaged father [Carlisle Edward Pratt], a very loving father, and we were blessed to have a wonderful grandmother and aunt.  My aunt is like our mother today.  She's still living and, you know, she's, you know, we feel by her like, like a mother, so in that regard, we are fairly blessed.
Story_ID: 639663
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite sights, smells, and sounds from that period of your life?
Speaker 2: I can remember the--well, I can (laughter), I can remember smelling the fried chicken and the freshly baked rolls, and all of that coming home from church, you know, that my grandmother [Hazel Pratt] had prepared.  I can remember sort of the quiet of our neighborhood.  I--and that, we were in the apartment we were living at the time, but yet the sounds of just a few sounds of, you know, other children out on the street.  I--the world just did seem a lot quieter and yet, it was very comforting when I have recollection--a recollection of those memories.  But I can remember the sounds of when we did move.  And my father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] remarried, and we moved to a newly integrated neighborhood in Northwest Washington [D.C.].  And I can remember hearing the sounds of, sort of the bat hitting the baseball (laughter).  And this was a racket--a lovely playground, which was very new to us, because sort of in your segregated neighborhoods, you did not have necessarily very, you know, didn't have the same kind of rich environment in your own recreational facilities 'cause you never got the same amount of money, where as here in this environment, you know, it was just unbelievable--the stretch of grass and all of the equipment.  And so, I just sort of--I do remember those kind of sounds as, as a young person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: How, how old were you when you lived in this integrated neighborhood?
Speaker 2: About ten years old.
Story_ID: 639664
Speaker 1: So between four years old and ten, you were living with your dad [Carlisle Edward Pratt], your aunt Aimee [Elizabeth Pratt], and your grandmother--
Speaker 2: My grandmother, yeah--
Speaker 1: --Hazel [Pratt]?
Speaker 2: --Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, that was Bloomingdale [Washington, D.C.], what they called Bloomingdale, and sort of that's, that, next to sort of LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.], and it was a basically, a neighborhood of African Americans.  And it reflected the era because you had a full continuum of experiences, careers reflected in one neighborhood.  There were a lot of--there were very engaged parents, very engaged grandparents.  Almost all of the kids went to the same place after school, you know.  So, there was one--Mrs. Frances [ph.]--I'm trying to remember her, her first name--she was the one who sort of, had this sort of--the equivalent of a day care center with all of the neighborhood kids when returning from the Gage Elementary School [Gage-Eckington Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] or Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  And, you know, it was very protective, sheltered community.
Speaker 1: And this is the area known as sort of the Harlem [New York City, New York] of [Washington,] D.C.?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: What kinds of businesses or people, professional people, do you remember who made the place?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we didn't live far from the Bullock family, which was later, who later was part of Walter Washington's family.  There were--I'm trying to remember--almost anybody who was in the school system or in professions, you know, were living in that cluster. I can't, I wouldn't want to single any one figure out as the, the towering figure because almost everyone, I think, sort of contributed in their, in a particular way.  I don't think it was such, there was such a sense of stability, quite frankly, throughout the community that no one particular family defined that community.
Speaker 1: If you took me around, if you took me around the block, are there any businesses that stand out?
Speaker 2: Not immediately within the Blooming--Bloomingdale, LeDroit Park community, but there were, if you hit Florida Avenue [Washingt, D.C.]--I'm trying to think--I think it was called Harrison's Restaurant [sic, Harrison's Cafe, Washington, D.C.].  You had the theatres, of course, but a little further beyond, with, with, on 14th Street.  So, you had the Lincoln Theatre and the How--or little off of that, the Howard Theatre and the Republic Theatre, and there was a third theatre--I'm trying to remember.  Of course, you still have, you know, the Ben's Chili Bowl that still stands.  You had, Luray Caverns.  You know, you, you, and I think Thompson's Restaurant [sic, Thompson's Dairy, Washington, D.C.].  I think that's what it was called off of 11th Street [Washington, D.C.].  So, you had not even--right, in the immediate community, but you had within walking distance, you know.  You had restaurants, theatres, all serving African Americans owned by African Americans, that was sort of the, you know, that was to be expected at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember thinking that was normal or extraordinary with the conversation in your home about the community?
Speaker 2: You know, we--what, what we took for granted, you did not--I didn't appreciate to what extent we were blessed that way until much later in life when I traveled elsewhere and appreciate--and came to understand that others did not always have that.  We were very fortunate in that regard because all of our role models--our teachers, our doctors, our lawyers, our dentists--they were all African Americans.  It never occurred to us, quite frankly, that you couldn't, you know, obtain professional care, services, without, you know, African Americans were quite naturally the source of that, you know.  So, in that regard, it was--we didn't think about it.
Speaker 1: You mentioned Walter Washington.  Was his family in that area at the time?
Speaker 2: It was the Bullock family that he married into.  And Sam Bullock, I'm trying to think, Walter Washington's wife--why, why can't I think of her name now, the first name [Bennetta Bullock]?  Her family, all of her family were--they owned a stretch of property in that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 639665
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] was, was pretty successful but he worked his way up.  Tell me--
Speaker 2: He worked his way up, that's right--
Speaker 1: --about his evolution.
Speaker 2: Well, my father, when returning from the [U.S.] Military, I--worked, I think, also at the Library of Congress.  And, of course, he didn't care for the government system.  He didn't think it was going to be very rewarding, and he certainly didn't think that it was going to be very rewarding for African Americans, and because they clearly had a ceiling, a very clear--maybe a glass ceiling.  But it was a very, very definite ceiling on how far an African American could go in the government system, though it certainly provided economic stability.  And so, he decided that he had gone to--I think, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and then he had finished up his education in the military.  And then, he decided he was going to work, and at Terrell, and go to [Robert H.] Terrell Law School [Washington, D.C.].  And he pursued that with vigor, and it sort of was for him a new beginning because my father was very bright, but not always applied himself.  But I think the experience of both the military, and then the limitations of the false and unnecessary limitations imposed by that, the government at that time in segregate--in a segregated era, he decided he was going to make his own mark.  And he approached the law then with great vigor--graduated, you know, became a member of the bar, and then started his own practice.  And he did very well, he did very well.
Speaker 1: How old were you when he achieved, or he received his law degree?
Speaker 2: I guess, you know, I was around--I don't know, I guess about eight years old, something like that.
Speaker 1: So while--
Speaker 2: So we had, we had--actually, he had married again.  And we moved first to 16th Street--I think it was 1712 16th Street.  And then, and we'd move there and then, when the [U.S.] Supreme Court, when we had Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka [1954], daddy pulled Bennie [HM Bennaree Pratt Wiley] and I, and poured out champagne for us, and said, "You know, this is sig--this day is significant.  It'll impact your life forever."  And with that, he was determined to move so that his daughters would benefit from integration.
Story_ID: 639666
Speaker 1: So, do you, do you a have a strong sense of Jim Crow at the time of segregation?
Speaker 2: I was aware of it, oh, I was aware of it.  And I was aware of it enough that I can remember, even as a child, I thought, when I grew--when I, if this is the situation when I'm an adult, I'm out of here.  I, I knew enough to know that a lot of African Americans had moved to Paris [France] and, you know, had experienced a better quality of life.  And I had, I had no intention of staying here if that was going to be the opportun--you know, the rules of the day.  I had no intention of staying.
Speaker 1: What are some of your memories of that period of segregation?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you--there was always the--an overarching intimidation where you knew that you had to watch what you said.  When we--my aunt [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] would take us shopping, you could not stop to eat.  You--there were certain stores you knew that you couldn't even buy anything.  You couldn't, you know, they didn't want your patronage.
Speaker 1: Which stores?
Speaker 2: Well, Garfinckel's was the most celebrated, the most infamous, I should say.  They were the most infamous.  You know, Lansburgh's and Cannes [sic, McCans] tend to be the most inviting, resp--welcoming environments.  We would go sometimes to Woodies [Woodward & Lothrop], to Hecht's [Hecht Brothers] but we really couldn't stop and eat there.  My aunt [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] was always, you know, would go and buy food.  So, we would, at a counter, you were always aware that you were second class citizens.  You just always--it, it was clear you were second class citizens.  So, I mean, the mem--that, that impression remains with me today.  I remember it quite clearly.
Speaker 1: And your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] was a man of social conscience.  Did he talk a lot about the racial climate of [Washington,] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  I mean, he was, he found the segregation insufferable.  He was determined, as I say, to make his own, make his own mark.  And so, he decided--set out on a path that he thought he could--where there were fewer limitations by having his own practice, being an entrepreneur.  And as an entrepreneur, you did have an opportunity in Washington because you had a stable market of African Americans because they had the stability of, of steady income as a result of the federal government.
Story_ID: 639667
Speaker 1: Do you remember colleagues of your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt]?  I know Thurgood Marshall obviously was, was active at the time arguing cases before the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  Do you remember his presence or any other sort of prominent judges, doctors?
Speaker 2: [William] Bill Bryant was one of them.  And daddy and Bill Bryant were very good friends.  Another was, of course, [William] Bill Hastie, who we ended up in the same families.  Those are the two that--and I'm trying--there were a number of local activists.  There was, of course, the Terrell family, and there were a number of the lawyers, members of the bar, who were involved in some form of, of activism, but generally through the courts, principally through the courts.
Speaker 1: And so, your father--you mentioned brought home a champagne to celebrate Supreme Court case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  Do you remember any of the, the messages he gave you during that, that conversation during that sort of symbolic moment?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did that, did, did--it was clearly he was always saying that, one, you've got to capitalize on this moment.  You've got to go after it.  This is the, you know, this is the window of opportunity, and we've got to grab hold of it.  This is the first--life will be different for you than was it for me, has it been for me and, and my parents.  And, you know, he wanted us to take whatever God-given talents we had and tap, you know, use them to maximum capacity.  And leverage any window of opportunity presented to you because of sort of the institutional resistance to our making a contribution.  You had to be aware when you had a window of opportunity and to have, and, and seize that moment.  So, I think always his message was about enterprise.  You had to be enterprising.  You could not rest.  You had to move.  You had to seize the moment.  I think enterprise was always really central to any message daddy provided.
Story_ID: 639668
Speaker 1: Did he [Pratt's father, Carlisle Edward Pratt] talk about your mother [Mildred Petticord Pratt] a lot?
Speaker 2: He did.  He, he truly loved her.  And, and I think that love was all deepened because of the--her absence, although he certainly married again, twice, and was, and, and his third, third wife was someone he also loved and cared deeply about--not to say that he didn't care about all three.  But I, I think that he was blessed to have Gloria [ph.], you know, as, as his wife as well.
Speaker 1: What were some of the stories he told you about your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, he always--I think he liked the fact that she was never as smitten by him as--so, he thought some, you know, as, as I get--women do spoil men in Washington [D.C.].  Let me just put it--say that.  And I, I think my mother just held her own.  She, she valued herself, and I think it was that sense of personal confidence and authority that always charmed him.  And I think his being charmed by that was create--set a message to both of his daughters, to have, you know, really to be about your own strength, and your own capacity, and sort of define yourself, and in defining yourself, hopefully, that will make you attractive to others.  But, you know, you've got to define yourself.  And he always, and I think that was the quality he most appreciated about my mother.
Speaker 1: I was reading a story from your sister's [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] interview that he said that your mother never went to the door without her lipstick.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he tell you that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.  Oh, he made that clear to every--he reminded me of these qualities sometimes when he thought I was, you know, a little dropping the ball (laughter), a little.  Yeah, he did.  She was a, she was a woman who primped, you know, not in, not in the sense of--she just always was aware of, of presenting herself, and, and putting the best foot forward, yeah.
Story_ID: 639669
Speaker 1: Tell me about your early educational experiences.  What schools did you go to as a child?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to quite a few schools.  I'm trying to figure out why.  I went to quite a few elementary schools.  I must have been to about five of them.  Part--one reason that I switched was--well, I guess, part of it was that moving from neighborhood to neighborhood as a result of first living in Suburban Gardens [sic, Deanwood, Washington, D.C. near Suburban Gardens] with my parents [Mildred Petticord Pratt and Carlisle Edward Pratt], then my mother taking ill, moving, et cetera.  And then, finally, moving to Rudolph Elementary School [Washington, D.C.], as a re--in the wake of the decision of--the Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: So, where were you before?
Speaker 2: I was--before Rudolph Elementary School, I was attending, I think, Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And this was a colored school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of them before that were colored schools.
Speaker 1: So, what were those schools like?
Speaker 2: Well, they were good in the sense that we had terrific role models and teachers who deeply cared about us.  But you never had the same quality of equipment.  And I think there is some level of disservice and not always--I think it's good to be in an environment where everybody is--you have a great diversity of talent coming from a broader spectrum of experiences that inevitably result in different, a heightened level of competition.  I guess that is my take on it.  Others may view it differently.
Speaker 1: So, at Mott, are there any specific memories you have or teachers you remember, and how they kind of focused their attention on you?
Speaker 2: I, I'm, I'm sorry to say I don't remember a specific teacher, but I do remember being very well-nurtured.  I, I do remember leaving that environment feeling valued and I do remember that.
Speaker 1: I know--there were quite, there were quite a few educated women in your community--at the time, African American educated women, more than many communities in the United States.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of these women? I know Mary Church Terrell was kind of a prominent figure.
Speaker 2: Right.  I, I think the most, like Julia Cooper [Mack], who later, Julia Cooper Mack was one such person.  And she was still in the, you know, early state, beginning of her career as a lawyer.  Later on, I got to know her with Patricia Roberts who, Patric--Patricia Roberts Harris were two--another Flaxie [Madison] Pinkett, who, whose family had--were very successful real estate development and management family.  And Flaxie inherited that business and she ran that business.  So, those are some of the women that I, I do remember.
Story_ID: 639670
Speaker 1: So, you were naming some of the prominent African American women in your community [Washington, D.C.].  Was there a sense that, that men and women in D.C., African American men and women, were working collaboratively toward some goal, or was there kind of a division?
Speaker 2: I would--I felt, I felt people were working collaboratively.  I felt that there was a really a strong sense of community and, you know, a great desire to--everybody was rooting for everyone else to, to do well.  But there was clearly a hierarchical arrangement--I mean, that was understood that men were the ones who were supposed to achieve at a certain level, and women weren't expected to operate in the same domain.  And to the extent that they did, that was very unusual and not necessarily something people promoted, but neither do I remember them necessarily disparaging it.  It was just that it wasn't expected and not even necessarily encouraged.
Story_ID: 639671
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned you went to Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] which was a colored school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then, after the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], you went to an integrated school?
Speaker 2: That's right--went to Rudolph Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  It was an integrated school.  And I think Bennie [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] and I represented, like the third or fourth, you know, members--a family that had, families that had, you know, had moved into this neighborhood and then into the school system.
Speaker 1: So, around what year was this?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--must have been immediately afterwards because I was entering the sixth grade when we, when we arrived.
Speaker 1: So, what was that experience like--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --the transition?
Speaker 2: --It was dramatic.  One, I mean, we did certainly appreciate that the resources of just Rudolph Elementary School--I mean, it was just a very obvious contrast with the resources available, you know, at Mott Elementary School.  But you, in an environment where you were the only one in the classroom, I think Bennie did have Marilyn "Trish" Robinson who was a real trailblazer in media.  And Trish was there, and I think they were in the same class.  And I don't remember, you know, anyone in my class.  And there was someone, one, one year behind me--Carter Bowman [ph.].
Speaker 1: And you mentioned the resources.  What--help me understand which resources then.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you had more books.  The, the desks were nicer.  The equipment, you know, in the classroom, was much more extensive and much nicer.  The maps, you know--the playground was just phenomenal.  I'd never--I don't think I'd seen a playground with this much grass in my life.  You know, that was the difference.  I mean, just unl--resources were just significantly greater than had they been at Mott or Gage [Gage-Eckington Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], or any of the other schools, or part of the colored system.
Speaker 1: Now, this was after you moved with your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt, Jr.] and his wife?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And which neighborhood was this?
Speaker 2: It's Petworth [Washington, D.C.], Petworth neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this was also an integrated neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Integrated neighborhood there.  We--there were only three at that time, African American families just within that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 639672
Speaker 1: So, how were you treated, both in the neighborhood [Petworth, Washington, D.C.] and at school [Rudolph Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] by your white classmates and neighbors?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there was tension.  And I had come out of an environment where I had been nurtured, and was sort of imbued with the notion of having a sense of, you know, my own worth.  And so, I, you know, I felt very empowered in spite of this.  And I remember being greeted with what, you know, I was stoned home one day because I got into a altercation with a classmate.  We were both patrol kids, so he was a patrol boy of the, you know, and I was a patrol girl.  And, no, I think it was a couple of them.  And they made some disparaging remark about being black and I responded in kind, you know, I talked about--we, "How dare you--I mean, what are you talking about?" and that sort of thing.  And, whereupon, they picked up a few rocks (laughter), and I mean, and they really came after me.  But, you know, I came back to school the next day and had the nerve to say something again, so I did not necessarily have great judgment, but I was very determined.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the teachers and the treatment you received from them?
Speaker 2: I don't, I remember, I think the teacher was reasonably decent.  I mean, I think--I, I do remember that the teacher was reasonably decent because actually, the teacher selected--you had a competition of essays, you know, and you were supposed--whoever wrote that they perceived to be the best essay would be selected to speak at the--for the graduation.  And that teacher actually selected my essay and asked me to speak at the graduation.  So, that teacher clearly was willing, you know, to make an assessment in spite of race.  And so, my regard, you know, my recollection of that teacher was a favorable one.
Speaker 1: So, you excelled in writing.  Were there other disciplines where you excelled or--
Speaker 2: The two, at least at that time, would, would be writing, and then I was in the plays, you know, they would always sort of recruit me to be in the, their play, so I guess it was talking and writing, you know, the same, same thing you do in politics (laughter), more talking than writing.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt, Jr.] encourage writing and, and literature at home?
Speaker 2: He did, he, he encouraged us.  And he was remarried and my step-mother was an English teacher.  And she provided us with always, you know, required reading, even beyond what they, you know, insisted upon in school, so that was very much promoted, very much encouraged.
Speaker 1: What was your step-mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Jean McKissick Pratt.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good relationship with her?
Speaker 2: Reasonably good.
Story_ID: 639673
Speaker 1: And after Rudolph [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], where did you go?
Speaker 2: Went to MacFarland Junior High School [sic, MacFarland Middle School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Tell me about that school.
Speaker 2: MacFarland, by this time, de facto segregation was beginning to take hold.  It was amazing how rapidly that was happening, so that by the time we arrive--I arrived at MacFarland, which was previously an all-white school, it was significantly African American.  It was beginning to be, you know, at least, at least it had to be at least fifty-five percent African American.  The principal was still a Caucasian, but the assistant principals were then beginning to be African American.  One of whom I do remember was a good friend of daddy's [Carlisle Edward Pratt], so it was Lawrence Graves.  And, you know, it reflected what most junior high schools do which is a lot of pre-puberty behavior, you know, so it was a good experience but, you know, it, it was typical junior high school.
Speaker 1: Did black students and white students interact?  Were there friendships?
Speaker 2: There was none, none of which I'm aware.  There was no interaction between whites and blacks.  The only interaction would be in the hallways.  There would be some conversation but rarely.  It was just a passing remark.  There was really no social engagement with--among whites and blacks--none of which I'm aware.
Story_ID: 639674
Speaker 1: And so, your neighborhood [Petworth, Washington, D.C.]--it's not as if there's one block that was a black block, and one that was a white block.  You were--there were a few African American families and you were kind of mixed in?
Speaker 2: Right, into that white neighborhood and, actually, it's amazing.  When I think of that neighborhood, and I--I only remember the African American families, and possibly it's because only the African American families communicated with us.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: One was the Robinson family, [Marilyn] Trish Robinson's parents and her brother.  Another was John [B.] Duncan and who was the first African American commissioner in the city.  He was up the street.  Another were the Bowmans who were next door neighbors.  And I do remember then the Cobb [ph.] family moving into the neighborhood, Charlie Cobb, and I'm trying to remember every--the full name.  And then, of course, there were beginning to be friends from junior high school that moved in, you know, around the neighborhood--Theresa Robinson [ph.] and her sister and her, you know, their family, so, yeah, I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember travelling to different sections of [Washington] D.C. and noticing the differences between the various neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Well, we began to get exposed to where the rest of the city lived so, yes, I, I do remember that.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about those neighborhoods-Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], for example?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, Georgetown, we sort of always--you always were sort of aware of that, that really with the Northwest neighborhoods, a lot of the Northwest neighborhood, far Northwest or upper 16th Street [Washington, D.C.]--all of that had, had been beyond the--our purview before.  And so, it was really something to behold--to us, at the time, because we just didn't know those communities existed.
Speaker 1: And that's because--
Speaker 2: Because you, because of with segregation, you lived in the same neighborhood.  You patronized, you know, colored, as they said, restaurants, and you rarely travelled beyond those, those communities.
Story_ID: 639675
Speaker 1: Now, I understand on one of your birthdays, your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] gave you a significant birthday gift, a book?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: He gave me 'Black's Law Dictionary' when I turned sixteen, and so I guess I got the hint (laughter) so--
Speaker 1: How did, how did you respond when he gave you that?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I can remember it.  I thought I would have liked something else, but I got the message.  And I guess, because, you know, we had such respect for daddy.  I just sort of said, okay, that's what I'll do.  It isn't really what I think I wanted to do at the, certainly at the time, but I guess also, there was something affirming about it that, you know, my father thought I could be a lawyer, so that was good.  I think that's probably how I sort of reacted to it.  I didn't--it isn't necessarily the gift I'd want, but there's a part of me that's flattered that you think I can do this.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, despite the fact, you mentioned there was a hierarchy between men, and then women, but it seems like your father was trying to level the playing field in some way.
Speaker 2: Daddy was terrific regarding his expectations of his daughters.  Now, had he had a son, I don't know if we would have fared so well, you know, but he didn't have any options.  So, he really imbued us, imbued in us, a sense of personal empower there's--empowerment.  There's no question that he valued that, thought it was achievable, and expected that of both of us.
Story_ID: 639676
Speaker 1: It sounds like you were achieving in the arts as well in writing specifically and reading literature.  Were you aware of the arts in, in Northwest [Washington] D.C., in the Shaw [Washington, D.C.] area, in LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--we were aware of the arts.  You know, I think one of the great things about, one of the many great things--there were many great things about the system, the segregated system.  And one of which is that you were nurtured on some of the great--the giants of in, in our community.  And some of the giants were really, you know--Richard Wright, you know, some of the great artists.  And so, that's part of the reason, undoubtedly, why as a child, I said, you know, if this is the system, I'm going to Paris [France] because I had learned about all of these great figures.  So, I, yes, I think that we were aware of it.  You had Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], and, you know, had certainly the performing arts were celebrated--maybe not as much the visual arts, but certainly the performing arts were definitely celebrated.
Speaker 1: And Duke Ellington also--
Speaker 2: Exactly, a native Washingtonian--
Speaker 1: --from the LeDroit Park area.  Right.
Speaker 2: --He's a native Washingtonian.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned Richard Wright, and you had mentioned your own sort of dream of going to Paris and, of course, he went to Paris.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, were you aware of African American writers and their biographies and--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I wasn't, I, because it was at least talked about a lot in the classroom as a part of that, of the, of the, segregated school system.  It was very, very much talked about.  And certainly with time, I certainly was introduced to, you know lit--more literature.  And, and my exposure began to broaden as well, but I think, you know, as you advanced in school, and I--certainly my step-mother was very good at introducing literature.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the books you read?
Speaker 2: Which ones had--well, the traditional ones that everybody likes.  And I liked 'Little Woman' [Louisa May Alcott](laughter) and 'Little Men' [Louisa May Alcott] and Jane Austen, you know, I guess all women are reared on Jane Austen.  You know, I, I'm, with time, I guess, more in high school that I began to sort of broaden it to '[The] Razor's Edge' and, you know, [W.] Somerset Maugham's work.  But I, you know, and I love Shakespeare and I do remember that.  It was interesting.  I really loved Shakespeare in high school [at Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.], and I think it was just the way he could turn a phrase.  And it was, you know, I think that's what I found so engaging--
Story_ID: 639677
Speaker 1: --About his works.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, tell me about your high school years.  Which high school did you attend?
Speaker 1: I went to Roosevelt High School [Washington, D.C.].  And Roosevelt High School had also had a very tough experience with integration.  The principal eventually got--was almost forced out of there because of the challenges with integration of the person.  When something, like people like [HM] Charlene Drew Jarvis, preceded me at Roosevelt, and they really separated you in the classroom physically by race.  So, it was, it was not a happy place.  It was still struggling.  By the time our class arrived, but, you know, within short order, it, too, became de facto segregated with African Americans.
Speaker 2: So, this is late '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: That's right because I graduated--that's right, it's late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: And so, how did, how did that work--the segregated classroom?
Speaker 1: Well, now, they were really practicing that with vigor shortly before I arrived.  But they really physically separated you in the classroom according to race.  So, basically, what they did was, they really did it by color, so the fairest blacks sat nearest the whites.  And that's really what they did.  They enforced that in the classroom.  Then, that's what they did, so by the time we arrived, they had, you know, made a switch with the principal because of that outrageous system.  So, Roosevelt really struggled with integration.
Story_ID: 639678
Speaker 1: Do you remember the remnants of that when you arrived at Roosevelt [High School, Washington, D.C.]--the colorism?
Speaker 2: Well, they sort of had recovered from it, but it was a, it was--I felt the tension there more than I did at MacFarland [Middle School, Washington, D.C.], and, and MacFarland was younger with integration.  I, I think that looking back on it, I, I think that's really what I felt.  It was still highly charged.  You still knew that it was an environment that was not that welcoming to African Americans.  We were still struggling with it and there was levels of--there were always levels of still of the vestiges of color, you know.
Speaker 1: So, tell me--I mean, this is big in [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: --the paper bag tests, all those kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how you were treated by other African Americans?  Was there a scale of, of color?  Were you treated differently?
Speaker 2: Yes, you--we were.  There's little question about it--I mean, because we came and along in a time when everybody revered what was white was right--as much of that as you could approximate, whether it was because of your education, because of your training, or because of your physical appearance.  You definitely enjoyed some assumptions, you know, presumptions, little question about that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific incidents that occurred that let you know, okay, I'm getting some privileges because of my complexion (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would say socially, you know, it was always sort of assumed you'd get an invitation to everything.
Speaker 1: White events and black events?
Speaker 2: Well, not white events, not white events, but certainly in the black community, I'd say that there were certain advantages.  There's no question--sort of, it was sort of assumed that you were going to get these invitations to social events.  I think sometime there was assumptions or presumptions of exposure, et cetera, because of that, and probably because of the history of slavery and the practices of slavery and, therefore, who got to be educated at a time when it was a crime to be educated, and if in fact, you were--had access to the plantation owner.  And the, and the owner of that plantation, you know, still allow--somehow introduced literature to you.  You could learn how to read.  Then, you did have that advantage.  That advantage got passed down with each generation.  And so, you know, that, that's a part of what had, what transpired.  But, clearly, people who had training, there were African Americans who, even at this time, who had had the benefit of prep school educations, who had gotten to go to Ivy League schools.  These, these African Americans were also treated differently.  There's little question, they, they got treated better than those who attended historical black institutions [HBCU].  There was that which was white was right (laughter), and, and that was, you know, that was a part of, unfortunately, in the DNA of our culture of that time.
Story_ID: 639679
Speaker 1: You had mentioned early on race mixing in different families and just now, you mentioned the slave master.  Do you know your own family history with respect to the mixing of races?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know it as well as I need--should know it.  I, I think my sister [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] has, has someone who's beginning to look into that.  Certainly, we know that, you know, we clearly have of African ancestry, a lot of Native American ancestry, and on my mother's [Mildred Petticord Pratt] side, Scottish, on my father's [Edward Carlisle Pratt] side, British.  And we are exploring that more deeply now.
Speaker 1: Do you remember in high school [at Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.], you said that you had certain privileges?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, as--I mean this is something that continues in our community as well.  Were there specific parties where people were excluded because of skin color?  They were too dark features?
Speaker 2: I think that--yes, I do think there were.  And I do think--not, you know, I mean, it was--but I do think that there were clearly--I, I've noted, I just knew that there were times I got the benefit of the doubt for the invitation that everybody coveted for no reason other than that.
Speaker 1: You know, Nella Larsen writes a lot about club women in [Washington] D.C. and New York [City, New York].  She writes a lot about passing, racial passing.  Are you aware of any of that going on while you were growing up--racial passing or a lot of clubs available to African American women of prominence?
Speaker 2: Not more as I became an adult, more about it, you know, certainly by the time I was in high school, I was aware of it--not really so much before that.  I was certainly aware that there were people who did pass, but I wasn't that close to anyone who did, so I wasn't as aware of it as others were, you know, maybe, and maybe by the time I got to high school.  I would hear my aunt [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] and her friends speak of people they knew who were passing at the, at the Library of Congress and that sort of thing.  They did know people who did that because that was the only way those folks were going to get--be advanced in the government.  So, they--people would comment on it, but I, I didn't really know anybody who had done it.
Story_ID: 639680
Speaker 1: Where did you excel in high school [at Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.] academically?
Speaker 2: I was always sort of the history, political science, you know, English, you know, anything where reading and--but history, political science, I really liked, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you belong to clubs?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  I think I belonged to the teachers' club, and what did I belong to?  I was, I was very active in high school.  I belonged to the, you know, acting club.  And I was active with, you know, I was elected president of my class and so, I was always involved, you know.
Speaker 1: Was that a first?  I mean, you mentioned this is a--very much an integrated high school.  Was it a first to have an African American woman as president of the class?
Speaker 2: Not really by that time.  I guess, probably because the class was overwhelmingly African American at that juncture.  So, but, you know, it was a compliment to me, I felt, to, to have my classmates, you know, think that well of me and so, I was, I was pleased by that.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: 1961.
Story_ID: 639681
Speaker 1: And do you remember your graduation [from Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.] and, and the encouragement you received perhaps from teachers or your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] about college?
Speaker 2: I do remember graduation.  I do remember my homeroom teacher, Helen Blackburn [Helen M. Blackburn].  She was--made all the difference in my life because, actually, up until high school, I, I was not applying myself the way I should have.  And I began to discipline myself better in high school and, you know, really make much more of an investment in my own education.  And Helen Blackburn was my homeroom teacher, and she was also the lead teacher for political science and American government.  And so, you know, she took an interest in me and, and she really helped me sort of grow.  And, and without a doubt, that had a lot to do with being elected president of the class.  It had a lot to do with, you know, becoming a high achiever academically.  Her husband had--was a dean at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Armour Blackburn.  And so, I decided, for lots of reasons, not the least of which is Howard was pretty exciting socially.  I wanted to go to Howard.
Speaker 1: Had you considered other schools as well?
Speaker 2: I hadn't.  And maybe, you know, that's really a function of being a product of more of a segregated school system.  You know, it really was a defining experience of my early years.  And so, I only thought of HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities].  I didn't really think of going elsewhere, and Howard seemed pretty exciting to me.
Speaker 1: So, your father gave you 'Black's Law Dictionary'--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --With the hopes that you would follow in his footsteps.  What were you dreaming about in high school?  What did you think you might be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Obviously, by this point, I think politics was beginning to get my attention.  And part of that was because we would--that was the, the year when you had--the [John F.] Kennedy and, and the Kennedy-[Richard] Nixon contest, but more particularly, because Kennedy was such a young candidate, a young president representing a new generation, and the promise of a new generation.  And so, it had a really reverberating impact--his, his candidacy.  And it really, you know, got my attention because I saw this as an avenue to have an impact on the issues that I cared about, certainly the issues of absence of enfranchisement in Washington [D.C.], and certainly the general dynaminc it--for African Americans and women in the country at that time.
Speaker 1: So, tell me your recollections.  I mean, this was a very turbulent time in some ways.  It was a, a shift, a paradigm shift really, in the political spectrum.  So, what, what are your memories of the JFK transition, of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s fight at this time?
Speaker 2: I do remember.  I'm always, and I guess, when I look back on it, I always had an interest in this political system and the government--not surprising.  Washington, D.C., you're, you know, you're right in the backyard of all of that.  And suddenly, seeing the images shift from a [President] Dwight Eisenhower, which is very staid, status quo image, to a period when you began to see a profile in different personalities, activists, and all the promise of activism.  So, I found it invigorating--I mean, hopeful, you know.  I was excited about what could happen and how we could have an impact.  I was ready to go (laughter), you know, and I, I would organize discussions in my class in high school around what--the, the ongoing presidential campaign, and how one could have an impact, and how youth could have an impact.  And so, when I entered Howard, I mean, I was just full of that vigor.  And, of course, we--I was entering Howard at a time when Stokely Carmichael was there, E. Franklin Frazier was there, challenging the black bourgeoisie.  I mean, it was, Toni Morrison was our introductory humanities teacher.  It was a great time to be at Howard, you know.  It, it really was.
Speaker 1: And your, your aunt [Aimee Elizabeth Pratt] had gone to Howard as well?
Speaker 2: My aunt did go to Howard.  She didn't finish but she went to Howard also, yeah.
Story_ID: 639682
Speaker 1: So, tell me about, so you graduated high school [Roosevelt High School, Washington, D.C.] in 1961, a big moment nationally, a big moment for you personally.  What was that first year like?
Speaker 2: At Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  Oh, I absolutely thought I'd died and gone to heaven.  I just loved it.  I mean, it was just such stimulating teachers.  Can you imagine having Toni Morrison teach you?  It was just wonderful.  You had Sterling Brown, you know.  I remember my logic, oh, I'm trying to remember what class--Dr. William [Augustus] Banner.  I mean, you had some of the great legends of all time who were teaching at Howard.  As I said, E. Franklin Frazier.  It, it was just an extraordinary time.  And then, you had all of the excitement and the electricity of the Civil Rights Movement.  And the personal expression of it in someone as were classmates, such as Stokely Carmichael [later Kwame Ture].  And we would go in the--oh, at Founders Library [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and we would get into debates about it.  And I mean, and you could--so, what you saw on television or read in the newspaper, you could actually play, you know, pages of that, experiences out in your own personal life.  At the same time, you had some of the most gorgeous men I'd ever seen at Howard.  So, it was, it was all in every way, exciting.
Story_ID: 639683
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of those sights during your first year at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. What are some of the sights that stand out?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the sights would be the Triangle, the Quad [Main Quadrangle], Quad, rather--not the Triangle, the Quad at--right there on the grounds at Howard University.  And it really was a fashion show on Friday without a doubt because you'd have--all of the fraternities and sororities would be out there, you know, and then, they'd have their own particular circle.  And so, it became just a magnet of activity.  And it was also a great social experience as well, as you can well appreciate, yeah.  So, I remember that.  I remember going into Founders Library and, of course, you had to go--I had to climb up in the stacks to really study because it was also another sort of social magnet, you know.  People are supposed to be there to, to study, but they somehow got distracted, so you'd have to climb up in the stacks if you really wanted to study.  I can remember having--there was a sort of--I can't remember what, what our group was called.  But they were sort of a small discussion group where we would talk about the contemporary issues.  And I remember--Stokely [Carmichael, Kwame Ture] was in that and we were in that together, and so we'd have these discussions and debates and--
Speaker 1: So, tell me about that.  What was Stokely Carmichael like?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very intense, extremely smart, and very impatient with what he perceived the absence sometimes of black leadership.  He views many of the accomplished African Americans to be too comfortable, too much a part of the E. Franklin Frazier definition of success.  And I found myself in the position of trying to defend, you know, what was perceived the black bourgeoisie--recognizing, I shared his impatience.  But I also understood that you don't get mad at people who were also victims of that same system.  And the fear that became a part of our community that discouraged you many times of getting outside the box.  That affected everybody within our community, but he was fun to debate.  He was, but he was, he was a fascinating person--full of contradictions, but, you know, this issue is the touchstone issue of America.  And it brings out conflicts in all of us.  It just brings out everybody in America.  It just brings out, you know, a plethora of conflicts, you know, and, and that played itself out with Stokely as well.
Speaker 1: Were you, were you both sort of leaders in this growing movement on campus?
Speaker 2: He was a bona fide activist.  I was a bona fide sort of the political activist.  I, I was much more intrigued with the notion of even then of being engaged politically.  I just always thought that this was the first lever to real empowerment in our community, and that political empowerment would lead to economic empowerment.  And I just always had that sort of notion--resolve and, and sort of, and so, that's what I was driving and pushing.  He was authentically involved in the real social activism that was occurring all across the country and now beginning to play itself out at Howard.  Howard was late grabbing hold of it really.
Speaker 1: And I mean, you may have gotten some of this from your father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] who had a real respect for the law and the system and working through the system to achieve success.
Speaker 2: Undoubtedly, I'm certain.  And, and daddy's notion of us becoming a part of the capitalist system. He was very determined that Bennie [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] and I should become players within the capitalist system.  He was very impatient with government, you know, how government--he felt stifled enterprise, and did not reward you for your labors the way the capitalist system would reward you for your labors.  And so, both of us sort of--I guess, grabbed hold of that notion in our early years.
Story_ID: 639684
Speaker 1: So, tell me about some of the organized protests on campus in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Well, there was--by, by the time, I guess I was a senior, Ewart Brown [Jr.], who now is the Premier of Bermuda, organized a sit-in on campus.  And my sister [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] was one of the ones who was really a part of that.  And they took over the administration building at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And Howard was beginning to get away from that old guard and express itself in terms of black empowerment, you know, from dress, hairdo, expression, you know, impatience with the faculty, the administration.  And that was, you know, beginning, but that was slow, slowly, slowly building, or maybe aggressively building, but it certainly wasn't at a pace that was occurring within the South, the deep South.  I think the deep South--they were the leaders, they were clearly the leaders.  And Washington [D.C.] is a part of the South, but we're right there on the border and very much, you know, I was a large, sort of a large plantation because we had been under the, under the thumb of the federal government for so long, continued to be under the thumb, in my way of thinking, the federal government.  And so, that discouraged the aggressiveness, I guess, or the assertiveness and the self-reliance that I felt that, that, that was much more prevalent to me among Southerners.  The Southerners were the leaders.
Speaker 1: Was [HM] Jacqueline Brown there when you were there from Prince George's County [Maryland]?  Was she--
Speaker 2: I don't--I, she may have been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Stokely Carmichael, now he, was he somebody who was, was he well-received by the student body [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?  I mean, this was a good-looking guy.  He was a little revolutionary.  How was he received?
Speaker 2: Students loved him.  He was well, he was regarded.  He had his own personal magnetism that he would have had, whether he'd been an activist or not.  No, the students really loved him.  Definitely, the--what was sweeping the country was sweeping the--and grabbing hold of the consciousness, consciousness of the student body without a doubt.
Speaker 1: So SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was active on campus?
Speaker 2: SNCC was beginning to be active on campus.  Again, Howard [University] tended to be a little behind the curb, in my opinion.
Speaker 1: What about SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] organization?
Speaker 2: Again, I do not remember a real significant presence of, of that on, on Howard's campus although, clearly, what was happening across the country was having its impact in terms of the dialogue, the conversation, the changing attitudes of students, and, indeed, some of the instructors, the, the thinking, the, and the presentation of, of African American history in the classroom.  It was having its impact.
Story_ID: 639685
Speaker 1: So, tell me about the classroom [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], E. Franklin Frazier.  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was great because he challenged all of us and told us everything that we thought--as the reasons why we had come to college, you know, is essentially to get into the system, marry, and then to go to debutante balls was a big waste of time (laughter).  And he, he was, he was wonderful because he's turned all the assump--these assumptions on their head.  And the students loved it, but you know, when you're young, you just love that.  And you appreciate that, you know.  He was, he was wonderful.
Speaker 1: I want--'cause it sounds like, from your experience, that you were, you were experiencing it all.  So, on one hand, you understood black bourgeoisie culture.  On the other hand, you were a budding activist in some way.  Were you kind of going through the [W.E.B.] Du Bois experience of double consciousness in a way, kind of that conflict?
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess so.  I mean, there is--I know that I am a member of this bourgeoisie.  And the bourgeoisie certainly has been very good to me from my high school teachers to my elementary school teachers all the way through law school.  But I--like E. Franklin Frazier, like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], get impatient with the black leadership.  I do understand why many times people are challenged not to do more, or not to get out of the box more, or to be more provocative as one I think must be.  But at the same time, I do understand that, but at the same time, I think, I recognize we desperately need that.  And so, with, with time, I certainly have come to appreciate maybe in little other ways, you can, you know, hopefully harness that to the collective advantage of our community, but I did feel that conflict.  I, and I think throughout life, I have felt that conflict.
Story_ID: 639686
Speaker 1: And [E. Franklin] Frazier, you said, he mentioned those debutante balls.  Were you part of a debutante ball (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I was a part of the debu--the debutante balls.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: The Girlfriends.
Speaker 1: And that was a big rite of passage in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Big rite of passage in D.C.--that's right, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that--the culture of debutante balls.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I--the--it was first very coveted to be a debutante.  Someone had to sponsor you, so one of the many social clubs of Washington had to sponsor you for you to become a debutante.  That was the own set of politics.  Then, you know, who got to be your escort, or who got to be sub-debs and all of that.  It was, it was major politics.
Speaker 1: Who was your escort?
Speaker 2: A guy named Leonard Manning [ph.].
Speaker 1: And was there sort of a queen of the ball?
Speaker 2: If there were, I mean there may have been, I don't remember that.  I do remember the sort of the etiquette classes and, you know, that they put you through, and learning ballroom dancing, and some of which, you know, were useful later years in life when I was working in corporate America, but, but I remember that, you know, reasonably well and--
Speaker 1: Did you have to be a member of an educated family to be a part--
Speaker 2: You did, you did.  It was pretty much that.
Speaker 1: And were black, dark-skinned black people, light-skinned black people all a part of it or was there colorism--
Speaker 2: Everybody was a part of it.  But, again, I'm, I, I, if you look back on it, there's definitely--I think I'm more aware of it with age than was I even aware of it at the time that clearly, you know, both education, professions, and color all played themselves out.  All of, you know, contributed to who got to be a debutante and who did not.
Speaker 1: Were you seeing reverberations of that on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, even in the early 1960s when civil rights is alive and well?  Were there still remnants of the bourgeois culture?
Speaker 2: Oh, goodness, gracious, yes.  I mean, Howard is the home of the, that, the black bourgeoisie without a doubt.  I mean, when I arrived at Howard, they were still thinking about wearing gloves, you know, and what the particular protocol ought to be walking through a dormitory.  It was just for two, you know, it was crazy.  And, and you know, then--and Howard was very much a continuing affirmation of many of the notions of the black bourgeoisie.  But, again, you have to look at it in a larger context which I can now later in life.  We had been a community who were enslaved.  We were people who had been deprived of any sense of civility and, you know, any sense of stability--civility--as well.  And so, we desperately wanted all of the accoutrements of any kind of social structure, social order, sense of tradition.  Initially, we did it in a fashion, I think, that very much emulated the environment in which we lived without pulling from our own rich ancestry.  And that began to occur clearly during the 1960s as we began to go through--have the Black Power Movement and the, this notions of personal black empowerment.  But, you know, upon reflection, I can see why all of this mattered so much because for so long, any aspect of this had been denied, institutionally denied.
Speaker 1: You mentioned hairstyles as a signifier of a shift in attitude.  What did you notice, notice on Howard's campus with respect to hair and dress?
Speaker 2: Very traditional in the beginning.  But by the time I reached my junior year, you began to see a lot more, began to see afros.  And that began to really flower by the time I was graduating from Howard, undergrad, and entering Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  So, I got to see sort of that transition take place.
Story_ID: 639687
Speaker 1: Did [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] or any of the big civil rights leaders speak on campus [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Martin Luther King did speak on campus.  And it's a moment you just won't forget because he had to be one of the most gifted speakers ever in the history of this country.  He knew how to pitch it.  He did it with intellect, and he did it with a cadence that was just so uncommon.  And he left you, he pulled you up, and he just sort of left it almost, you know, so, so that you hungered for more.  I've rarely seen a talent of his caliber, both in substance and in style and in delivery.  Oh, yes, I remember him for certain.
Speaker 1: Where did he speak and--
Speaker 2: He spoke at Cramton Auditorium [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Tell me about the student response.
Speaker 2: Oh, the stud--well, I mean, first off, he was a legend. He was a building legend by then.  And so, the students were already captivated with him, just about what they generally knew about him.  But he grabbed hold of that audience--I mean, with a personal magnetism I've rarely ever experienced.  And you just felt an intimacy with him as if he were speaking to you personally.  And he delivered the message.  He let us know the importance of what was going in the movement.  He did it by--with, with historical reflections, biblical and reflections, and then left us with a sense of and now what to do.  I mean, there was a way he just grabbed hold of you and pulled you in, and then you were just ready to follow.  It was extraordinary.  And he did it in the space of about eighteen minutes.  It was amazing.  I'll never forget it.
Speaker 1: And what were students doing at the time?
Speaker 2: They were on their feet--I mean, they were on their feet.  I mean, I--it was--they would have followed him off a cliff, and I would have been in front of the line (laughter).  It was just something.  I, and, and I, someone who is a student of, of great oration, I like to hear a great speaker.  I like to, you know, some people just have this gift, and I have never seen anyone who matched him--never.  And I don't think I ever will.
Speaker 1: Were his speeches apparently impromptu?  Was he reading any of this?
Speaker 2: Oh, he never read it.  I mean, he looked you right in the eye.  He did not read it.  I'm certain he had organized his thoughts before he stepped on that stage, but he could summon a sentence with such ease.  I mean, he, it was, he had an uncommon gift--the way a great composer, a [Ludwig van] Beethoven, you know, he just had a gift.  He could hear something, and present something, and format something with a, with a style again, and a reflection, a quality that you just can't quite quantify.  You know, I--my daughter's in the music business and I'll say, well, what, how do you know that's the artist to sign?  And she says, it's the tone, it's, you know, you just have to have the ears.  It's the tone.  And he had that something special that you cannot quantify.  And every single person that he spoke to, you know, was in his grasp at the end of that eighteen minutes.  They were in his grasp with the first few sen--words and I, I can't quantify it.  I can't even fully explain it, but I know it was a moment I'll never have again.
Speaker 1: Something you said reminds me of some of the great African American essayists, like [W.E.B.] Du Bois and [James] Baldwin, had that gift, that ability to take you on a story using several analogies, and then putting it back in your lap.  So then you were carrying the torch and you had to take it somewhere next.  It sounds like that was the experience you had.
Speaker 2: I did, and I, and I think it's--some people have the gift, so that they can present it in the printed format.  And part of what those who do in the printed format tend to be--bring rich layers to it, but those who can do it through the oration, they have to be--give you that same reflection, but very concisely, so that somehow a combination of what they say, and how they say it, you, you experience it.  You get the general, you know, get all of that texture in a few short sentences and, you know, he had that quality.  He had that gift.
Story_ID: 639688
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet him [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: I did, but, you know, I, I didn't get a chance to know him, but I certainly got a chance to meet him.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the meeting.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I was just, you know, I was one of the ones just standing in that crowd coming up to him, speaking to him.  And he, he looked, he was engaging, but clearly, he gets spent, he was spent, when after he spoke, you know, because he gives, gave so much to the audience.  It's like, you know, some of the great perform--performing artists, when they get up on the stage, they give so much to the audience, you feel some of that em--and how they're a little emotionally spent after they speak, and you could sort of feel that.  He was still there, but he was, you know, you could see that he was a little depleted by how much he had given us in that eighteen minutes as it were of oration.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you said to him, or what he said to you?
Speaker 2: No, I just remember just telling him, he was absolutely fabulous, you know, but I was just one of hundreds saying that.
Speaker 1: And you seem moved here recalling that, that moment.
Speaker 2: I, I am, and I always, I was moved by him.  I, I felt he was just an extraordinary human being.  I have to say there was one other human being that I did meet, and got to know better that I feel that you almost feel God sent this person.  And the one, the other is Nelson Mandela.  And for different reasons--one, I have had a chance to engage in conversation with Nelson Mandela, but people who are so centered and you can't, again, some people are just centered.  And I felt that about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] always.  I always felt that he came from a very centered space.  He wasn't giving me any practiced kind of presentation.  He was speaking from a very clear centered spiritual space.  And I always, and I felt, had felt the same in my conversations with Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 1: Did he bring you to tears?
Speaker 2: Dr. King?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  He did, he always brought me to tears.  I, and he always, you know, embarrassed you about how you, you know, what you were doing.  What were you doing with your life, you know, and I mean, I'm up here pursuing, pledging sororities and that sort of thing and, yes, I cared about these other things.  But had I put my life on the line?  No.  And he embarrassed you about--in a way that was not chiding, not judgmental, but so clear about one's mission that, yeah, he always brought me to tears.  And you just felt God, that, you know, God had touched him and, and anyone who was connected to him or any, had been in his presence, you were touched indirectly.
Speaker 1: So other students were also mushy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Story_ID: 639689
Speaker 1: What did you do as, as a student body and as an activist group on campus?  What did you do after [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] left?
Speaker 2: Oh, I do think the students that would--it filled their energy, the, the desire and drive to, to get more engaged.  And I do think at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], we were particularly self-conscious, that we were sort of the capstone of the, of both, that we, we thought black education.  And we, we always thought and, but the bourgeoisie, so I think that there were levels at which it, it fueled that drive to, to try to do better, to try to make a difference, to try to become engaged more, and I think he did that very decidedly.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the activism in the wake of the King speech?  Were you guys active throughout [Washington] D.C. or on campus specifically?
Speaker 2: I think it's the most, the greater activism, I think, occurred on Howard's campus--not to say that you hadn't had activists throughout the history of Washington.  And you had these activists--a case in point, as we referenced earlier, such as Mary Church Terrell, in the, you know, the black middle class community, so there's no question about that.  But Howard was really a hotbed of activism in contrast to the larger landscape of Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And so, you mentioned, and we had talked very briefly about Mary Church Terrell, but you were aware of her and her husband's [Robert Heberton Terrell] presence?
Speaker 2: I was aware of their presence.  I, I can't say that I had the privilege of really knowing them in any significant way, but I was well aware of their pre--'cause people spoke of her with a great reverence.  I mean, she was a source of great pride, and the fact that she had that kind of resolve and determination in the face of a pretty hostile system.  No, people spoke of her with great regard.
Story_ID: 639690
Speaker 1: You mentioned some of the other great professors at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the time.  Tell me about class with Toni Morrison.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, class, that was- class with Toni Morrison was also quite something because she--her compelling style that played--is reflected in her writings later in her writings, was evidence in class, and she is very dramatic.  She's very dramatic, yeah, she gets your attention.  I mean, and so, she would, she stimulated you to want to read whatever, she--you know, she, that that certainly was a, one of the byproducts, but she was--there was, she was challenging.  She challenged old assumptions, and she did that in her lecture.  And she did it in a way that the implications were that if you didn't begin to challenge these old assumptions, then you were intellectually lazy (laughter).  I mean that to me, that's part of what she was saying.  But she did it with great style and great panache, and but she was real--I mean, you just, she was a riveting kind of personality.
Speaker 1: So, even at that time, now she was probably in her mid-thirties at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was an, she was an instructor, I think, or maybe an associate professor.  And she had a large humanities class and I, she probably had already started writing, but she wasn't, you know, a published author then, of which I was, I'm aware.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the books 'cause I know that--I mean, she was trained in the classics and, you know, became a prominent African American writer, but did she teach you the classics or was she focusing on African American (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: She taught us the classics and I can't recall exactly.  I just remember I do--of course, of course she was challenging.  I remember one that she was challenging some of the passages in the Bible, and that's what I particularly remember because that was pretty provocative at Howard at that time.  And her perception of the attitudes toward women in the Bible, and so that, I do remember vividly because it was just so avant-garde for anybody to have a temerity to do that in this big grand lecture.  I mean, it, it was just unheard of.
Speaker 1: I wonder, was she teaching 'Paradise Lost' or one of those books that sort of dealt with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And she, you know, she was just--and, and because of her style, her dramatic style--I mean, she really could have been an actress, I think.  You know, she was, you know, she was a compelling personality and so, I do remember her very, very clearly.
Speaker 1: And so, you mention that she was challenging the Bible and this was a little bit revolutionary--black community, pretty conservative at this time and, and generally.  Which values was she shaking up?  Now, did your family go to a church in town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, our, our family--my father's [Carlisle Edward Pratt] family, yeah, were Lutherans, pretty uncommon.  And my mother's [Mildred Petticord Pratt] family had been Episcopalians, which I later became.  But no, no one challenged the Bible.  That was just not done so--
Speaker 1: Which church did you attend in town?
Speaker 2: It was Our Redeemer Lutheran Church [Evangelical Lutheran Church of Our Redeemer, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And was this a quiet Protestant church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was a very, yeah, that's right, a quiet, you know, one of the great things with my experience at Howard, and then you had Rankin Chapel that I got introduced to the great Baptist ministers and the A.M.E. ministers, and also how you got a little bit more audience feedback, whereas with the Lutheran Church and the Episcopal Church, you never know if they're really awake (laughter).  So but, but whatever church, you certainly never challenged scripture, and she just so boldly did it.  And, of course, it was in the context of great writings, but the fact that she would, you know, bring it to the forefront and was, again, very provocative at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, so she's teaching you, during, during the Civil Rights Movement, was she very socially conscious about injustice?
Speaker 2: One had the impression that she was.  I, I think that was sort of layered in her, her lectures because she was generally impatient with the, you know, all of us.  Yeah, that was, that was, I guess, the feeling I had about Toni Morrison. That may not be a fair characterization, but it was my impression.  She was impatient with all of us.  It was sort of, and she perceived not doing enough, challenging enough, not intellectually aggressive enough, you know, that, that was my impression.
Speaker 1: And who was the president of Howard at the time?  I know he was very active as well.
Speaker 2: James Nabrit [Jr.] was the president at Howard at that time, yeah, and he had been, of course, obviously, very active in the '54 [1954] decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and he was quite a personality, but there was a level at which he also reflected the old school.
Story_ID: 639691
Speaker 1: You were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] on fellowship.  Is that true--the Falk Fellowship?
Speaker 2: Falk Fellowship for--I did win a Falk Fellowship, yes, but that, that was just a--I can't remember the value of it--I mean it was a pretty good amount of money.  And it was the honor of being a Falk Fellow, that's right.
Speaker 1: What was your major while at Howard?
Speaker 2: Political science was my major and history, economics were minors.
Speaker 1: What were your hopes for the future?
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, I pretty much knew I was supposed to be a lawyer.  And although I was a little intrigued, after going to Howard, with cultural anthropology.  That just seemed sort of very interesting, but there was a level at which I wanted to be active.  I wanted to make an impact in some way, and I just saw law possibly as a vehicle for doing that.  And I think even then, I was interested clearly in the political arena, if we could ever get an opportunity to participate in it, you know.  And that was beginning to happen with the activism in the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in a debate team on campus or SGA [student government association]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was involved with debate team, but I was also the--I'm trying to remem--the college, there was a competition to college--what was it the--College Board--I, oh, I can't remember the name of it.  It was a big competition among colleges where I was representing Howard, but I was involved with the debate team.  I was involved with politics on the campus, involved with student council elections.  I ran as president of, for the student council, the first woman to run.  I, I didn't win, could have won, but, you know, my, my purpose was at that time, activism for women.
Story_ID: 639692
Speaker 1: I was trying to get my sorority, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] to stop focusing on homecoming queen, and to focus on president of the student council.  I did not succeed, but at any rate, that was more of the kind of thing that I was focused upon.
Speaker 2: Well, that's my next question is pledging on campus.  Now, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--I mean, this is where African American sororities began, specifically the AKA, so tell me about that whole process of, of pledging, and being active on campus with that organization.
Speaker 1: Well, I, and I was interested in both sororities [Alpha Kappa Alpha and Delta Sigma Theta] actually.  But I--my step-mother [Jean McKissick Pratt] was an AKA, and there were just friends of mine who were AKAs.  And so, ultimately, that's the one I hoped where I would get to be invited.  And, of course, they'd gotten kicked off campus at that time for hazing activities, so I then pledged in my junior year.
Speaker 2: Are there any aspects of the pledging process you can share generally?
Speaker 1: Well, I think it's an interesting exercise in human--in terms, because you get to see people when they feel they have this kind of power over you.  It's an interesting phenomenon.  I mean, I, I enjoyed--I found it fascinating how people can sometimes be quite abusive because they know they have this power over you.  You covet what they, their power, you know, their capacity to make or break you, and the unkind things that sometimes people will do, and the unkind things they'll do to, to other pledgees.  I, I--but it was a great learning experience about people and how they behave.  And, and the amazing thing, I just often witnessed was the ones who were most cruelly treated and the ones that I was so eager to protect.  I ended up being captain of the line principally because I just felt so protective of, you know, if you said this thing, how can you say this, you know?  I would call the big sisters on it, so instead of being annoyed with me about it, they rewarded me, so to speak, by making me the captain.  Well, the very ones who'd been the most cruelly treated were--I discovered when they got a chance to be the big sisters, you know, the 'Animal Farm,' they were, often the worse, you know.  And it was a--that I think was the first time a real organization, I had a chance to sort of begin to see the dynamics of how people behave with one another when they covet a position of power, being accepted or not.  It was a learning experience for later in life and just in the broader arena of politics.
Speaker 2: Now, were there people on campus, either sorority sisters or people who were active in your political organization, who went on to greatness, like yourself?
Speaker 1: Oh well, I, well, almost everyone I think the--we had a lot of successful women coming out of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And certainly both sororities, AKAs, Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]--first off, the women almost always had the higher grade point average--well, the sororities then, you know, even the fraternities.
Speaker 2: Do you rem--are there any people we might know?
Speaker 1: You know, I--so many of them are judges now, deans, or at, you know, major universities, and but I'm trying to think of who in my class.  I need to go back and reflect on that, but almost all of the women either were great chemists, high achievers but, you know, they sort of scattered all across the country.  But I, if I reflect on it a little bit more, I'm, I'm certain I'll be able to give you some bett--some good examples.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 639693
Speaker 1: Do you remember the March on Washington in '63 [1963]?  Tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I do, I do remember the March on Washington.  I had been involved more as an activist around [Washington] D.C. issues.  But by the time the March on Washington was building, you know, you knew you had to be a part of this.  And I, again, I was just so moved already by [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], I was becoming impatient with my own lack of participation generally.  So, both Bennie [HM Benaree Pratt Wiley] and I said, we have to be part of it, you know, my, our grandmother didn't think we should participate [Hazel Pratt].  Washington is very old-school, very bureaucratic, and so, it's not an out-of-the-box town.  But, you know, Bennie and I both knew that one day we would be embarrassed if we--when we have children, that we actually said we were here, and we had not participated, so both of us did participate and--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that day.
Speaker 2: It was a absolutely extraordinary day because first off, everybody would say, "How could these many people arrive in one place without it being a problem or some kind of, you know, riot of some sort, you know?"  And no one I think fully expected the numbers that actually did descend upon Washington, D.C.  Everybody was absolutely polite.  Everybody knew that they were having almost a religious experience.  I mean, people were amazingly deferential to one another.  There was a quiet, that, that befell that crowd--a quiet because it was a quiet resolve and purpose.  It was beautiful.  And by the time Dr. King spoke--I mean it was, it was, it was just an unbelievable moment.
Speaker 1: So, you, did you go with a group from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I remember going with Bennie.  But I don't remember who we went with, you know, but I, just thinking about it, I, I remember just a small number of us, I remember, and I do remember everyone was so polite.  People arriving from, you know, from Mississippi, from Chicago [Illinois], from New York [City], and you'd, you know, if you accidentally bumped into them, you know, it was just, are you okay, sister, or everything's okay?  But it was just as if you were in church.  It, it was just so unbelievably polite, so un--wonderfully organized and, and more because I think everybody knew that this was--they were having equivalent of a religious experience.  This was a special day.  And, and the memory of it just, you know, pulls at my heartstrings even now because it was such a special day.
Speaker 1: What are some of the sounds you recall from that speech?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, everybody I think who spoke was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Who do you remember?
Speaker 2: But, well, I guess, everybody.  I'm trying to remem--I--[HM] Reverend [Dr. Joseph] Lowery spoke as I recall.  Of course, the person who everybody remembers and is the memorable one, of course, is Dr. King, and, and I think because he did pull everything together.  He sort of pulled together the threads of all of the groups and interests that had assembled there, that after--that day.
Speaker 1: Where were you standing?  I mean, this was on the Mall (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I can remember standing on the Mall.  And it was a huge--an overwhelming crowd, but you sort of were now transfixed by what was occurring with on, on the stage.  And I, I don't remember having a vision of him, and possibly as short as I am in that crowd, I probably didn't have a vision of him.  But I remember just sort of seeing others watching their expression as I could hear what he was saying.  And others had spoken beautifully.  Others had spoken purposely.  But no one had pulled it altogether and sort of defined the moment as did he because we all couldn't even explain why we were there.  And, you know, we understood it, but I, I think the thing that it was just of an amusing analogy.  But I always loved the movie, 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind' and [Steven] Spielberg has everybody sort of stopping what they're doing.  And suddenly, they all happened to be there at this mount, this rock, and, and this gathering place, and they don't even know why.  And, and people knew why, but not fully why.  It was so compelling for them.  He gave, he pulled it all together--each pers--each personal story of why they had to be there.  And you were so proud to have been a part of it.  It was a certain--you, you were proud to be a part of that moment, you know.  And I can remember going home.  And my grandmother who had been so--said, "You know, well, I don't think you and Bennie should do this."  I mean, she was in tears, she was just so proud.  I mean, he--it was, you know, and listen, if he could do that with my grandmother, you know, I thought, wow, what an extraordinary moment, what an extraordinary day, so it was a great day, it was really a great day.
Story_ID: 639694
Speaker 1: Do you remember--you had talked about the hope [President] John F. Kennedy instilled--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in you and, and other people in your age group at the time.  Do you remember what, what he represented in that day, and do you remember his assassination?
Speaker 2: I do remember John Kennedy.  It was the fact that he had this youthful persona, the fact that he spoke of the future.  He didn't talk, talk about government as sort of maintaining a status quo, but rather government being an agent of change.  And that was particularly welcomed by people of my generation.  And he had a vigor to him, a vigor that he used himself, that term often in his expressions, in his statements.  And so, there was--he, he was a magnetic force.  And so, he really touched the youth of our generation, and, clearly, when he was assassinated, we sort of knew that foretold where we were headed.  You can remember the moment you got the news.  You knew how it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Where were you?
Speaker 2: I was at one of the temporary buildings--well, political, they had these temporary buildings still on Howard University's [Washington, D.C.] campuses.  And I think I was in a class with Dr. Robert Martin or leaving that class.  I'm trying to remember, I was right there on, and, you know, you, you think, you can't believe it, but you can believe it because he was such a force of change, such a--that you wondered how well the country would be able to absorb this force of change.  And he was also clearly not chastising or entirely--he was trying to accommodate the energy, and the demands coming out of the African American community, possibly not as much as we would have liked, but certainly, he was trying to, to accommodate that.  And so, I think it just sort of foretold the, the forecoming [sic.] despair that we began to feel with the country, you know, with one assassination, then after the other.
Story_ID: 639695
Speaker 1: Did you take any trips to the South?  You mentioned that the South, that was the heart of the Civil Rights Movement.  Did you take any of those trips down there and become part of the Freedom Riders (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nope, I, I never was, I never really did.  I never, I regret that I didn't, but I didn't.  And I have, over the years, I've gotten to know some of the personalities of that period.  And they actually--I was able to enlist their support when I ran for chairman of the party many years later.  And, you know, you just--I just have nothing but respect and regard for them because it took a lot of chutzpah to do what they did.  And so, they're my, they're heroes to me without a doubt.  I think they should be for all of us.
Speaker 1: Was the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] active in this area at the time?
Speaker 2: The Ku Klux Klan was not visible, but the Ku Klux Klan philosophy was very apparent.  They played--now you really had it in Prince George's County [Maryland], I think.  And a lot of the police officers, you were pretty nervous when you moved into Prince George's County at that time.  The, you know, it was a very different culture in PG County then.  And the police, you wouldn't, you were concerned about the police officers in Washington, D.C. when they pulled you over, if they pulled you over for a traffic violation, et cetera.  You knew you had to be concerned.  So, it wasn't--the experience that the South of the, you know, the deeper South had, but the attitudes and philosophy, this is Washington, D.C., is definitely the South.
Speaker 1: Are there any other experiences during your undergraduate years at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that other than--well, Howard was an inspirational place as I said in part because of, you know, the period of civil rights and activism.  But also, there were profiles of women who were asserting themselves, and one was Toni Morrison and the other was Patricia Roberts Harris.  We were beginning to see women who visibly expressed ambition, and who were taking on roles of leadership and that was very encouraging.  I mean, that meant a lot to me to be able to see women who were doing that.  That, that, that was the source of great encouragement.  I, I didn't, I knew it then, but I truly appreciate it in retrospect.
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your interaction with Patricia Roberts Harris at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Patricia Roberts Harris was the dean, associate--dean of women, when I arrived at Howard.  And just having her, one, a lawyer, a presence, you know, as a woman who is a lawyer, and she had a lot of personality.  She was a tremendous speaker and it was just--you, you just were, it was exciting to meet somebody like that in, in person, in the flesh.  And it made all things seem possible.  And so, she always was pushing and, and encouraging us to sort of stretch and grow, and be about something.  She and Toni Morrison were like that, you know.  There was always that--that was always a part of anything they said.  It was sort of always a part of, in all of the messages they conveyed.  But Patricia Roberts Harris, because she was a lawyer, because she was interested in politics, because she was a very strong, a women of great decidedly opinion, a very opinionated person (laughter).  It was just an inspiration for me.
Speaker 1: And she was relatively young at the time, too.
Speaker 2: She was--she was pretty young.  And then, she, and later, got--was appointed by [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson who, and then she came back and was on the faculty at Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  So, she was--I, I do remember meeting her.  I remember the, you know, what an impression she made, so she, she, she meant a lot to me really.
Story_ID: 639696
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from undergrad in 1965.
Speaker 1: Did you go straight into the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I went straight to law school.  And half a, half a minute, thought about going away.  I was really, at that time, they were sort of recruiting African Americans then to come to a, major white institutions.  And Stanford [Law School, Stanford, California] was recruiting, Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was recruiting, Duke [University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] was recruiting.  And I was, really like Stanford, but the guy I was interested in was returning from the Air Force Academy [Colorado].  And I wanted to get married, so I stayed (laughter), and I went to Howard.
Speaker 1: And who was, who was that young man?
Speaker 2: That was Arrington Dixon, and I married Arrington a year, after my first year at Howard Law School.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about meeting Arrington.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: I--Arrington is also from Washington, D.C. And I met him--I think I was like, probably about a sophomore at Howard University, and he was very active, at that time, in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And, of course, at that time, most of us were quite smitten with a man in a uniform.  And he looked very smart in the [U.S.] Air Force cadet uniform.  And I noticed him one day, but he then engaged me in conversation as we were on the bus.  By the end of the bus ride, so I think I knew in my mind then that we were--I don't know, I just sort of felt that there was this, this special connection.  By the time I got off the bus, I was--I said, "Well that probably will be--"I, I actually I thought, "That will probably be the father of my children."  That's probably what we had most in common (laughter)--we're having Aimee [Arrington Dixon] and Drew [Dixon Williams], but, but he was a wonderful talker.  He had a great love for the city, and he loved, and he loved--he [Pratt's former husband, Arrington Dixon] was preoccupied as was I, with the notion of Washington [D.C.] having the right to vote, you know.  That's something we talked about.  I think the first time we met, you know, and it was a continuing conversation.
Story_ID: 639697
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about that because, obviously, that, that's a big deal in Washington [D.C.].  It was a big part of your professional life.  So, Home Rule, how, what were the discussions around that and who, who were the leaders in that struggle?
Speaker 2: The Home Rule Movement, there were many people who were part of it.  Arrington was a part of it.  [HM the Honorable Reverend] Walter Fauntroy was definitely a lead player in Home Rule, he was definitely a leader player.  [HM] Sterling Tucker was part of it.  Walter Washington, as the then-appointed mayor, who was definitely promoting it.  Julius Hobson, and [HM The Honorable] Marion Barry was clearly a part of that.  And, you know, there was a great activism around it because it was just an unbelievable contradiction that here you are, the home of the capital of the free world.  And you're going to deny the right to participate with the citizens of the capital.  And it's truly the only place still to this day, that denies the citizens in the Capital the same rights of the rest of the country enjoys--the only example of a democracy in the world.  So, we still live with much of that contradiction.  And as natives of the city, both Arrington and I, it was really a source of consternation and for us, that's really where we poured our energies around prog--as we perceived it, progress for the community, certainly impacting the African American community, but impacting anyone who lived in this city.
Speaker 1: And was this a conv--an ongoing conversation in your own home?  Were, were adults sort of outraged by this?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] was.  He was outraged by it.  And, you know, but I, actually Washington is again a government town.  It's, it's buttoned down.  It's bureaucratic.  And so, people really, don't really necessarily want to think out of the box.  That's my take on it.  They may have a different point of view.  And so, really, it was, it was a handful of activists who pushed for Home Rule.  I'd say the broader, larger population was not that engaged in it, and weren't even certain they really saw the benefits of it.  And the first expression of Home Rule came--I think it was in '68 [1968] with the ability to vote for the school board, and that was the first campaign in the city.  And Arrington and I were thoroughly involved in that effort, but people were still trying to figure out--well, you know, how does this make a difference in my life?  And that was the precursor to the '74 [1974] Home, Home Rule Act [sic, District of Columbia Home Rule Act, 1973].  But, again, it was a handful of activists, those who were proponents of this, but it was not necessarily a point of discussion or concern, you know, in the living rooms of Washington.
Story_ID: 639698
Speaker 1: Tell me about that, that first vote for [Washington, D.C.] School Board [1968].
Speaker 2: I, I remember the election significantly because Arrington [Dixon] ran for, stood for office, and we put up the first posters in the City [of Washington, D.C.].  We would--we were, and we ran that campaign on five hundred dollars so, and we did a pretty good job, you know.  So, I remember that, got, got our family from all over, wherever they were living, to come out and cover precincts which did help.  And everybody was learning the rules of the game, learning what it takes to do--get out the vote, what it takes to identify voters, what it takes to persuade a voter.  All of this was new to Washington [D.C.].  And so, as a student of political science to be able to actually practice the principles you've learned was very invigorating, very exciting, and you, and you began to make, you made a whole new, many new friends, you know, that all came of that political experience.  And it was, it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Were you targeting white and black voters or focusing on the black community?
Speaker 2: Both voters significantly.  Naturally, you--we were living in Ward 5 at the time.  And so, we were clearly, you know, but, but you certainly got, went after contributions and support all over the city.  And, of course, I was very pregnant with our first child, Aimee, which, you know, sort of was an expr--also a testament to the fact why we would have an interest in the school system.  But I do remember sometimes going into Ward 3, which is, was a overwhelmingly white ward.  I think that was around, you know, just sort of getting, garnering support, et cetera, et cetera.  Sometimes, you'd often get doors slammed in your face, you know, but, you know, that you learned to--a door slams in your face is a door slammed in your face, and you move on.  You just don't let it, you don't absorb that rejection.  You learn not to--to throw it off and keep moving forward.  That was a good experience, that was a learning experience.
Speaker 1: And who was running in that race against Arrington?
Speaker 2: I'm trying--what, and what, my goodness gracious, why don't I remember the--I remember Lillian Huff was--I think she was one of the candidates who became a great supporter of mine over, over the tenure of--mine, you know, my career in politics.  And I do not--I'm embarrassed to say who won, won that race by just a few hundred votes.  But there were--[HM The Honorable] Marion Barry was one of the people elected in that school board election.  So, Marion ran a very effective campaign, and I remember Arrington and I would cross his path many times throughout the campaign and you just knew this was a good political organizer.  He was a very good, very strong candidate.  He was very good.
Speaker 1: What was it about Marion Barry that you recognized at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, Marion has a lot of personal magnetism.  He really does.  He's also very smart, and he pays attention to what people are saying.  He also understood the process.  He--so he spoke with a level of authority.  People tried to pigeon hole him as this activist, sort of rough around the edges activist, and he disarmed them with his command of the facts, his knowledge of the system.  Certainly his story and profile in what he had done was a compelling one.  And he just knew how to engage people.  He has great personal charm, so, you know, I've been with him and run against him, and, and I recognize that he's a great talent, especially in the political environment.
Speaker 1: And who were his supporters?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of it, his supporters came out of the civil rights era.  And that was a great advantage really because he had been a part of a grassroots effort.  He had the experience of a grassroots effort.  And he had people around him who were familiar with that process.  And so, they were able to galvanize support in a way that was unparalleled and anything we'd experienced in Washington.  And so, he, you know, Ivanhoe Donaldson was with him then.  And so, he was able to tap into the activists on white and black.  I mean, that's who he appealed to.
Speaker 1: And so, you know, we hear so much today about black apathy when it comes to voting.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were people excited about having the right to vote, even for school board?
Speaker 2: Some people were excited but, you know, waking, getting the whole city to wake up and get excited was still challenging.  But, you know, we were getting their attention.  The process was getting their attention because they suddenly saw posters, you know, they suddenly saw leaflets and flyers.  Suddenly, people were stopping them at this--when they were leaving the supermarket, you know, so they were sort of being bombarded by all of this, these, these personalities.  And so, it was--I think it was empowering.  I think that, you know, suddenly, people who always were sort of in a subordinate role in the government, suddenly these, these agents who hoped to be a part of agents of government, potential agents of government, were being solicitous of them.  And so, I think that was beginning to get their attention.
Story_ID: 639699
Speaker 1: Let me take you back a little bit to 1961 around the time you entered Howard Law School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  What are your first memories?
Speaker 2: Actually, I entered Howard Law School about 1965 and I graduate--
Speaker 1: Yes, you entered Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in '61 [1961] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's alright.  I entered Howard undergrad in 1961, law school in 1965, and I was one of fourteen women in the class.  The world has changed dramatically since then.  And I think Patricia [Roberts Harris]--Pat Harris was the only woman that I can recall on the faculty.  It was a very, it was a stimulating class.  [HM The Honorable] Togo [D.] West [Jr.] was in my class and Gail [Berry], they were--just met in law school, you know.  Kellis [E.] Parker who went on to be a great scholar at Columbia Law [School, New York, New York].  [HM] Walter Leonard, who later became president of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], was in my class.  Marvin Robinson, who's a--became a great leader, you know, in Louisiana.  I mean, they were a lot of real stars in our class and, and it was a, it was a exciting and, you know, fascinating group.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your classroom experiences?  Was this a startling moment in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, what I do remember is that sexism was very, very pronounced in the law school.  One, as I said, there were only fourteen women in the class.  It was very hard.  Sylvia Drew was in my class, you know, and it was--I'm just thinking back on some of the women.  And it was very hard for us to get called on.  You could raise your hand, and they--often the professors ignored you.  The only time they wanted to call on you is if it was involving something like rape.  You know, it was just unbelievable.  It was just so blatant.  And so, that was, that was the first time I think I so, was up so, you know, sexism was so apparent, so obvious, so inescapable.
Speaker 1: So fourteen women out of how many students in the class?
Speaker 2: I guess it was about two hundred students, you know, and there were fourteen women in the class and--
Speaker 1: So, how did that feel?  Was there fear?  Was there anger?
Speaker 2: No, I, I, you know, I'd been well-prepared by daddy [Carlisle Edward Pratt] to feel, you know, I'm supposed to be here.  So I, you know, their attitude was not affecting what I thought about, you know, myself.  It was just very frustrating to have to deal with it.  The, you know, you--not to be able to be called on.  If you went to the faculty often for help, they thought you were making yourself available for a pass.  So, it was, it was, it was challenging in that regard.
Story_ID: 639700
Speaker 1: So, with that--I mean, so you mentioned sexism in the classroom, but was there that kind of harassment, sexual harassment?
Speaker 2: It was a level of it, yeah.  There was a sex--level of sexual harassment up to the point that actually, I and some others led a sort of a protest against the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  You know, it was, it was, you know, it was getting ridiculous.  And they just hadn't caught up with where the world was, you know, they hadn't read the 'Feminine Mystique,' [Betty Friedan] I guess (laughter).  They hadn't seen that there was a whole Civil Rights Movement across the country.  You know, they were just, even though you had great stars, who had been a part of the '54 [1954] decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and a part of a number of major milestones in, in, you know, civil rights law, they just didn't quite get it.  And it was also very hierarchical.  They just really still saw anybody aspiring to be a lawyer, so sort of a--to me, there were levels of which they sort of saw us as second-class citizens--not to say you didn't have great professors.  We had great professors like Janice Parks [ph.] and others, and Julian Duggan [ph.] and others.  I mean, you know, we had--and Clarence Clyde Ferguson [Jr.]--I mean, he was the dean of the law school then and he was a real star, he was a real star.  And, but there was this attitude.  There was this sexism.  There were levels of sexual harassment and it was just--we--so we ultimately had to challenge this into our system.
Speaker 1: Are there stories you recall?  I know my experience in grad school, I can tell you, you know, these are four stories where sexual harassment was a factor.  Are there stories you can share?
Speaker 2: Well, I just do remember one particular professor who I spoke to of the--and he--and I did win a full scholarship to the law school.  And I, I won't give his name, but I do remember having--when I went to him about reconfirming that because I, you know, that, that's what Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] said.  That was part of why I decided to go to Howard.  I was going to get married.  This way, we didn't have to worry about this particular expense.  And when I arrived in his office to talk about, you know, yes, this is what I--the letter you said, et cetera, et cetera.  There was clear pressure presented in, in both his physical conduct and his verbal statements that there was--this was a quid pro quo.  And but, you know, I, I got the scholarship without the, you know, having to worry about that.  But that, that was just the beginning of what, you know, was a, you know, unfortunately, a lot of experiences in the law school in the early, in the beginning.
Speaker 1: Did other women, the fourteen women, share stories?
Speaker 2: They did, they did.  Other women shared stories of both, in terms of being harassed, being discriminated against, not being able to get the same grades as the men in the class.  They can say whatever they want about--I didn't know.  Of course, they knew.  And they had a bias.  I mean, it was also, who got to get interviews with the law, law firms, or jobs at significant, significant agencies in term--the women weren't even invited to participate.
Speaker 1: Now, was this, this bias, I imagine, extended beyond the law school and to the world of law.  So, some of those firms, were they also overlooking women?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, law firms really were not--rarely did you have a woman that they were inviting into the law firm.  You--and when a woman joined the law firm, if she got to be an associate, she basically was what they called, you know, a life--I can't (unclear)--it was lifetime associate.  She just never was going to get to be partner.  And so, there was both that attitude with the law firms.  And, but there was also that attitude present with the faculty.  They just really didn't understand why we were here other than, I guess, to make ourselves more interesting wives.  I, I don't think they saw that we thought that we could use this to any purpose.  And that attitude just played itself--was evident, you know, in this classroom and outside of the classroom, yes.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about this protest you had on campus.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, there was a big television show on television called 'Mission Impossible' that we--I said, we're going to do this.  We're going--so I got together all the students who were on the Law Review.  If--I figure if you got all the students on Law Review, if they kicked us out, it would be quite--they'd be embarrassed, you know.  They wouldn't have the 'Law Review' who always were your, you know, top academic achievers.  And so, we're going to shut the school down.  We're going to do it with the precision of a 'Mission Impossible,' you know.  We're going to all move at one time and boycott, and send letters on the heels of announcing that we're walking out.  And we're going to send letters to the administration in protest of what's going on in the school.  And it had its effect.  They, they wanted to kick us out, but they couldn't because we, we managed to recruit everybody from just about from the, from the 'Law Review.'
Speaker 1: Who was the dean of the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] at the time?
Speaker 2: Clarence Clyde Ferguson, who I, I think back on, who was a great dean.  I mean, he was a very, very capable dean.  And he helped to establish--he set the bar at the law school.  And, but I think a lot of this attitude was just the individual faculty as well.  I just think that there was, there wasn't the respect for women in this profession.  There wasn't--no one took women seriously.  And there was a view that why should I waste a limited opportunity to get people placed, African Americans placed?  Why would I waste that on, you know, these women?  And so, I think they thought they had a very reasoned position of the notion, the notion of sexual harassment.  And I don't even think they thought it was, was that.  That had gone on so much at Howard undergraduate school.  And it, it just, it wasn't considered, you know, you weren't supposed to challenge it.  And so, you know, people accepted it.  It was amazing.  I mean, this was just still the beginning of the Women's Movement.  And so, what had been acceptable behavior before was rapidly becoming very passe.
Story_ID: 639701
Speaker 1: You talk about the Women's Movement.  And we know that the, the Women's Movement grew out of the Civil Rights Movement.  And during the Civil Rights Movement, women were active, but they still had sort of a back seat.  Was that your experience at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], both undergrad, and at the law school as well?
Speaker 2: You had a lot of women who were, I think, great high achievers.  But by and large, no matter how intelligent, accomplished you were, you were supposed to use those collective talents to pursue homecoming queen (laughter).  That was still the order of the day.  And so, you know, that, so women have, so when I ran for president of the student council or talked about things like that, that still hadn't caught really hold at Howard yet.  Or, I guess, generally, we were still struggling with these notions in society.  And when I'm taking back, I want to think, 'Feminine Mystique' Betty Friedan]--I guess that post was--arrived after I probably graduated from Howard Law School.  And so, there were the beginning of the rumblings of this.  You're right, it was sort of a byproduct of the Civil Rights Movement, but it still had not taken hold.  So women were not present on--in significant ways in any position of authority throughout that university.
Speaker 1: We talked about double consciousness earlier with respect to race.  Were you experiencing it as well with respect to your role as woman?  Like, were you involved in the pageants and things like that, the same time you were running for student body president?
Speaker 2: The only one I did was political science that they had to be in the homecoming, homecoming parade.  So, I said I'll be the political science queen for that parade.  But it was really a draft, you know, it wasn't a contest and I said okay, I'll do that.  But, yeah, I felt the conflict of it, you know.  I, I didn't really participate other than, you know, I just--there was nothing wrong with it, but I just wanted to see women put their talents to other purpose as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, now I appreciate it a little better.
Story_ID: 639702
Speaker 1: So, you must have been achieving to some extent--the law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], you were on Law Review [Howard Law Journal].  Tell me about your experiencing, experiences there.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I enjoyed the law.  I did, you know, once you learn how to analyze a case, you sort of--it's not as hard.  And so, I enjoyed the law.  I enjoyed the--my classmates.  We had a lot of very bright people.  I enjoyed, you know, the general experience.  And so, I just did apply myself with the hope that I could use it later.  I didn't always apply myself to the fullest, but I did apply myself.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the activism at this time, political activism at the law school--I mean this is also a turning point nationally.
Speaker 2: The law school got--had a taste of the activism, but again, not as much as I think people would like.  Part of it is because the--they, they give you so much to--it's a demanding ruling schedule.  And it's really hard to find the space beyond that schedule because it's, it's a very pressured environment.  And you can easily get kicked out, so you know that you have to make the most of it.  And it, I think it's hard for any school like medicine or law to, to really nurture that activism because you just don't have the same freedom that you might have in the undergraduate environment.
Speaker 1: Favorite experience at Howard Law School--highlight?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the, the--that, that, boycott was fun.  I, I was glad we did that, that the students had the resolve to do that.
Story_ID: 639703
Speaker 1: You know, we, again, I can't say that I, you know, Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] was teaching a class [at Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] that I took, really dealing with international relations.  And I remember she was then a delegate for [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson at the U.N. [United Nations], had, and she was a supporter of Lyndon Baines Johnson's policies.  And I loved Lyndon Baines Johnson because he brought about the '50--'65 [1965] Voting Rights Act, et cetera.  But I really took issue with Vietnam [War].  I had had Bernard Falk, Bernard Fall, rather, at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] undergrad, who was a real scholar in the space of, of the subject, and brought my opinions to bear, and so that was interesting.  She, you know, she, she took issue.  She, she took, you know, she did not agree with me, but she did richly reward me when, when I did, you know, present my case well.  So, I do remember that--a part because it was such an important issue, a touchstone issue.  And it was consid--you know, sort of taking up a lot of the oxygen at that time.
Speaker 2: Did you become an anti-war activist or more a scholar?
Speaker 1: Well, no, I was somewhat of an activist, you know.  But I, I can't claim being a real, you know, leader in anything like that, but I was very outspoken about it.  It just wasn't logical, and but that was sort of the point of view of most people of my generation.  And, you know, to have access to somebody like Pat Harris who'd been actually in that arena impacting, or at least being a force of shaping that policy, to have the chance to engage someone directly.  That's probably another reason it was so memorable because it's sort of let you know whether you could effectively engage somebody like that who had a different point of view, have more authority than you, and clearly extraordinarily bright.  Could you manage that?  Could you handle that?  And to the extent that I could survive that, that probably is why that moment was so memorable in terms of my experiences in the law school.
Speaker 2: So, at the law school, was the '65 [1965] decision a big moment?
Speaker 1: Well, the Voting Rights Act, it certainly was for me because, again, I had a great interest in politics.  And you just had to know this was going to make all the difference.  This was going to be the linchpin piece of legislation for African Americans.  It's, from where I sat, because, again, I'd always had the view that politics would be the precursor to economic participation in America.  And once we had--it was clear that you had to ackn--we had a, we had the right to vote, you know, and that no one was--can intrude upon that.  And, obviously, people had intruded upon it, particularly where there was a high concentration of African Americans in many quarters throughout the South.  This was going to be, this was going to usher in a whole new era and it did.  It did usher in a whole new era because that was the beginning of, of your first, you know, elected black mayors throughout the country, delegates throughout the country, city council members.  It was a very significant moment in American history.
Story_ID: 639704
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate Howard Law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1968.
Speaker 1: And you got married [to Arrington Dixon] in 1967?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1966.
Speaker 1: So, you were married as a law student.  What was married life like at that time?  You have two active citizens, right, both politically active?  What was that like in the early stages?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--most of my time when I first married was still as a law student.  And Arrington, at that time, had--was with RCA [Radio Corporation of America] which was, at that time, involved with computer technology.  So, he was really quite interested in computer science and was one of the early, you know, marketing personalities in that, in that sphere.  And so, he really, he was on this sharp shooter team, so he had to travel a lot, which probably was good for me because I had to study a lot.  So, but it was a, you know, I remember we would have a lot of folks over to our apartment 'cause our apartment, compared to others' apartments, since he was actually working, some of the others would--both of them were in law school.  Like Gail [Berry] and [HM the Honorable] Togo [D. West], we'd entertain a lot and we'd get our friends together a lot.  And we, you know, we had very easy good times together.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first years out of law school.  What was your first job?
Speaker 2: Well, it took me a while to start work because actually, after I had Aimee, I realized that I didn't really want to go to work immediately.  So, I, for a moment, I did--for a minute, I did work for daddy [Carlisle Edward Pratt].  My first job was with my father's law firm, when I did finally start to work.  And it was, it was both--I learned a lot, but it was hard to feel empowered working for my father.  Even though he had been the one who had encouraged me throughout, I think I just felt paralyzed in his presence, you know, I just, I can still remember that.  And so, I learned what you should do, but I had a hard time applying it because I knew I would fall so short of his standards.  And so, I just remember it as one big headache (laughter) that one year, you know.  And, but when I moved on and did, you know, was, I litigated later and taught later, and negotiated with a corporation later.  Everything I learned in that year came back to great advantage.  I had learned a lot, but I was just--I think a little too in awe of daddy, to be able to put it to good, to practice, you know, which was, as you can well imagine, a source of great disappointment to him after working so hard to get to nurture this lawyer and then, I quit (laughter).
Story_ID: 639705
Speaker 1: You mentioned the juggling act you had to do as a recent law school grad and as a new mother.  Was that pretty tough?  Tell me about the births of your two daughters and how you were able to balance your professional life.
Speaker 2: Well, when Aimee [Arrington Dixon] was born--again, I didn't want to work quite right away.  I, I waited a little while and it was very hard to balance it.  Emotionally, it's hard.  It's a real tug.  And it's--I watch my daughter, my youngest daughter now, it's just very hard.  And I tell her, I learned the hard way.  You can do it all, but not all at once.  You know, there are certain things you have to take when you lean more in favor of one than the other, so I wanted jobs that allowed me to engage my mind, but didn't exhaust me.
Speaker 1: What year was Aimee born?  What year was Drew [Dixon Williams] born?
Speaker 2: Aimee was born in 1968, and Drew as born in 1970.  And so, one, you had to get--find child care.  And we were lucky--the first person we had was great.  And then we, you know, when we, when Daisy [ph.] left, it was touch and go for a long time, so much so, that ultimately, later when we moved, we asked Arrington [Dixon]'s parents to move in with us.  They had a home not far from ours, but we asked them essentially to move in.  And so, we would have that, you know, their presence all the time, which is also a challenge, because then you have your mother-in-law right there (laughter), who is a wonderful grandmother.  And I loved her dearly, but, you know, her son did no wrong (laughter).  So, I was living with that, so, you know, you, you have to, you, you give a little, you take a little.
Story_ID: 639706
Speaker 1: And during this time as well, you have the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.  Do you remember that day?
Speaker 2: I do.  I remember when Dr. King was assassinated.  And, you know, the City [of Washington, D.C.] was just a collective sense of despair.  And, and I think, more grief, then ultimate, ultimately, we saw anger, just a, because here was a person who had for so long--I think helped stabilize what was a very volatile situation.  He had been an agent of change, but he had always worked from a place of love, you know, he--that was his whole mantra--that was his mantra, you know.  It was all focused on love and driven by love.  And to, to think the country could turn on him--well, that, as we saw it, the country turning on him, and to take him out that way was just hard to accept, and that turned quickly to a lot of anger.
Speaker 1: So, I, I understand, particularly along George Avenue near Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, the Shaw [neighborhood, Washington, D.C.] community sort of--that is where I know Stokely Carmichael was organizing.  And then, slowly, but surely, what some called riots broke out.  What, what do you remember about the visual scene?  Do you remember Stokely Carmichael at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I remember Stokely.  I remember [HM The Honorable] Marion [Barry] had been a big activist during that period.  And I do remember when the riots occurred.  I mean, there was a part of me that was thrilled that people had--were gonna, you know, say, look, I'm angry.  I'm not going to take it, but there was the other part of it you knew that it was a very dangerous, you know, environment in which we were functioning so--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was clearly riots.  I mean, people were, you know, slamming bricks into all of the businesses up and down the corridor, particularly on 14th Street.  That was the corridor that was most--I think most profoundly impacted.  And it had been one of the corridors where African Americans could patronize these stores, but, you know, these were never stores that we owned.  And so, that corridor--I think all of that sort of--the pent-up frustration probably of the terms of payment, et cetera, all of that put, you know, was expressed in the anger of the moment.  And, you know, again, they were--cars were being turned over.  It, it was a very, it was a riot, it was definitely a riot.  There was definitely anger.
Speaker 1: A thing like eleventh, like a thousand fires or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were fires all over the city.  And Walter Washington, I thought, in a manner that was not so--I thought he was very good.  I did think he was very good.  I think he was a calming presence.  I do not think he was trying to suggest that there wasn't a reason for this anger.  But at the same time, he was trying to restore a sense of calm because he also recognized this is always perceived to be the property of the federal government.  And that federal collective presence, that, though the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]--all of it would, you know, roll into play.  I know, I've since seen it, you know, during the Persian Gulf War.  They will usurp any local power in a second.  And then, he had to fight to preserve his authority which ultimately was--I think, a benefit to the city.
Speaker 1: So, he was, in a sense, empowered by the federal government, by the President [Lyndon Baines Johnson].  How was Walter Washington perceived by black people in the community here in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, he was regarded by the old guard of Washington.  But for the new generation, they saw him as too much of an extension and too much a reflection of the old guard.  And I think part of it is because Walter Washington could not show some of the anger that he really felt that he, that he displayed when he was a one-on-one, even with President [Lyndon Baines] Johnson, who clearly, again, was someone who made Home Rule possible.  But I think Walter Washington had a lot of fight in him, but he could not display that because of what--who, the city, because of the, the structure of the city and the culture of the city.  And most of the city liked the fact that he was--didn't show that, display that anger.  Again, this is Washington--it's very buttoned-down.
Speaker 1: So, there was eventually, there was a sense of calm after, after the riots?
Speaker 2: There was a sense of calm.  I, I think, again, it, it left its imprint because I think that activism was, paved the way, was a great segue for [HM] Marion [Barry], for Julius Hopson, for [HM The Honorable Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, for many of the first wave of elected officials in the city.  John Wilson, that, that activism that, it was a segue to the activism that ultimately expressed itself in full flower with the first election of, of, of officials.
Story_ID: 639707
Speaker 1: Now, I know also at this time, there was, the movement sort of toward more aggressive activism.  So, from civil rights to the Black Power Movement. I know Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was moving in that direction. Were you witness to the Black Power Movement here in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Black Power was definitely taking hold.  Doug Moore [Douglas E. Moore], again, he was a part of that.  And so, there was Calvin Rolark was coming on the scene.  So, you, you were beginning to see that part because you all--they suddenly had also a platform.  And the platform that was being provided was first, your '68 [1968], a wave of elections with the [Washington D.C.] School Board and then ultimately '74 [1974].  Now, they had a platform by wherein they, you know, to grab the public's attention and a way to, to express the fact, you know, and a way to galvanize a constituency that would catapult them into office.  So that's what helped to create and establish a, a new set of players.
Story_ID: 639708
Speaker 1: Tell me about your work with the Joint Center for Political [and Economic] Studies [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: The Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, one of my professors at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] helped--spoke to me about taking the job.  And that was Frank [D.] Reeves who was a real force to bringing about the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.  Naturally, it was, you know, the very name was everything I believed in--political and economic studies.  And so, I was their first lawyer.  And, of course, when they first opened their doors, you--I don't think you had four hundred, at best, elected officials in the country.  And that included any, every, every kind of elected official, you know.  And most of them were, you know, like county this or something that--it was not, you know, you didn't have hardly--there were very few elected mayors and city council members.  And so, the first gatherings were pretty small.  And to have seen the, the growth and, and the impact ultimately of that '65 [1965] Voting Rights Act--I mean it's amazing to see.  And it has had an impact on America's economic profile without a doubt, but that was just the beginning.
Story_ID: 639709
Speaker 1: So, [HM] Eddie Williams at the Joint Center [for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.], tell me about his impact, and do you have any stories?
Speaker 2: Actually, Eddie Williams was not the head of it when I was there.  It was, it was Frank [D.] Reeves.  He was the Head of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.  And, you know, of course, he'd been a great architect of a lot of the milestone legal decisions in the civil rights arena.  And I think he had been a part of the effort to bring this about, so Frank Reeves was really my mentor at that time and he was the one who was driving it.
Speaker 1: Tell me about what happened next.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--the great thing about the Joint Center is that it, it provided a forum for these emerging political personalities.  You had a handful in the [U.S.] Congress, you know, earlier years we'd had Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], and a few--I'm trying to remember out of Chicago [Illinois], we had a few.  [William L.] Dawson and Digg--[Charles] Diggs, and so you had a growing number--[HM the Honorable William] Bill Clay [Sr.] out of Missouri.  And so, it provided a forum for these elected officials, as well as other elected officials throughout the country.  Then you had [Richard] Dick Hatcher coming out of Gary, Indiana.  And all of--and this, this was creating electricity.  And, of course, they were suddenly having these gatherings and, you know, sort of alternative conventions, you know, pulling all of the black political activists sort of out of--from every crook and cranny of America, you know, every, every little crevice of the country, you know.  They were sort of--and so, that was what was exciting about it.  You suddenly knew there--people were there, people who had been a part of the Civil Rights Movement, who are now being--becoming, becoming a part of the political activism, you know, the Fannie Lou Hamers of the world, the [HM The Honorable] Julian Bonds.  You know, it, you, you knew you were all--again, this was the beginning of something new and it was exciting.
Story_ID: 639710
Speaker 1: And while this is going on, you have these, these new black leaders in all of these major U.S. cities.  You were fighting the battle here at home in [Washington] D.C.  Home Rule again, the beginning stages of that, you were getting a little bit more power in increments.
Speaker 2: That's right.  We were getting power, '74 [1974] again was the, the first, yeah, the first elections when Walter Washington was elected the first time.  Clifford Alexander had been his principal challenger, but you also had camps beginning to form.  There was very exciting 'cause you had the Walter Washington camp, then you had the [HM] Sterling Tucker camp, and then you had the [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry camp.  And I actually was at a memorial service the other day and I talked to myself, so you could sort of tell the difference between them--the Walter Washington camp had the laced shoes and the thin ties and the hats.  Marion's camp was much more ethnically authentic with the dashikis, and then you had Sterling Tucker's camp.  They always had the tie and the handkerchief that matched.  And, and, but it, it was, but see, Sterling came out of the Urban League camp, you know.  Marion was, you know, much more of the activist camp.  And then, Walter Washington had been a part of, of the appointed government that was now converted to elected government.  So, it was different kind of strategies, all of which had contributed to great growth and energy in the city.  But it was a, but, you know, and but it was, it was like--the electricity in the town was palpable.  I mean, it was--people were suddenly engaged that never had been engaged before, you know, and every movement, every meeting, every caucus, oh, it just portend such significance as we thought, you know.  And because we knew that there was about to occur in '78 [1978] this elect--this contest of, of these powerhouses.  And that would be Sterling, Marion, and Walter Washington.  So, this was sort of the landscape in Washington, D.C. while at the same time, things were growing in momentum, and energy, at--on the national scale because begin--political--African Americans were beginning to have, suddenly have an impact in the political environment.  They were still trying to marginalize us, but we begin--we're beginning to become a force with which they had to reckon.
Speaker 1: And were there, you know, efforts to make sure that blacks were getting to the polls and voting in these elections?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, you had a lot of efforts to mobilize the vote.  Some of that was coming from organ--you know, a lot of it were byproducts still of the civil rights era.  And then, as you know, I mean [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson was involved with those kinds of initiatives.  And, you know, a lot of that activism, a lot of that grassroots organizing had been developed in--a skill that had been honed as a result of that civil rights period.  So, there was an effort to mobilize the vote, but there was also an effort to use whatever platform we had to challenge both the Democratic Party and the country because it was a party that sort of took our vote for granted.
Story_ID: 639711
Speaker 1: And so, we were beginning to challenge this party [Democratic Party] when I had--at that, Pat Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] had been the first--was then, at that time, the national committee woman.  And then, ultimately, I became the national committee woman.  And so, you used the forum of the Democratic National Committee [DNC] also to begin to raise these issues.  And then, all of the committees that get formed as associated with the Democratic Convention.  Also, every committee assignment got--had great significance because it was a chance for us to raise our issues, and make a demand that you cannot assume that you will have our vote without making commitments to our community.
Speaker 2: So, you are relatively--I mean, you were young, a young woman--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in a very powerful position with the DNC.  Was your voice heard?
Speaker 1: I, I--well, I, I think it was heard.  I sometimes wonder, but I got elect--I was continuously elected to more, more, more significant positions.  And that was with the support, first of the Eastern region, and then the broader, the broader membership of the national committee.  They may not always have done what I wanted, most particularly around being as aggressive about statehood for the district, but they certainly were listening to us.  And there were people, obviously, like C. Delores Tucker and others, [HM The Honorable] Basil Paterson, Hazel Dukes.  I mean it was Maynard [Jackson, Jr.], you know, [HM] Julian [Bond].  You know, it, it became a forum for our demands.  And particularly to get to arrive--to participate in the, in the political process, and to be at the table where all of the decisions are made--not at the crash landing, but at the takeoff.  We were demanding that we wanted to be full participants in this political process.  Otherwise, don't look to our vote in the numbers that you looked to it--
Story_ID: 639712
Speaker 1: The debate around Home Rule came first, and then statehood came later.
Speaker 2: Yes, and all statehood was always sort of in the background.  But clearly, first, we wanted to have at least some right to vote, and have a right to participate and have control over our own destiny, both the right to vote, but also the right to control, you know, the operations of government here.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first national election in which [Washington] D.C. residents were able to vote?
Speaker 2: I think that was--well, [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson was running for president, so I guess that was--was it '68 [1968]?  I think that was then.  And I remember we were putting slates together for delegates.  And the only real organized element in the city at that time was labor.  So, I remember [William] Bill Lucy (laughter), you know.  And Arrington [Dixon] and I were trying to organize a slate, you know, so it would--so that I think that was the first occasion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were telling me about the election [1978 Washington, D.C. mayoral election], the race between [HM] Sterling Tucker, Walter Washington, and [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry.  Now, your, your husband, Arrington Dixon, was also a political figure as well.  Tell me about the races he was involved in.
Speaker 2: Well, Arrington stood for election in the first set of elections, and was elected to the ward for a Council [of the District of Columbia] seat with the Home Rule government.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: And that was 1974, he was elected.  And then, he decided to pursue the Office of Chairman, partly because, clearly, there was going to be a vacancy potentially with Sterling--well, Sterling wasn't seeking his office again.  He was seeking the Office of Mayor.  And so, Arrington and I worked for him to become chairman, which he did, and there was a tug of war really more between Sterling and, and Marion trying to, you know, convince Arrington to support, support him.  And of course, ultimately, Arrington's campaign manager, who was also my cousin's husband, supported Marion.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: Barry [K.] Campbell.  And, and Arrington and I ultimately supported Sterling, you know, for lots of reasons.  So, we knew, we saw that Marion was the one gaining momentum.  He really had a heck of a grassroots campaign.  Sterling is a, is a--had a powerful campaign, but I think Marion had clearly the stronger grassroots campaign.
Speaker 1: So you supported Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: No, I supported Sterling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually supported Sterling.  And for lots of reasons, not the least of which is that Sterling's base was Arrington's base out of Ward 4.  And so, that had, you know, it, it just made more sense, and both had been, had reached out to us.  Both were--we respected, but at, at the time, it made more sense just to support Sterling.
Story_ID: 639713
Speaker 1: Take me through your career at this point.  You went to Antioch [School of Law, later University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.] to teach.
Speaker 2: Taught at Antioch Law School.  I thought that would be a more manageable demand--career than other things.  I, of course, Antioch was anything, but manageable.  It was Jean [Camper Cahn] and Edgar [S.] Cahn, two very interesting personalities who believed that they should--they wanted to challenge the paradigm of how, in terms of legal education, that they felt that you should approach the training in law in much the same way as you do medicine, so that you had more practical hands-on experiences while learning the law.  And, of course, they also challenged the role of law which is basically to protect the status quo.  Jean and Edgar Cahn were great agents of change.  They came out of Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] activism, you know, the spirit of activism that sort of caught fire at Yale Law School at that time.  And so, Antioch was an environment of activists, you know, it was a very challenging environment.  Half of the students were older than I, and half of the students were about my age because I was only twenty-eight.  It was, it was an interesting, and it was a period of great growth for me because basically, I had lived in pretty much a sheltered environment of Washington, D.C., had not had a lot of experiences beyond that sort of, that, that world.  But Antioch, we had all of these folks who had, you know, taken over buildings and other places across the country, and challenged the Department of Interior as Native Americans.  And, you know, they were feminists and activists and, boy, that was exciting to me.  And exceptionally bright people so, and then I was put in the role--I was in this role of being able--having to get their attention and win their respect in order to teach 'em.  So, it was a great period of growth, and I learned a lot and enjoyed that four years.
Speaker 1: And our friend again, Mary (laughter), Mary Church Terrell had, had gone through Antioch as well, years prior to your tenure there.  Was her story kind of reverberating in your mind at all?
Speaker 2: Well, the Antioch story just generally, you know, the story of Yellow Springs [Ohio] and Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio], and the spirit of activism of the school--the univer--the school certainly was always a part, you know, was evident.  And it would only be in Antioch that would have embraced what Jean and Edgar Cahn had in mind.  I mean, it was such a contradiction to anything the law had ever been about in terms of training.  And I remember when the American Law School Association came to sort of evaluate it, and they said, well, we've seen the future.  We're not certain it works (laughter).  So, you know, it was a very--it, it pressed the edges of the envelope on, on so many fronts, both in terms of applied learning, as well as the role of law in society.  So, but it was, it was great.  It was a very interesting experience.
Speaker 1: So this is toward, this is the end of the Vietnam War while you were, you were at Antioch.  More discussions, discussions about the Vietnam War, race discussions, reverberations from civil rights.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, all of the--they talked about the war.  They talked about race.  They talked about everything.  I mean, there was nothing that was sacr--you know, everything was on the table.  You could discuss anything you wanted and the students didn't call you professor anything.  You were called Sharon.  Everybody was first name, you know.   'Cause after that experience, I came to appreciate that--I think a little discipline and structure is needed for growth (laughter).  So, but it was--no, it was very much about pressing for more change, using the law again as an instrument of change, and all of the conversations, and all of the activism occurring throughout the country was very much a part of the classrooms in, at Antioch Law School.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--were you in the minority when it came to women of color?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there were very few women although there were, there were a few.  And I'm trying to think--I, I think that's, I think that's almost how I got the job.  I think Jean Cahn said, "Oh, I got, definitely got to bring Sharon on board," you know, 'cause it was tough trying to get on board with that school because Jean and Edgar were very clear about what they wanted.  And you look at my profile, and you look at my history, and I seem to be the antipathy of everything they were about.  And so, I, but when I challenged Jean, they first said, "No, you can't get on board," and I said, I challenged them.  I said, "How dare you?"  You know, and I--because I came back at them.  And, you know, I, I got, I was able to join that faculty.  And I think of Jean Kahn, the co-dean, and I think, I were the only African American women on that faculty, and there were a few women though.
Speaker 1: And this is, you know, the real heart of the, the Women's Movement.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I will say that was the beginning of seeing 50-50 in a classroom in terms of men and women because that--keep in mind what my experience had been.  But fifty percent of that class or in the first class, there were--were women, and that was very exciting to see.
Speaker 1: How did that change the culture of the law classroom?
Speaker 2: It did--well, it was--well, there was just such, sort of free spirit to the school.  I think having such a very different profile in a law school had an impact.  It did change some of the dialogue, but I'd have to say what I did discover from that experience was that the most empowered student was always the white male.  No matter who was the smartest student, it was the white male.  Now, if I, if, if a, a white male asked a question, and I responded to suggest he didn't know the answer.  It was like, okay, you know.  I mean, he was distressed, but this, this is a generalization, I know.  Women, generally, if they struggle, maybe they never ask a question again for a few days, you know, and I think African Americans, in particular, struggle for even a longer period of time.  And it just showed to me, it was very instructive in terms of how these cultural experiences play--you know, evidenced themselves, and even something like a conver--dialogue and colloquy with a, with a student and a teacher.
Speaker 1: So, you spent about four years at Antioch?
Speaker 2: I spent four years there, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Story_ID: 639714
Speaker 1: --Where did you go next [after Antioch School of Law, later University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: From there, I went to PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company], and I joined the law department at, at PEPCO. You know, I sort of decided I, I would like to, you know, move in to the private sector.  And I--the girls were a little bit older.  And I thought I'd enjoy that, so I was able to secure a position at PEPCO in their law department.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the highlights from that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, PEPCO was, PEPCO was--had a great CEO that I absolutely adored, who later became a mentor to me--[W.] Reid Thompson.  But PEPCO, the culture of PEPCO, PEPCO had been around since the turn of the century.  And it had practiced for a long time segregation in its worst form.  They had for years, separate picnics, separate everything.  And the vestiges of that were still prevalent and present at the time I arrived in 1976.  So, they were struggling for African Americans, and they were struggling with the notion of women in any kind of significant position.  They were still struggling with it, so it was a place that where they thought that they had already accommodated African Americans by having an African American PEPCO gospel choir.  They thought that was a (laughter), that was 1976.  So, you know, 'cause utilities basically, you don't leave these jobs by and large, you know.  These are engineers who, you know, you know, they stay in their own space.  And they have a hard time with those of us who live in the world of social science and policy, et cetera, and they were very resistant to that change.  It was a tough culture.
Speaker 1: And you had a got a couple of different positions at PEPCO.
Speaker 2: I did.  I was in the law department.  I sort of moved, you know, with some success in the law department.  And I--we were having clearly problems with our customers because, you know, that was the energy crisis with the Arab Oil Embargo and that was impacting.  And suddenly, people--what they thought was a very predictable bill, you know, was suddenly escalating and so there, with that, the public was growing impatient.  They were having a hard time dealing with it.  Then, on top of which the--because of politics, the Public Service Commission profile was changing.  And so, suddenly you had African Americans who were regulating and determining the bottom line, their rate relief.  And so, that provided an opportunity and a challenge, a challenge for the company, but an opportunity for me when they asked me to run, first, the consumer, the Consumer Affairs Department, so that I left the, you know, my role as a lawyer, to take on a management role in the Consumer Affairs Department.
Speaker 1: Were there any black women in powerful roles at PEPCO?
Speaker 2: No.  There weren't many--when I was elected vice president of PEPCO, I was the first woman in the history of the company to be elected to a vice president or above.  They had elected a woman to the role of secretary who had been in the Investor Relations Office, but, you know, an office, or what was really the real officers of the company, it was the first woman of any color who had ever been elected to, as a, as an officer within that, within that company.
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned the history of segregation at PEPCO.  Can you recall any incidents where there were still echoes of that, of those attitudes?  Any memories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yep.  They, they were, there was absolutely resentful of the demands being placed by the city Council [of District of Columbia].  They viewed them all to be a bunch of civil rights activists, you know.  And now, they had this doggone Home Rule.  Oh, they would say it, they would say it.  And, you know, when I pushed them that they also had to do a better job of reaching out to a constituency, and they needed to place advertising with WHUR and so forth, you know.  They, you know, there was a lot of pushback, enormous pushback.  Their, the, the comments were laced in almost all of the remarks made by so many of significant personalities within that company.  And I'd have to tell you that in large measure, my career there was catapulted by the fact that I challenged what was going on.  I mean I was seeing practice after practice in my role as a lawyer dealing with personnel.  And it was getting to, to the point where I thought if I don't say something, I'm going to--I mean, I can't, in good conscience, not say something.  So, the question was who do I take it to?  So, after much pondering, I decided to take it straight to the CEO, you know, if they kick me out, they kick me out.  But I laid it out--how I thought that they were just on the verge of serious problems, serious challenges.  And Reid Thompson called me into his office.  You know, you didn't know whether he was going to hand your hat to you or not, but he sat me down, and he made me go through and explain it.  And I think he respected the fact that I, you know, had the, had the chutzpah to bring it to him, that I thought that--and the fact that I respected him enough that I thought he would do something about it.  And he did, he did begin--do--begin to do something about it, but it's, it's a tough culture to change.
Story_ID: 639715
Speaker 1: While you were at Antioch [School of Law, later University of the District of Columbia David A. Clarke School of Law, Washington, D.C.], [President Richard] Nixon years, you moved on, change in the administration while you were back in the [Washington] D.C. area.  Could you feel that shift?
Speaker 2: When Nixon came into office?
Speaker 1: From Nixon to [President Jimmy] Carter?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, any time--this is a Democratic town.  You'd always feel it when Republicans come in.  You just do because, first of all, Republicans tend not to be that engaged with cities.  Cities are overwhelmingly--the mayors and elected officials tend to be overwhelmingly Democrats.  So, you suddenly do lose access to power when Republicans, you know, take office.  And, you know, not to say that I wasn't able to co-exist with them when I was in office.  Actually, [President] George [H.W.] Bush was very good.  But, you know, you, you feel the effects of it.  And, and, certainly, Nixon, what was he saying when he talked about, you know, law and order?  It was just, it's race, always is playing itself out.  And it's, it's, it was a veiled conversation about race, and keeping people containing that, containing people.  And so, as well as generally, women getting out of line, everybody getting out of line.  Let's bring it back to the good ole days, and, you know, so you felt the effects of it.  And when Carter came in, that was like a breath of fresh air--not to mention the fact that his campaign had been engineered in, in large measure by a great many African Americans.  I mean, you had people like [Andrew] Andy Young and [Benjamin] Ben Brown and others who had played a very active role, you know, with that Atlanta [Georgia] based campaign.  So, it was a very welcome arrival to the city.
Speaker 1: Were you feeling the call?  I mean, you were at PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company], you were in corporate America.  Were you feeling the call back to politics?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd always been involved in politics 'cause I was supporting Arrington [Dixon].  Then I, by this time, I was very involved with the Democratic National Committee [DNC], so I had run for chairman of the Eastern Regional Caucus.  I'd served on--co-chaired a lot of committees.  And so, I was, I was always very engaged in the process.  So, yes, I was, you know, I'd have to say, yeah, I'd always had that pull.  I was always involved.
Speaker 1: And during this time, you were with PEPCO and still involved in the political arena with the DNC and your husband's campaigns.
Speaker 2: And the local state committee, I was very involved with that, very active with Bob Washington when he was chair of the party and, you know, the whole--all of the--I was very, you know, involved with--there was not a Democratic state committee meeting I would miss so--
Speaker 1: So, tell me about those, those meetings and, and the conversation at the time--I mean, Home Rule now to the emphasis on, on statehood.  What was the conversation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, the city--I think the city was more focused on, you know, impacting policy, and, and, you know, the process, and how you can convert that to both economic empowerment for the city, as well as, you know, just creating job development, doing job development in the city, how these programs could do that.  Of course, you learn the hard way like everybody does.  There's a limit to what you can and cannot do, but there was that hope and that energy then that existed in the city that, you know, and you had a lot of very talented people, such as, you know, Ivanhoe Donaldson and Bob Washington.  And, you know, so many others that, who had fairly engaged in the process, and it was, it was some of the best and the brightest you'd want to see.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you remain at PEPCO?
Speaker 2: I was at PEPCO until I decided really to stand for the Office of Mayor, so I was there until I guess late '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: And so, something significant happened to you in 1988, right?  So, you leave PEPCO and I know that the--tell me about the Democratic National Convention that year.
Speaker 2: Well, the '88 [1988], that was [Michael] Dukakis.  Well, we were hopeful of that Dukakis could do it.  I don't know that I would of--Dukakis was my first choice, but he was my brother-in-law's first choice.  So, he'd--Flash [ph.] had been really active with Dukakis out of Massachusetts.  And, of course, he was electrifying really when he did his speech the night of the nomination--moving in and out of Spanish and English.  So, we were all hopeful that we could reclaim power, but it just didn't happen.
Story_ID: 639716
Speaker 1: I'm gonna bring you back to 1982 when one of your mentors, Patricia Roberts Harris, again, decided to make a move.  Tell me about what she was doing with the [President Jimmy] Carter administration and what she decided to do back in 1982 and your role.
Speaker 2: Well, Pat Harris, who clearly was a role model for me, had been Secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and HHS [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].  And then when she left office, ultimately was prevailed upon by sort of a coterie of folks who were close to her, to stand for the Office of Mayor.  And so, when she deci--began to think about it, some folks suggested, and I guess she suggested, that I talk to her about it. (tape break) Well, Patricia Harris was certainly a role model for me.  She'd been Secretary of HUD, Secretary of HHS, and then she was sort of prevailed upon by a cadre or coterie of folks close to her, that she ought to stand for mayor.  And I think they thought it was a little easier than it proved to be, but somewhere along the way, Pat got me involved.  And, you know, I, I really admired her.  I knew that it was going to be an uphill battle.  And it was not going to be the push--as much of a pushover as people thought it might be because you know [HM the Honorable] Marion [Barry] had been--was getting negative press, but I also understood how much of a following he had in [Washington] D.C.--
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Marion Barry to date.  He had run successful Council [of the District of Columbia] races.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now and mayor.
Speaker 2: Marion had, had been elected to the [Washington, D.C.] School Board.  He had become president of the School Board.  He was elected with the first Home Rule election to an at-large seat.  And then, from there, he won, an unbelievable--what was, you know, the odds were totally against him, so it seemed.  When he ran, run for mayor in '74 [1974], he'd had, he'd won again in '78 [1978]--I mean, won in '78 [1978].  I'm sorry, then won again--now he was up for reelection in '82 [1982].  So, he won in '74 [1974], for at-large seat, '78 [1978], he won for mayor, and then in '82 [1982], he was up for reelection.  And he'd won, won with, you know, basically, he'd won significantly with a great many white votes in the city because he was sort of a voice of change.  He was challenging the slowness as he perceived--of the bureaucracy, how non-responsive government was non-responsive, and that he sort of--that was his sort of campaign theme.  And because of his activism, he was just sort of an, a good--the embodiment of that kind of energy that people wanted to see spill over into government.  Now, but then he was beginning to get negative press.  There are people beginning to challenge him.  And so, there was the notion that he was, was vulnerable which, of course, there was a level that probably he was.  And that's when Pat Harris decided to stand for the Office of Mayor.
Story_ID: 639717
Speaker 1: Were you friend--I mean, you have been in the same circles with [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry for decades.  Were you friends?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I like Marion a lot, you know, I respect him and I like him.  What I disagree with--he and I disagree, and, you know, to me, he's not institutional.  He doesn't build institutions enough for my bias.  He's a great activist.  He's very smart, and I think he's done a lot of good, but I always got frustrated that he didn't cement the good into institutional milestones.  And that's where he and I, you know, always had our points of departure--not that he disagreed with me, but it wasn't the priority that, you know, for him, as, as it is for me.
Speaker 1: Do you remember seeing him at social functions or political functions?  Do you have any stories to tell us about?
Speaker 2: Well, Marion was always campaigning.  He would be over at the house to try to, you know, get Arrington [Dixon]'s support.  He was always trying to get my support.  Run, you know, you'd run into him at, you know, we always gathered at the Foxtrappe.  That was the hot spot in Washington [D.C.] in those days.  So, no matter how hard you worked in the day, you made it over to 16th Street [Washington, D.C.] to the Foxtrappe which was a non-stop party.  You'd see him at Old Ebbitt's Grill [sic, Old Ebbitt Grill], you know, you, wherever, he always had a presence at the Democratic state committee.  He always was very much a good retail politician so you'd run into him all the time.  I dealt with him in my role at PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company], you know, so, and he was always responsive.  And as I say, he was always trying to--if you weren't with him, he was going to try to get you with him.  That was one thing about Marion.  That's when he was so good.  I mean, he would always try to court you, to convert you, to the Marion Barry camp.
Speaker 1: What would he say?  So, he'd come over to your house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd come over and he--well, first he wanted, you know, Arrington's support.  But he would sit down, explain his candidacy, explain the politics of it, the numbers, who had what numbers, what the undecided vote looked like, you know.  He'd talk about what he thought were the touchstone issues and, you know, he was very persuasive.  He was very, very good at making his case, you know.  But, you know, whether it was at, again, a social event or a professional occasion, he'd say, you know, Sharon, when am I going to get your support or when you're going be with me?  And he would always press you, you know, try to convert you.  And people respect that.  I know I used to listen, I still remember it because he valued my support enough that he always asked me for my support, and people always remembered that.  That's part of his, his, his--the reason for his success.
Story_ID: 639718
Speaker 1: So, tell me about this race in 1982 [Washington, D.C. mayoral campaign] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I think there were a lot of reasons that it was, you know, an appealing opportunity--not the least of which was the fact that Pat [Patricia Roberts Harris] was somebody I had always respected and admired.  And I felt I did know the political process really better than did she, or some of the people around her, God bless them.  And so, I was eager to try to do what I could to see if we couldn't convert what I thought was some of her political appeal and, and capabilities into, you know, real live votes, and tried to help organize a political machine for her, and recruit people like [R.] Calvin Lockridge and others, you know, to this effort.  And I was able to recruit an awful lot of people, but there was always, as are with any campaign, you know, whatever you see on the outside, there's always a political tug of war going on internally.  And so, there was the crowd that knew her from the days of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  And then, there were these upstarts out of Washington, D.C.  And there was always, to some extent, a tug of war going on with these two camps that I think sometimes depleted our strength and effectiveness.  But [HM the Honorable] Marion [Barry] was, again, a very good politician.
Speaker 1: Did those two ever go head-to-head?
Speaker 2: Oh, they went head-to-head, certainly in debates, but what Marion was being--able to do--he had won basically with the Ward 3 vote.  He had won significantly with a white vote.  And now, he was losing favor with that constituency.  And he was able--he's the only one of us who was able to convert, to quickly shift his base into, back into the black community.  And part of that was his bona fide days as a activist.  And I think also because his personal story was a much more--is a much--very compelling story.
Speaker 1: Which aspects of that personal story (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, the guy who, who really started out behind the eight ball, you know, he, he came from a very tough, poor environment.  He didn't have nearly the advantages in terms of role models and, and support systems.  And here's a guy who had the vision, you know, to ascend to the Office of Mayor.  It was, it's an extraordinary story.  It's a compelling story, and you just can't help but root for that, that, you know, that guy.  America has always loved that guy, you know, that person--whether [President] Bill Clinton, [President] Ronald Reagan.  There is a quality that is just you have to root for this person, and Marion has that, that, that quality.  So, he was able to make that transition--very few elected black mayors frankly, where you win with a black and white vote, win more--and very often, you'll lose that white establishment support.  Why do you lose it?  Because you're going to have to do the things if you're going to be true to your community that are maybe at odds with the economic interests as, as often perceived to be the economic interests in the white establishment, which means you've got to galvanize a significant outpouring of black voters to offset that loss.  [HM the Honorable] David Dinkins wasn't able to do it.  Walter Washington wasn't able to do it, you know.  And I, I'm another one who wasn't able to do it.  It's a very tough thing to do.  Marion was able to make that switch.  He could just switch over.  It wasn't easy, but he managed to do it.  He had to win that support of the black establishment in Washington [D.C.], but he was able to do it.
Speaker 1: So, who was a part of, who was part of the Marion Barry cohort--white and black at the time?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  Well, by then, I think, you know, [Robert B.] Bob Washington, who had supported [HM] Sterling [Tucker], was over there with him.  A guy named Max Berry [ph.] had been--was a part of his campaign.  Anita Bond [sic, Anita Bonds], you know, Ivanhoe Donaldson.  People were still involved like Gladys Mack, you know.  It, it was, I mean, you know, he had a full spectrum of the town.  A lot of the major ministers--now, packages, forget it, when we were walking into these, you know, Baptist churches, she was not going to get that.  And, and I think that's tough for any woman frankly.  That's, that's tough, but, you know, he had almost all of the ministers, bishop, you know, [HM Reverend Dr. H.] Beecher Hicks [Jr.] and, you know, you just go through the, the long list of ministers.  They were all with Marion.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Patricia Harris?
Speaker 2: Pat was able to--I mean, there were few, there were people like Knight [ph.] and Stanley [ph.] that she was able to get.  She, again, people that they didn't expect her to get, like Calvin Lockridge.  There were people like Emily Washington [ph.] who was--is a real activist in Ward 7, and a strong proponent in education.  You know, she was able to enlist a lot of people who were impatient with what they perceived to be gains in the city, institutional gains, the sort of debate that Marion and I had ongoing conversation, he and I have had.  And that, that was the constituency that gravitated to Pat.  And I do think she had the potential to, to, to gain a more significant slice.  But she was up against probably one of America's best politicians.  So, you know, that, so, that Marion won, and he won significantly.
Story_ID: 639719
Speaker 1: And so, what was next for you at this point?  Were you involved in clubs and organizations outside of the DNC [Democratic National Committee]?
Speaker 2: I--not really.  I, I've, most, you know, between PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company] originally, and then PEPCO, and my husband [Arrington Dixon] and certainly my children [Aimee Arrington Dixon and Drew Dixon Williams], very, very much involved with, with their activities, and then the Democratic Party as a volunteer.  That was more than enough.  I didn't have much, I didn't have any energy after that.
Speaker 1: Toward the beginning of this interview, you talked about the lay of the land in [Washington] D.C. at the time--a very segregated place.  By this point, through the '70s [1970s] to the early '80s [1980s], had things changed significantly, vis-a-vis race?
Speaker 2: Washington was beginning to change, and Home Rule, I think, had--was the most significant factor in that change because suddenly the people who got to make bottom line decisions that impacted your life, that could determine the outcome of major economic institutions, such as a PEPCO, such as the telephone company, and the gas company and the light.  Suddenly, that meant that African Americans were beginning to ascend to positions of importance and power.  And the developers in the community knew they had to take notice.  The lawyers in the community knew they had to take notice.  They couldn't just go in here and lobby without, you know, black lawyers.  The, the banking community knew they had to take notice.  They did it often begrudgingly.  They did it with one or two people.  They did it often kicking and screaming, but it was beginning to have its impact.  And people were beginning to have images where the notion of power, and it being an African American, were often more one and the same.  Then, had they, you know, at, which had not been the case before.  So, it was having its impact.  And I think Home Rule, truly, the political process really had a profound impact upon it.
Story_ID: 639720
Speaker 1: And so you remained at, at PEPCO [Potomac Electric Power Company], as you said, until the late '80s [1980s], at which time you decided to run for mayor [of Washington, D.C.] yourself.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I don't quite know what possessed me to do that because I always sort of thought that the person who had the greatest political influence was the person who was behind the scenes, you know, the one who advised the, the candidate.  And I was correct (laughter) to a great extent.  And so, because when you're in the process, you're sort of like the beach ball that gets kicked and moved about, you know.  You, you use a lot of the decision--a lot of the power that people at the time to focus on policy and program and many times--often or get to shape the options that the official and candidate get to consider, you know, the ones who are behind the scenes.  So, I always sort of liked that role of being behind the scenes.  I'm not certain whether it was a combination of being a little frustrated with, with the direction, and really thinking more about entering the, the conversation about the direction of the city and saying, well, the only way I can do it is to say I might become a candidate, probably 'cause where my daughters were now, were away in college, you know.  I had more time to do that sort of thing, and so, that's how I got started.
Speaker 1: And as you made these professional transitions, there were some transitions in your personal life as well.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I, you know, and I think that I divorced in '82 [1982].  And I certainly know that probably is another reason I got so involved with Pat's [Patricia Robert Harris] candidacy because the campaign, because a lot of that, you know, the anguish associated with the divorce, the loss associated with the divorce, I could sort of direct--redirect my energies around something positive and exciting and rewarding.  So, yes, that had happened in '82 [1982], and so, now here in '88 [1988], I decided to become a candidate myself, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you announced it at the [1988] Democratic National Convention [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I first announced it--it seemed to me up at Roosevelt High School [Washington, D.C.], when I did a formal announcement.  But I did begin to talk about, you know, possibly becoming a candidate.  And I just did it the old-fashioned way.  I just went from door to door, started talking to people, having a conversation, just trying to find out if what I thought--they thought.  Did they think that I--what I thought, did they think it was time for a change?  And I gave [HM the Honorable] Marion [Barry] his due.  I said, "You know, it's a time and season for everything, but, you know, Marion, you were great in your day, but it was time to move on."  And was that one person's view or was it, was a shared view?  And Washington [D.C.] is reluctant to embrace change, as I've said many times.  So, I wasn't certain whether this would, whether it would work, whether they were ready to hear it.  But at a minimum, I was gonna impact the conversation and, and the discussion.  And so, I began that process.
Story_ID: 639721
Speaker 1: So, you--interestingly enough, because you said [HM the Honorable] Marion Barry was the grassroots candidate--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --historically.  And you became somewhat of a grassroots candidate in the sense that you were going door to door, [Adrian] Fenty style before his time?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And oh, and there's no way to beat it.  I mean, there's just no, better, because at the end of the day, you've got to turn yourself over to the people.  They, you've got to have a conversation and listen to people.  And you can proselytize for days, but is it anything that they, that resonates with what's going on in their life?  And so, and, and you will learn and grow as a human being, and you'll learn and grow as, as an effective office--politician if you go through this process.  This process prepares you to serve.  It really does.  And so, it was definitely a solid grassroots campaign.  At this point, though, you're up against people who have established machines because they're in elected office.  They can dispense patronage, and they have a structure, they have structures in place.  I'm trying to create something out of whole cloth, and which is probably why I threw out my candidacy up until I dare say, three, maybe five weeks out.  No one thought I could win.
Speaker 1: And you were pretty vocal, a vocal critic--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Of Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were some of the interactions and conflicts you had during the early stages of that campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, because no one took me seriously except me and the people who supported me.  You know, they tended to ignore me except the public.  You know, when I'd go to these forums, and you know, and I tried--I do it, I hope with a sense of humor because that's how I--I mean, you know.  I, I respect Marion. I have great affection for him.  And, but I, that doesn't negate the fact that I felt it was time for him to go, you know.  Like they say, you're good in your class, but your class has graduated, so, you know, let's move on.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you remember any, any of the, the forum that you're talking about?
Speaker 2: I went to countless forums.  And, but when I started talking about it's time to clean house, and I just remember one--and I said that's what we've got to do.  And that was connecting.  The audience was connecting.  And it always got a, a response, so I knew that I was on to something.  I was surprised that the more established candidates weren't grabbing hold of that message, you know, because they had the machinery and apparatus to run with it, whereas I had really no apparatus, no machinery.
Speaker 1: Now, you were the first to announce your candidacy that year?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, um-hum.  Everybody--people were--all the other officials, so it appeared to me, were waiting for Marion to say, I'm not going to run, or I decided I'm going to anoint you as my heir apparent.  And so, that's part of the reason I was the only one who would occupy this space in the debate because I wasn't waiting for Marion to endorse me.  I knew that wasn't gonna happen, and that really wouldn't have--I was inspired by the message more than, than, you know, so the others wouldn't do that.
Story_ID: 639722
Speaker 1: Were you aware of, of his [HM the Honorable Marion Barry] problems--the cocaine problem?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it was--Marion's personal demons, and his problem with his personal demons, were very well-known to anybody who was very involved in Washington [D.C.].  And so, you know, they--we knew those personal demons were going to catch up with him.  And so, you know, so at some point, you knew that, you know, they might catch up with him.  And it was also impacting him, you know, his effectiveness.  And he'd also gotten caught up, as anyone does, if you, with the trappings of power.  And you don't become as agile and as responsive to the will of the community, as were you when you first start out.  It's, it's a challenge for anybody in elected office.  And he was suffering from that, that as well, so you knew that he, he was at a point of, of great political vulnerability, but you also knew that people didn't, most people didn't think the emperor, most people still wanted to tell the emperor he still had his armor in place.  No one was going to challenge it and, and, surprisingly, none of the other elected officials who wanted his job, would challenge, would tell him that either.  I was the only one saying--and I didn't say it in an antagonistic way, but I did say, "Marion, you know, the emperor has no clothes here.  You really need to check it out."  We, we, it's time.  And so, I was the only one saying that.  And so, therefore, it began to create its own dynamic.
Speaker 1: How did you respond to sort of the sting operation of 1990?
Speaker 2: Well, two ways, I probably pretty much, like everybody else, where there's a part of me that knew that good grief, you know, Marion, how could you put yourself in that position?  But at the same time, I guess, I, too, had the reaction of when I discovered more about it--why was every, why did the government spend this much money for somebody who, you know, was really, seemingly, his worst offense was that he smoked the pipe--not to say that, that's acceptable, and certainly, frankly, some of his conduct was getting out of hand.  There's no question about it so he was his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had--there were reports of affairs and things like that.
Speaker 2: Well, and not just so much that as, as he was losing his personal discipline in terms of his conduct, you know, it's the incidents with the, at the Super Bowl game [Super Bowl XXI], you know.  You know, having visible--his problem, his problems were becoming quite visible, and it was a disservice to the position.  It was a disservice to him, and it was certainly a disservice to the city that, unfortunately, very much depends upon, or must navigate a relationship with the federal government on an ongoing basis.  And to the extent that, you know, you neutralize him because of his personal demons, you neutralize the power of Washington, D.C.  And so, it was an unfortunate phenomenon.  So, there was, as a person who likes him, I, I felt badly about it, but you also knew that Marion was his own worst enemy.
Speaker 1: Where did you, where were you when you first saw the tape of him smoking?
Speaker 2: I was actually at a restaurant with my soon-to-be second husband [James R. Kelly, III] and his sister.  And my phone, I guess people were trying to reach us.  I guess the restaurant, the restaurant, they told us of the incident.  And I sort of absorbed it, and then I just decided I would finish my meal.  I would, you know--
Speaker 1: Were you, what was your reaction--emotionally?
Speaker 2: I was surprised, I, I was surprised, I was surprised that Marion would be arrested--yeah, I was surprised.  I, I really was.  I, I thought, I thought I could beat him (laughter), you know.  And I hadn't assumed that anything like that, but I was surprised.  And so, by the time I got home, it's not the era of where anything is so digital.  My, you know, answering machine was off the hook with messages.  And that's when I got more information.  And that's when I, you know, turned on the television to discover more about it.  But, you know, you know, so I, but so a part of me was saddened, and, and, actually a little troubled that there was this level of government--money spent on his, more of his personal problems than things that impacted, let's say, like, graft or any, bribes, or anything like that.  But I also recognized that his personal demons were working to the great disadvantage of the city because of the role he played.
Speaker 1: Were aspects of the city suffering as a result?  Were the people suffering as a result?
Speaker 2: I just felt Marion was not on top of his game in the city because he, you know, he was just too caught up in seemingly the lifestyle that goes sometimes with some of these unfortunate habits.  At his, on his worse day, he's good.  I give him his due.  On his worse day, he's good, but I do think he was not on top of his game to the disadvantage of the city.  The city wasn't as responsive as it had been.  And I do think he--it was creating a tremendous strain with what we, the relationship with, on the Hill.  And as much as I often sometimes resent that relationship as a, you know, you still have to be on top of your game and deal with it.
Story_ID: 639723
Speaker 1: --Well, that was an interesting time as well that, you know, he's [HistoryMaker the Honorable Marion Barry] mayor [of Washington, D.C.] at the time when, when [President Ronald] Reagan is in office.  And there had to be some tensions there, some serious tensions (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What did this do to your campaign?  He went through his legal trials and tribulations.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a level--it certainly, it, it brought a new energy to my campaign.  But, amazingly, just as much energy as it seemed to have brought to the campaign--soon all of the pundits 'cause, again, this buttoned-down city [Washington, D.C.].  They soon dismissed, again, my candidacy as being viable, even though I was the only voice that was juxta-positioned, you know, in challenge with Marion and, and challenging him, even though I was the only one occupying the space of change, you know.  First, people say, "Well, there is, you know, Sharon Pratt Dixon within short order--"they said, "but she doesn't, she can't win.  She doesn't have a, she doesn't have a political structure.  She has no endorsements.  How can she win?  She has no money.  So, how is she going to win?"  So, but it did, I do think it, it made people believe or empowered people to get involved, and to say we do want change.  And you're the only agent of change out here, so it did encourage people to start getting more involved in the campaign.
Speaker 1: Well, is there this point, counterpoint, kind of atmosphere where you would see what was going on with Marion Barry and his, and his legal trials, and what was going on with your political campaign?  I mean, is that how it played out in the media?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you saw this great drama unfolding, you know, that, that cap--that really had the town's full attention.  But at the same time, the city--there was a sense of--people were just sort of spent by Marion.  That's really what it was.  It was emotionally spent by him.  People regretted that he was in this predicament.  They--it troubled them that he was going to be, you know, in prison.  They still were rooting for him, but they were emotionally spent by him.  And so, that sense of that, that sentiment was beginning to, to bounce to my advantage where people were just ready--let, let's have a change.
Speaker 1: Were people embarrassed by what happened to him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do think there was a level of embarrassment, yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your big win.
Speaker 2: Well, even up to the day of the election, everybody said, "She cannot win."  You turn on any radio station, they said, "She cannot win."  But, you know, our folks just felt that momentum, we felt that energy.  And we suddenly had volunteers coming out of the woodworks.  And that was our only ability to cover all those precincts.  So, within about what--twenty minutes after the eight o'clock when you could do nothing else.  Going down 16th Street [Washington, D.C.], they came on, "We have the first report, and it appears Sharon Pratt Dixon was at thirty-five percent."  I think John [L.] Ray was behind by nine or ten percent.  We hit the brakes, and just jumped out of the car, and yelled victory, and, you know, just traffic was stopping, you know.  It, it was exhilarating 'cause I had a campaign of nothing but young people.  I was the only old person in the campaign.  And the--they could see that, you know, you could have a dream and it could, could happen, you know, you could just make something happen.  It was, it was a great moment.
