Story_ID: 97711
Speaker 1: [Reginnia] Williams and I'm the interviewer The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the Videographer today.  And we are in East Cleveland, Ohio with Professor Edward E. Parker, visual artist, educator and entrepreneur.  Professor Parker, I'd just like to ask you first of all if you would please state your name, first, middle and last, and spell all three for us.
Speaker 2: Edward Everett Parker, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T, Parker, P-A-R-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: And your address please?
Speaker 2: 13240 Euclid Avenue, East Cleveland, Ohio, 44112.
Speaker 1: And would you please state today's date?
Speaker 2: Six, fourteen, oh four [June 14, 2004].
Story_ID: 97712
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I have several questions.  We refer to these as "People" Magazine-ish type questions.  And just to get some basic information about things that you like.  Would you tell us please what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: One food or several.
Speaker 1: One if you like.
Speaker 2: I think I like greens.
Speaker 1: Any particular kind?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like kale and collards mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: All right, and a favorite vacation spot.
Speaker 2: I really enjoyed Africa.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all the four seasons, all the--something about just the four seasons just turn me on.  I think that's the reason why I live in Ohio 'cause you get a good blend of summer, fall, winter and spring.
Story_ID: 97713
Speaker 1: Okay.  Professor Parker, this first section of the interview, we'd like to take some time to talk about your early life, including your memories of your parents and siblings and grandparents, just your growing up years.  So will you tell us please where you were born and when?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1941.  305 Bentley Drive.  Incidentally, I was born on an ironing board.
Speaker 1: Would you like to explain that please?
Speaker 2: As the story goes, my father [David Parker] ran to get the doctor.  When the doctor got to the house, my mother [Augustine Washington Parker] was too far gone to go to a hospital or anything, and then they had difficulties in getting black people in hospitals back in--and incidentally, my birth certificate is on a microfiche, which means a black film.  My mother was laying on the couch and he just merely took me from her and, and put the ironing board in front of the couch, so I was literally lifted from her and put on the ironing board.
Speaker 1: And this is in 1941?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: In Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 305 Bentley Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay, the family home.
Speaker 2: The Hill District, it was the projects.  305, one floor, second floor, third floor.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell me what your mother's name was?
Speaker 2: Augustine Washington Parker.
Speaker 1: All right, would you spell her first name for me please?
Speaker 2: A-U-G-U-S-T-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: And was she a native of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No, she was from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever tell you any stories about how the family came from Georgia to Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Well no, but they didn't go to Pennsylvania.  They went--my, my mother's family went to Toledo [Ohio].  My father was from Sandusky [Ohio].  When they got married, out of Toledo he went to Pittsburgh for jobs.  You know they had steel mills there, and I was born in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your father's name please?
Speaker 2: David Nathaniel Parker.
Speaker 1: And you said he had roots in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Sandusky.  His mother worked on the--she was a cook for the railroad.  And I imagine that was a pretty good job way back then, so she traveled that railroad line coming from Illinois, Cairo, Illinois down to someplace in Nebraska.  So I guess Sandusky was on the route, that route.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said your--at the time of your birth, your father and mother had gone to Pittsburgh so that he could work in the steel mills?
Speaker 2: Right, he was there for a job.  I remember, you know how as kids always look in their parents' drawers finding letters that, you know, love letters and stuff that was written back and forth, which I always find pretty interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long had they been in Pittsburgh when you were born?
Speaker 2: Well that's a good question.  I don't think they had been there too long before I was born.  But we stayed there till I was eight.
Speaker 1: So you were there during World War II, the family was.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty one [1941], yeah that's another good--that's interesting.  In fact, as the story goes, the ship that my father was on, he was in the, in the service at that time.  He came home because of my being born, right.  He got, what is it furloughed, furlough--what is it--a leave.  His ship got blown up during Pearl Harbor.  And he was home during that time.  So he might not have been around too long.  But yes he was in the service and came home on furlough to see his son being born and--but he was a [U.S.] Navy man.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and did he return to the military then, after your birth?
Speaker 2: After, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have any memories, and I know this was a while ago, of the war ending?  And you would have been very young.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No memories of that.
Speaker 2: No memories.
Speaker 1: And I'm just thinking of some of the, the pictures and the great celebrations in the streets.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it was a little too early for you.
Speaker 2: Little too early.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97714
Speaker 1: Now you said you stayed in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] until you were.
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: Eight years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have an older brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the baby.  Can't you tell?
Speaker 1: Well I might have guessed that.  But what's your older brother's name?
Speaker 2: David Ronald Parker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how much older is he?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he also born in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in Toledo [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now we've talked a little bit about your, your parents and, and now your brother, just the two of you, two children.
Speaker 2: And I always wished that I had a darling sister, but never did.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: I think my mother [Augustine Washington Parker] was my sister in effect, 'cause she was only like 16 years older than me.  And 13 years older than my brother, see so she was a young mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did your parents feel about that?  Her becoming a mother at such an early age.
Speaker 2: How did her parents feel?
Speaker 1: Was that an issue?
Speaker 2: No because back in those days, people took care of their obligations, you know, he [his father, David Parker] married her.  I always--you know after I got older and you know seen the age discrepancy, so to speak, I always called him a dirty old man.  But not, you know in fact he really wasn't.  She was 13 and he was 21, that's something like eight years difference, you know.  But that's not a big difference once you get 35 and 42, you know.  But I used to tease him about that after I got a little older.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were your grandparents a part of the household when you were growing up or was there a lot of interaction?
Speaker 2: Early on my mother's--I vaguely remember my mother's father and mother and incidentally that's where Snickerfritz came all about.  You know that's the name that my grandfather bestowed upon me.  I remember my father's mother even more because she was a part of the family up until maybe I was 12 or 13.
Speaker 1: Now Professor Parker since you brought this up here, maybe we should explain.  We're in the Snickerfritz Art Gallery.  And you said one of your grandfathers gave you that name.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me what that grandparent's name was and how that name came about, Snickerfritz?
Speaker 2: Well I really can't remember his last--first name, but his last name was Washington.  And I--they called him Brother Washington, Bruh Washington because his--one of his sons were called--my Uncle Brother was kind of named after him as a nickname.  He was a short man.  In fact, you know his stature, I guess he was about five feet seven.  His wife was about six foot and I think that's probably where I got my height from.  The story goes you know when I was born, he said isn't he a little Snickerfritz?  Incidentally, Snickerfritz is a Pennsylvania Dutch German word, which means mischievous or sweetheart, or cutesy.  And if you ask me which one I was, I will say a little of all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right I--I'm just a, a little curious about your interest in the visual arts.  Do you think that's something that was developed early in your childhood?
Speaker 2: Of course.  You know I remember in my school years was--which wasn't too pleasant because I had a speech impediment.  And--but I had a gift, so to speak.  Every homeroom I was in would always win the bulletin board contest, so to speak.  So as students were out learning the three R's, I was out doing bulletin boards for the school, you know.  The, you know I was somewhat--they were somewhat envious, but still I, you know I had--I didn't learned the three R's like I should have and it took time for me to grasp all of that.  Because you, you know I think that the foundation starts early in terms of educating and when they were educating students, I was out in the hallway doing bulletin boards, you know.  So I was like envied in one way, but losing out in another.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna spend a lot of time talking about formal education in the classroom.  But I wanted to stay with the family background for a little bit longer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Were either of your parents or grandparents interested in art or any kinds of creative activities at all?
Speaker 2: I think so.  My mother was a fine, fine hair stylist, and my father was a tailor, he sewed clothes.  He--not only did he do tailor, tailoring, he was a millineriest too, he made hats.  So he had a lot of talent, heck of a fashion illustrator.  So yeah I came up around art, so to speak.  My mother did hair and my father did clothes.  So--we were the sharpest, my brother and I, sharpest kids in the neighborhood.  'Cause he got a chance to do the suits.  We had suits for every holiday.  So he got--he did practice, you know he practiced on us, making clothes.  And we were quite envious too, you know, of each other and even the neighbors were even envious because they knew that Mr. Parker was gonna have his sons or should I say Mr. and Mrs. Parker were gonna have their kids the sharpest at church on those holidays.
Story_ID: 97715
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about some of the holidays and special occasions for the family.  Now you've already mentioned that you were active in the church.  Do you remember the name of the church and the denomination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to--early on it was Philips Temple.  And then after I got a little older to go to the church that I wanted to go to, it was Warren AME [African Methodist Episcopal], only because that's where all the pretty little girls went.  So I decided to go to that church.
Speaker 1: So the Philips Temple, was that also an African Methodist Episcopal church?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact as around--you know my mid--early life if you wanted to play basketball or baseball or any kind of sports, you had to go to church.  So I spent a lot of time in church.  We played church league basketball in fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you good at that?
Speaker 2: Extremely good.
Speaker 1: So you're an athletic and a creative child.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now and did your brother [David Parker, Jr.] share your interest in sports and girls?
Speaker 2: Yeah my brother, yeah, yeah, yeah, yes he was, he was talented, very talented.  He didn't go into drawing, he could have.  Often, you know I oftentimes mention to him that if we were in the same city, we should have started a contracting company because he's very talented when it comes to doing things around the house.  Like I remember the house that he lives in now, he lift the house up and put a new foundation under it, you know.  Very successful at what he did.  In terms of sports when he was a kid, he was--made All American as center at a school called Macomber and that was really unheard of.  Blacks being centers and quarterbacks way back then and he made All American as a center.
Speaker 1: And this is football.
Speaker 2: Football.
Speaker 1: I'm not a sports fan, so I have to ask.  I thought that was a position for football, though.  Okay, so there were things for children to do in your community.
Speaker 2: All the time; boys club, you know and girls club and dances or hops as they used to call them, or canteens I think they called them back in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 97716
Speaker 1: Well the reason I ask is early on you mentioned that you, you were born in the projects.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now when we think of public housing, especially in urban areas like Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and maybe Cleveland [Ohio] and Chicago [Illinois] too, it's not always a pleasant place to raise a child, but it sounds like you had a pretty good childhood.
Speaker 2: This is fantastic, yeah, you know, you know, you know the concept about it takes a village to raise a kid.  It was definitely that.  Everybody knew everybody.  And in fact, if a person couldn't pay their rent, they had rent parties so other neighbors would come and help them pay their rent.  So it was a good time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A good time.  I remember the--now when I was living there in that area, the first color TV that I saw was a black and white with a filament over it.  Can you remember that?
Speaker 1: Yes I do remember those, with the three different colors and one flesh tone for the, the faces at the top of the screen.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wonder also if there are any special smells and sounds that remind you of those special occasions in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: Oddly enough, you know I go back there maybe once every two to five years.  And the last time I went there, it took me all the way back to my child--even though the same housing projects were redeveloped and brought up to date through remodeling, the same kind of sense and comradeship and homeliness I experienced when I went back and that was some years later.
Speaker 1: Is that because the neighbors are still friendly, they, they remember you?
Speaker 2: Well no, all those people are gone, but they're still friendly.
Speaker 1: The people.
Speaker 2: They still have that village kind of atmosphere because it was Terrace Village No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3.  And I lived in Terrace Village No. 3 on Bentley Drive, so from what I can remember.
Story_ID: 97717
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you spend all of your childhood in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Left when I was eight.
Speaker 1: Yes, you did mention.
Speaker 2: Cried like a baby.  Left all my friends and things and neighbors.  You know I just cried like a baby all the way.  The story goes they were--my mother [Augustine Washington Parker] and father [David Parker] was on the way to California.  You know that thing go west young man?  They were on their way to California and decided to stop in Toledo [Ohio] to visit my mother's sister on the way to California.  And during the week that they were there visiting, my mother got a job.  And my parents always worked two jobs.  My mother did hair during the day and worked in the factory during the day--at night, you know did hair during the day.  My father worked two jobs for eleven years.  So as kids we didn't want for anything.
Story_ID: 97718
Speaker 1: Now in Toledo [Ohio] since you're a elementary school child, you're eight years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the public schools of Toledo?
Speaker 2: I went to Roosevelt, then I went to Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of 13 black students at Lincoln when I started.
Speaker 1: Okay and that's 13 out of how many?
Speaker 2: I don't--I couldn't guess.
Speaker 1: Hundreds?
Speaker 2: But it was a school that went from K [kindergarten] through eight.  Back in those days you went K through eight, then ninth was the high school, you went to a high school.  But it had to be couple thousand, yeah.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it had K through eight, it had slow learners classes, retarded kids, sight classes, the whole bit.  And during those days you either had a red book or a blue book.  They didn't have all these different sections, which I don't agree with anyway.  How could somebody be 13 times slower than someone?  You had a section one for the bright kids, a section 13 for slow kids.  So but during my day you either had a red book or a blue book.  If you was in the blue book, you was slower.  If you was in the red, you was faster.  Right.
Speaker 1: All right, now is it--
Speaker 2: Lot of good memories.
Speaker 1: In the public schools of Toledo then, is that where you're doing the bulletin boards?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And being creative?
Speaker 2: At Lincoln, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's the K through eight school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of any of the teachers who were especially influential in shaping your vision as a young artist?
Speaker 2: I remember one or two.  I remember a Ms. Lou, for whatever reason, she was a music teacher.  And I still could remember those big platform shoes and that same blue dress every day.  But I had a teacher I can't remember who really actually started me going to the art museum in Toledo.  I started art school in the third grade, and she paid my way there.  And I'm sorry, I used to remember her name.  I can't remember her name now.  But I was always her sweetheart, she always would hug me and tell me you're gonna go far.  And I had that a lot in life, you know.  "You're such a little sweetheart, you're gonna go far Edward".  I remember her.  In fact she paid my way as I said, to the Toledo Museum of Art for art classes every Saturday.
Speaker 1: Saturday morning classes, okay.  And how many years did you do that?
Speaker 2: From the--six years.  Third grade till the ninth grade.  Yeah, every Saturday.
Speaker 1: And the same teacher was paying for it?
Speaker 2: No different teachers, different teachers all the way through.  But I can remember very few black kids was able to go to the museum, it was a European situation.  I guess it somewhat still is today.  But I went every Saturday and got talked about every Saturday, but I prevailed.  I remember winning contests that one teachers told me that I painted a inside of a cave that I had.  I remember this teacher took my--no, no, no.  I painted a volcano, that's what I was painting.  And to have it erupting and stuff.  And he took my picture and turned it upside down and said this looks like an inside of a cave. And, and it kind of hurt me, but it made me push harder.  Oftentimes people--sometimes people do things to make you push harder, and that's the way I looked at that because I remember six years later, I won the competition for the age group.  And the first question that came out of my mouth to that teacher was do you remember me?  So he said yeah, so--
Speaker 1: So did he tell you that to make you push harder, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  But I had teachers like Mr. Wheeler in high school.  I had a Mr. Ryan.  Mr. Wheeler was very significant in my life.  I painted a picture, and I still have that picture now, it's called "After Midnight" that was painted with a palette knife.  The one that won.  I painted the picture in Mr. Ryan's class and then the next year when I was a sophomore, Mr. Wheeler entered it.  Mr. Ryan didn't enter it, but Mr. Wheeler entered it and it won first place.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what high school did you attend in Toledo?
Speaker 2: Scott.
Speaker 1: Scott High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Scott.
Speaker 1: All right, and what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's going way back isn't it?  Sixty (1960), I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty (1960).
Speaker 1: Now while you were in high school, did you plan to, to study art?
Speaker 2: Yes, all my life.  I started art in the third grade.  It's a passion.  You know it was something that I felt that I could do a little bit better than most.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a passion.
Speaker 1: What was the art scene like in 1960 when you're coming out of high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had no idea.
Story_ID: 97719
Speaker 1: It was just something that I could--I remember my first studio was behind my parents' [Augustine Washington Parker and David Parker] furnace.  And during those days, the furnace, you had to feed coal, put coal in the furnaces.  The furnace had to stay--be--kind of be away from the wall so I created my studio space behind the furnace, and it was a good, a good way of getting away from things because you know I said I had that speech impediment.  So I could just go down there and hide for hours and just create, draw and paint, sculpting didn't come until later.
Speaker 2: What was the, the speech impediment like?  Was it stuttering?
Speaker 1: Stuttering, profuse stutterer.
Speaker 2: But you overcame that.
Speaker 1: Yes.  You can come over--you can overcome a lot of things.
Speaker 2: How long did that take?
Speaker 1: How long did it take?  That's why I have very little patience with people that say they have handicaps, you know.  Because you can overcome anything if you believe in it and trust in yourself and the Lord, you know, you can overcome anything.  How long did it take?  From, from kindergar--from whenever I started speaking until I was maybe a junior in college.  A long time to have people poke fun at you and laugh at you, your peers are the worse people, right.  Yes, but when I got to college I had a teacher who kind of worked with me.  And I always felt--when I--you know since I've gotten older and done research on stuttering, you know, I think that the reason why people stutter is because they think faster than their speech pattern.  So one thing one has to do is learn how to slow down and think twice before you act once.
Story_ID: 97720
Speaker 1: Okay.  So graduating from high school [Scott High School in Toledo, Ohio] in 1960, what college did you decide to attend?
Speaker 2: I didn't know anything about colleges.  I thought college was like--you remember Dobie Gillis where he had his roommate and he had his own bathroom, you had your own apartment.  That's what I thought college was.  I was--speaking of a cultural shock, when I went to Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] to find out that you might have three to four people in your room, to find out that you had a restroom down the hall where you might have 20 or 15 or 20 kids taking a shower at one time.  I didn't grow up like that.  I had my own bed, you know my brother [David Parker, Jr.] had his own bed.  We had twin beds, you know, bunk beds.  We used to fight over who would sleep on the top, but never four or five people in a room like so many families have to bear with, you know.
Speaker 1: So that's Central State in Ohio.
Speaker 2: That's Central State in Ohio, Wilberforce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my background in terms of education went from Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] Central State, Illinois State [University, Normal, Illinois], I studied in Africa, that's where they bestowed upon me a doctor's degree from the University of Ibadan.  I'm sorry, I stayed at the University of (unclear) from the University of Ife, I-F-E, Ife in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But Central State first.
Speaker 2: Central State.
Speaker 1: A historically black college.
Speaker 2: Kent State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Illinois State.  I took correspondence courses like at in Boston [Massachusetts] that I've never been to the school there; we just sent stuff back and forth.  I took the famous artists class, courses when I was coming out of high school going into college.
Speaker 1: Now are your parents [Augustine Washington Parker and David Parker] supporting you as you go through the various art schools, or--
Speaker 2: All the way through, all the way through.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was there, I was--couldn't call myself their favorite son, but I was a favorite.
Speaker 1: Were there ever any concerns about you being a starving artist?
Speaker 2: All the time, yeah that's what I wanted to do.  That's a good question.  That's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to go to New York and hang out and do artwork.  And a wise man set me down and said son, you need to go and get some education so you can teach it.  If you can't make money at your paintings, you can teach and make money that way.  And that wise man was my father [David Parker].  So, so glad he said that, you know to get educated.  Because it takes a little bit more effort, but you can always substitute if you don't wanna teach or if you have one of those hunger pains, you know you can go substitute.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're coming to the end of this segment.  So we're gonna close out our discussion on education.  But I wondered if you could just talk a little bit about that experience in Nigeria at Ife.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: What was the nature of the study there?  Was it still formal classroom study?
Speaker 2: More than that.  It was about work effort and a lot of work effort.  And in fact, my work as like if I could use the word superlative or great.  They even gave me a name that kind of meant that.  That name was Ikelabe Ikande (ph.), which meant somebody special.  Which is special to me.
Speaker 1: All right.  Professor Parker then we're gonna end this segment on that note and we'll pick up with the discussion of that experience in West Africa.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 97721
Speaker 1: We were talking at the end of the last segment about your experiences in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I wanna stay with that theme of education for life.  You said they, they bestowed honors on you and made you feel that you were really special, special part of that community.  Can you talk a little bit more about that?  Were you tutored by a master artist or, or how did they see what talent you had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was tutored by Demus Nowolko (ph.), but he was an artist in Ibadan [Nigeria] and I took, not--well it's strange to say, but even though I learned a lot about life and creativity, I think my skills a little bit better than his.  I learned how to use what's around you.  You know like he had people made bricks.  He had his own water treatment system where like he would collect water when it rained, during the rainy season and had it filtered down to his drinking water or to his shower water.  Those kind of things.  And if you look around this complex, I tried to emulate, tried to copy some of the things he did.  And you know traditionally years ago, sculptors were architects, and architects were sculptors, so I don't--I didn't mind building in this facility.  As an example, this facility here Snickerfritz where we're sitting, was empty 17 years.  Then along came a artist, crazy so to speak, or at least they called me crazy then.  They're not calling me crazy now.  But to turn this kind of thing around.  And I think that's what it took, someone that had architectural ability and didn't mind--well see I looked at this as a great big sculptor anyway and just coming here and started working on it.  So we've been working on this building for 21 years.  But Africa--nothing like it.  I mean the flowers that you see here grows ten times higher there.  Everything is just more plentiful.  The last vast, the greens are greener, the reds are redder, so to speak.  Can't say enough about Africa.  So a lot of cultural shocks too.  But can't say enough.  And the question is would I go back?  Yes.  Would I live there or could I live there?  Probably no.  Only because it's so far away for me.  And I'm, you know I wanna see my friends, you know.  When you go there you have to divorce everything and start all over.
Speaker 1: How long were you in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two different times.  One month one time, six months another time.  I won a competition to go to Africa.  Couldn't go because I went to Mexico (unclear).  And you know as an artist, or if one wants to become an artist, I would suggest that they learn the three R's as I mentioned before because you can always apply for different kind of grants.  And then as people give you things, you should know how to write a thank you note.  So the three R's are so important.  Three R's by the way, reading, writing and arithmetic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97722
Speaker 1: All right so once your formal education is complete, you have a chance to apply the knowledge that you've acquired.  The sculpting and the three R's.  So can you tell me about your experiences as an educator now you've learned from all these other great teachers?  Where are you when you begin to teach other students?
Speaker 2: I, you know I think teaching is, is, is so important.  Number one thing in terms of importance.  I mean the, the teacher because things that you say could impact the student for the rest of their lives.  I mean when I was a stutterer (unclear), I had one teacher tell me and, and you remember Weekly Readers, that kind of thing?  I think we did that in social studies, I don't think it was in English.  And I had a teacher tell me anyway sit down 'cause you can't read no way.  I was trying to collect my energies and thoughts.  I had difficulties with words, you know like took a lot of wind like W's and D's, like do you want or what are you saying, those kind of things.  And this woman told me to sit down 'cause I couldn't read anyway.  And those the kind of things that for me that made me stronger; to fight harder, or to go out and beat up somebody, you know what I mean?  Payback so to speak.  But education is so important.  And when I started teaching, my first teaching job was teaching the non-educable, the people that were not supposed to be able to learn, people who couldn't talk.  And I'm here to tell you out of my 12 students, all of them learned their ABC's, even the ones couldn't talk.  When I say who wants to say their ABC's?  They would stay up and run--stand up and grunted, you know, 'cause they were so into.  I taught 'em how to count by shooting dice or crap as it were.  Because I bet you didn't know that if you throw some dice out and it has seven, what would be on the bottom side?  So if you have a one on the top side, what's on the bottom side?  Those are the kind of things I taught them through counting.  So if you have a one on the top side, you have a six on the bottom side.  If you have a two, you have a five.  It all adds up to seven.  So that's how I got them to count.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is this in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: This is in Toledo [Ohio].
Speaker 1: In Toledo.
Speaker 2: At, Larklane or Heffner.  I was a teacher at Heffner school for retarded kids.  And did that for a year and, and incidentally you know the, the whole thing is kind of backwards.  I remember applying for a job in Toledo teaching in the Toledo public schools.  And the man that were interviewing me, said we'll hire you if you cut off your beard and mustache.  And for the life of me I couldn't understand that.  So I had to, you know, being, being a hot--I was a hot rebel, so to speak, I said if you--if I cut off my moustache, it be like taking the Negro National Anthem away from me.  You know so I lost that job 'cause I refused to cut off my beard and moustache.  And start teaching retarded kids, which enabled me to have more patience anyway.  So when I started teaching.  But I did that for a year, teach at--taught at Heffner school for retarded kids, which is a great experience because like I said, it taught me a lot of patience and when I started at regular school situation, had all the patience of Job.  So whatever they did, it was all right.  But one thing I always remember doing in my early teaching career was getting my rest.  Because I said I have to be rested to go into--my first teaching job in Cleveland was at Audobon Junior High.  To go into Audobon and to teach these kids you had to be rested because any time you're teaching 30, 35 kids--overcrowded, you know way overcrowded, you, you got all these different personalities and all these different kind of issues.  So the best I could do was to be well rested.  And in fact my student and I had such a great rapport, is that I would tell them don't bring no nonsense in here 'cause if you come in here tired, I would rather you lay your head down and go to sleep.  'Cause if I come in here tired, I wanna be able to do the same thing and I want class to go on as normal, and it did.  'Cause I would do it on purpose sometime, go in there and just lay my head down.  And somebody would take over the class, we just have a beautiful time.
Speaker 1: Now this is in the 1960s by the time you're teaching in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: No, this was in-- I graduated, when did I graduate, '65 (1965).  This was '66 (1966), '67 (1967).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay so 1966, '67 (1967) is the, the start of your teaching career in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: At Audobon in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: In the public schools.
Story_ID: 97723
Speaker 1: There's an important year in history.  I'm thinking that's the year of Black Panthers and Carl Stokes is mayor.
Speaker 2: All of those, all of those things, all of those.
Speaker 1: And here you are the rebel art teacher.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In a middle school in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to teach--I used to sit up on the file cabinet.  I be the tallest thing in the room, you know, and teach from that.  And I remember the assistant principal came by and said "what are you doing?"  I said "I'm teaching".  He said "carry on".  Because we wasn't--you know we used to win all of the dental poster contests and the AAA poster contests and all that kind of thing.  And then with my rebel self again, I remember my supervising teacher, rest his soul, who's a man I grew to love, Mr. James Batey (ph.).  Not a mentor of mine, but just a good friend.  I remember when it came time for evaluation and he's supposed to evaluate me.  And I went to the principal who was like my surrogate father, who told me that going back to school and get your master's.  Clayton, Mr. Leo Clayton.  I went to him and said I'm not trying to be difficult or anything, but it seems to me I should be evaluating him.  I'm the one winning all this stuff.  So next year they made me department chairman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're moving up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The ladder of success.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In the Cleveland public schools.
Speaker 2: And I always felt that as you're moving up the ladder, be careful who you walk on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you might have to come back down that ladder some day and you'll cross those people again.
Speaker 1: Did you have that experience?
Speaker 2: I always been fair to people.
Story_ID: 97724
Speaker 1: You know, I wonder with all that happening in, in America in the 1960s, did you find that that was a good inspiration for art projects in the class?  Were you able to, to mix the history and the politics with the, the art classes?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  But in terms of my own work, if I had made any mistakes, that's what it was because during that time you mentioned you know all the black movements in terms of Carl Stokes and the H. Rap Browns [also known as Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and the Stokely Carmichaels [also known as Kwame Toure], I was in that kind of thing.  And so I had--think my work was a reflection of that, which I don't know if it was good or bad, but I mean as an example, way back in those days, they asked me to sit on the Art Council in Columbus [Ohio].  But I was too militant, you know what I mean?  I don't wanna sit on that.  And I don't know if that was good or bad, but maybe I might have been a different place if I had sat on that Art Council, you know what I mean?  Or I remember Ken Snipes used to be the director of Karamu [House], asked me to become artist in residence there.  I did it on a part-time basis.  Maybe I should have did it on a full-time basis.  I was so busy at the time I just didn't have time, you know that kind of thing.  So you kind of pick and choose your path.  And when you get to be older, you wonder if that was the right path, what would you have--would be without that path.  But as you can see, you know I've been blessed.  The Lord has really blessed me.  I mean there's a picture that I've been framing recently called "Footprints".  And this is where the Lord Jesus is carrying a person, so you only see one set of footprints.  I tell a similar story.  If you hear two people talking and you see one set of footprints, the footprints is his because I'm riding on his shoulder.  'Cause I ask for help all the time.  And I pray all day every day.
Speaker 1: Now I, I'm thinking about that, that invitation you had to serve on the Ohio Arts Council.  And the fact that you chose to turn it down.  Now that sounds like a high honor for a young artist to be asked to do that.  Was that because of the awards that the students were winning in the schools, or for your individual work?
Speaker 2: No, the awards the I was doing and the, yeah, the total thing.  And in fact I can remember the fellow who kind of took--I don't know, I shouldn't say took my place.  But the fellow who sat in that seat was Ben Davis that used to be the chairman of art at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, your alma mater.
Speaker 2: My alma mater.
Speaker 1: One of them, okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact there's another interesting story.  I wanted that job, or at least I thought I wanted that job.  And I went back to my advisor who was the--it's strange how people can direct your life without even knowing about your life or if it's gonna be good for your life or bad for your life.  I was--Wittenberg, you familiar with Wittenberg College [sic, University, Springfield, Ohio], not far from Central State?  They were gonna hire me there.  My supervising teacher wouldn't recommend me, and I'm gone tell you the reason--and he didn't recommend me for Central State 'cause I wanted to apply for that job.  What a better honor to graduate and become the chairman of the Art Department from where you graduated from?  He brought me into his office and said I'm not gonna recommend you for this job because I think you have--I think you're unique.  I want you to go to Cleveland [Ohio] or someplace else other than here, and just go as far as you possibly can go in the European world.  That was the black world, you see.  So I come up here and went as far as I can go in the European world.  And if I must pat myself on the back, I would say I don't think I did a bad job.  (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 1: Now how long did you work in the public schools and combine that with the studio work?
Speaker 2: All of my life.  You know the studio work was like a relief, you know.  Most people go to a eight hour job, come home and they're tired.  I went to an eight hour job, came home and went to my studio no matter how tired I was because I knew that was--would make me relaxed.  And I knew it was a different kind of tiredness.  So it wasn't a tiredness at all, it was a joy.  So I looked forward to doing that.  So after I got out of the classroom, I came home and did artwork.  I suffered in other ways, my social life, maybe with my kids and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 97725
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two lovely kids.
Speaker 1: Really, and what are their names?
Speaker 2: Micah Nahum is the guy's name. Those are two minor prophets in the Bible.  There's the--is my son's name.  And Unique Everette is my daughter's name.  My daughter's in--working on her master's degree at FAMU (Florida A and M University, Tallahassee, Florida).  And my son is at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] majoring in art.  Not education, but kind of piss me off, but in art.  Said he's trying to follow the family tree, you know.  He--and I told him to major in art education, but you know how kids are, he wants to be an artist.  Reverse of what my father told me, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I know Fisk is Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But FAMU--what does that stand for?  Is that Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Florida A and M, okay.  Just wanted to make sure.  Okay should I ask about marriage, or is that not a part of your history?
Speaker 2: Well you can ask.
Speaker 1: May I ask then about marriage?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Marriage kind of eluded me.  Even though I have two lovely kids, that kind of eluded me because for whatever reason, seemingly I could never find the right mate to fit the art.  You know I think marriage takes--and I guess that's a selfish statement, you know.  'Cause when you're married, you're married, you know, you--certain kinds of things you should do and expect to do.  But always in my life art has come first.  Good, bad or indifferent, that's the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no wife whose name has to be mentioned in this interview.
Speaker 2: No, there's no wife, but I hope it's not too late.
Speaker 1: Okay, for the women who are watching.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  I still liked to be married, I still think that I have a lot to offer.  I mean I try to offer everything that I can to my kids and I've never been considered a downbeat dad so to speak.  I've always taken care of my obligation.  Schools are expensive, by the way, sending kids to school.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know where the money comes from.
Speaker 1: But it comes.
Speaker 2: It comes.
Speaker 1: I'm sure they're very grateful.
Speaker 2: I hope.
Story_ID: 97726
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know I'm just a little curious about when you made that transition from teaching in the middle school to teaching at the college level 'cause I know eventually you were tenured at Cuyahoga Community College.  But can you talk about making that change?
Speaker 2: It's about, it's about growth in life.  You know I was taught that you can do anything that you wanted to do as long as you could suffer the consequences.  So it was about growth.  Not only did you do--I mean not only do you supposed to go to school and get you a good job, but you shouldn't just settle for that good job.  You should try to get another good job and another good job.  And I came around to the right time because I was very prolific in my work and that's what they were looking for.  I came around during the '60s (1960s) affirmative action.  You know I can remember when they hired me I was wearing leathers and suede and earrings.  You know incidentally, I was one of the first people that I can remember having a earring hanging out of his ear 40 years ago.  So I can remember when they were introducing people at Cuyahoga Community College.  And I got--when the man said we looked far, wide and long but we couldn't find anybody that came up to this person's potential and his work ethic.  So they hired me for that job with these--I wouldn't do it now for whatever reason.  Buckskins, you know leathers and suedes and earrings hanging.  But I know that I was one heck of a worker and I know I was one heck of a schoolteacher, and I knew that from my past experiences being a stutterer, and who had to go through all these kinds of things to get to where I am, that I couldn't and would do much a better job than what was done to me in a lot of instances.  Because every time there was something bad, there was something good.  You know when some of the teachers said you can't read, another teacher said you gone go far, you know.
Story_ID: 97727
Speaker 1: You know when I think about your work, I usually think that the clown sculptures are probably signature pieces for you.  You think that's a fair assessment of--
Speaker 2: I think that's a fair assessment through no fault of my own.  I think, you know I was looking to do something different than what I had been doing when the clown series were born.  And in fact my clown series was born in New York in Spanish Harlem.  I was in an apartment there kind of babysitting when, you know, the person there was in another country somewhere.  But this clown series evolved.  And it evolved from when I was in Africa singing the Egungun Festival, which was a festival of re-celebration and a festival of rebirth.  And when they do--when they did these--this festival, they would dress up like clowns and they were--they would play a game by whipping each other below the knees and they would dance and have fun and I remember as a kid we played a game similar called Hide the Belt.  Can you imagine a bunch of fellas getting together and hiding the belt, and whoever found the belt, can whip you back across the line, underneath the legs.  So that was like a deja vu kind of thing when I saw this.  But the clowns have been very successful.  I consider myself a theme artist, so you know not only did I did the theme of the clowns, I did Chicken George Revisited.  I did Africa on the Moon and many, many, many more things.  Malcolm X, that whole thing.
Story_ID: 97728
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mr. Parker I had asked earlier about your teaching, especially in the 1960's and whether or not all of the social and political changes of that era provided material that was inspirational as far as the, the classroom activities were concerned.  And you said to a certain extent, it did.  Would you comment on that further?
Speaker 2: I want you to state that question again.
Speaker 1: Just with all of the social and political changes in the 1960s, the rise of the Black Panther party, the Civil Rights Movement.  In Cleveland [Ohio] we have our--the first black mayor in Carl Stokes elected, being elected to office in 1967.  Were any of those activities reflected in either your personal artwork of that era, or in the projects that your students produced?
Speaker 2: Well perhaps more in my personal thing, but not in my students' activity 'cause I wouldn't wanna put that on such young minds, so to speak.  But in my personal thing, I think it did.  I mean artists, artists are image makers, you know.  You know, you know I've always felt that an artist could make somebody happy or sad 'cause we are image makers.  I think artists could be good politicians too.  I think that because they're sensitive, you know and I think they're in tune to the spirit world, you know.  If you can get at to what I'm trying to relate to.  You have to be very sensitive to be a good artist.  You have to be very spiritual to be a good artist.  How can you paint something, a masterpiece, or how can you do something like that, you know.  You have to be led to do that.  So therefore, you gotta be a spiritual person, you know 'cause after all, you heard of the term the potter's hands?  Right.  So I mean to me--for me to deal with what the potter's hands did, have to be a very spiritual hookup.  Because sometimes I could be making apiece and it'll look like somebody's taken over.  And the last thing I do in my piece is to blow air into the mouth.  Let it live, let it breath.  Each piece is a new and devastating thing to be taken care of individually.  Like a doctor would bore a new kid, let it live.  So each of my piece, I try to make it breathe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you influenced at all by the Black Arts Movement and the, the leaders of the movement are saying that art should be created by black people for black people.
Speaker 2: That's, that's hogwash.  You know I had, I had a, a--somebody come in here a couple of years ago and a friend of mine passed.  And when I was at the funeral across the street, this young fella came up and said he was a Moor and he said my art was Asian, which was kind of confusing to me.  I don't know what is, what is Asian art as opposed to black art or as opposed to European art?  So my response to him was my art is Ed Parker.  You don't have no Asian on it.  You know what I mean?  I do what I call, what I think is art that reflects the growth of my people and my people.  I mean I can paint the blue boy, I can paint landscapes just as good as anybody.  But if somebody don't stand up and direct--to direct the course of black art, it will never direct a course, if that makes any sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I'm gonna do this if I live.
Speaker 1: In most of your artwork that I'm familiar with, is very clearly there's an African American influence that can be detected.
Speaker 2: And that's what I like the fact.  I like the fact that my work is taking something that's up-to-date and fusing history with it some kind of way. Okay.
Speaker 1: There's a piece that I'm working on now that I've been thinking about for the last seven years.  Seven years ago a lady came here and got her dreadlocks cut off.  So I kept the dreadlock and I've always wanted to do a piece and add the dreadlocks to it, so now I've finally done that.  So that's one of my latest pieces that I'm working on.
Speaker 2: So this is mixed media, hair--
Speaker 1: Mixed media.
Speaker 2: And what else.
Speaker 1: Your hair and clay.
Speaker 2: Hair and clay.
Speaker 1: That I've--that I blew breath into.  That I blew breath into.  No, I don't get hung up and I try not to get hung up and say cliches or movements.  I'm gone do art for the sake of my people, you know.
Story_ID: 97729
Speaker 1: You know you've done some I think radically different kinds of pieces.  Both of the series that I have in mind reflect the African American experience, but from different vantage points.  If we talk about the clowns for a minute, 'cause I know people can see images of those on the website.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But sometimes when I look at those, they're almost like minstrel images.
Speaker 2: See I can't comment about that.  'Cause you know it wasn't directed to be, you know.  Like the clown series--my father used to call--you know I kind of attribute my clown series to him.  I mentioned that I was a theme artist.  So I kind of mentioned--kind of give him credit for that because he used to refer to people when they got out of place as a clown.  Look at that clown.  You know what I mean?  So when I went to Africa and saw that, I gave the, the theme or the title was called "Stories that my Father Told of me of Clowns, Buffoons and Court Jesters."  So that was at tribute to him.  And he used to call--not only did he use the word clowns, he would always call people Jabbo.  So I remember that and did a piece called "Jabbo the Master Mangalionist (ph.)."  So it had nothing to do--it has more to do with something that he said on this particular theme, than what I read or heard or some political movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In other words, trying to give credence to my people, my father, you know so he can be remembered forever.
Speaker 1: And well again I think a lot about that series.  But also the one that you did on Malcolm X, both the, the, the pencil drawings and the, and the bust of Malcolm X.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called--that series was called "The X Factor".  And in fact when the movie started, we had prints in the movies, that was very successful for me--to--and that's what an artist has to do or be a chance taker, you know.  And maybe in the back of my mind that's the reason why I never took on a wife because she would have to be a very flexible kind of wife.  A non-traditionalist because I'm gone do art, you know, I'm gone love her, but I'm gone do art first and love her second.  And I know women don't like that too well.  They wanna be loved first and art second.  So that's the difficulty I had, and but, but, but, but I hope that I'm gone go through this life again like I mentioned before, without being married.
Speaker 1: Now what was it about Malcolm X that attracted you to his, to his life's work?
Speaker 2: 'Cause he believed in by any means necessary.  And that's what you gotta do in this art.  Do it by any means necessary.  That's what you have to do in life, by any means necessary.  If you hit me, I'm gone hit you back, so to speak.
Speaker 1: So do whatever you have to do to survive, to prosper?
Speaker 2: You gotta do.
Speaker 1: It's just--okay.
Speaker 2: By any means necessary.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: If that's what you wanna do.  By any means necessary.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now you mentioned the, the Malcolm X film.  Are you referring to the Spike Lee movie?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now how did that figure into that--the series on--of artworks that you produced?
Speaker 2: Well I try to catch things before they kind of happen.  So if you know anything that's coming two years from today, let me know and I'll do a series on it.  Like "Chicken George Revisited".  I knew that the movie was coming.  So you know, way ahead of its time, you know.  You know kind of knew that movie was in the works. So you say hey, Malcolm X is a historical figure.  I do historical things.  So let me do 15, 20 pieces on him.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was before the Spike Lee film came out or about--
Speaker 2: It was, it was like during the--
Speaker 1: Same time.
Speaker 2: Before, during the same time and after.
Story_ID: 97730
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was that show that you hosted here at, at Snickerfritz [Art Gallery] or with a tour?
Speaker 2: That show has been several places, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Throughout Ohio or--
Speaker 2: Fortunately I could have a show when I get ready, fortunately.  I mean I, I don't have any--and, and.  And that's what an artist has to do, you know this past year I looked at different venues to have shows.  As an example, I've been a--what is it called--a stockholder of Merrill Lynch for years.  So I go to Merrill Lynch and say hey, you know I been a stockholder of you for years, giving you all this money.  Why don't you give me an art show?  Oh, I'd love to do that.  So that's a new venue.  So I've shown at Merrill Lynch this year, I've shown at Key Bank this year.  I do a lot of one man--I mean one, one day shows.  I do lot of work for Colin Post when they have events, I have as how there.  Very successful shows.  I've shown at East Cleveland Theater [Cleveland, Ohio].  And in fact I'm sort of the art director at East Cleveland Theater, non gratis of course, you know.  But I still bring other artists in to show their work there.
Story_ID: 97731
Speaker 1: Okay, all right I'm wondering about your vision as an artist.  You mentioned if I know something's coming up two years from now, let you know and you'll do a series.  But I'm wondering if there's anything that you have in mind right now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That you'd like to put together and share with the world.
Speaker 2: Well what I'm doing right now in terms--I'm gone work every day.  But what I'm doing in terms of what I want to do is so much bigger than artwork and it's so much bigger than Ed Parker, and that is putting together a edifice similar to what I have here in a warm climate.  So as we speak, we're doing architectural drawings on a winter home that will be similar to this space here.  This is 19,000 square feet in this space so we'll not only have in this new--these new drawings series, not only will we have a living space for me and a gallery space.  There will also be an apartment for visitors.  And I'm looking at either a place called Fernandina Beach, Florida, or New Mexico.  And I'm leaning more so to New Mexico because I understand that seven to one there, for every one American dollars, you get seven pesos, so to speak.  So if a brother took 100,000 over there, he could live forever real well.  Know what I mean?  So at seven times one, I mean seven to every one dollar of American money.
Speaker 1: In Mexico.
Speaker 2: So that's what I'm doing, is to do a--something that will be bigger than just a piece of artwork or something that will be bigger than Ed Parker or anything like that.  As an example, I'm, I'm, I'm gearing up for a fundraiser in August to open up my sculptor yard, sculptor and parking lot area, which is in the back.  And what I wanna do with the proceeds of that money is to do a search, a national search and bring in about top--bring in about eight to ten top artists high school age, and bring them here and put them up in my bed and breakfast, of course.  And to have two weeks of concentrated study.  And after two weeks, we will work from sunup to sundown like nine to nine, after two weeks, have a show.  And we will house them here, feed them here, field trips here and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's much bigger than Ed Parker, don't you think?
Speaker 1: Sounds like it.
Speaker 2: Right.  Especially if you're reaching out for the top, say ten students in the country to bring them here and to house them for two weeks of nothing but art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Art, art, art.
Speaker 1: So you haven't really retired from teaching.
Speaker 2: Not really.  We teach here in my studio downstairs, which at one time I was an off-campus site for Tri-C [Cuyahoga Community College] and I imagine that I still am.  I don't know if you ever can become an off-campus site, then they have that campus.  But I used to have students come here.  Very blessed; whatever Tri-C did for them, for their own school, they did for me.  And I always looked at, you know, they have a metro campus, a western campus, an eastern campus, why not have a campus in East Cleveland which would have been the fourth campus.  And we almost--we, we, we brought that to fruition because they used to have registration here, you know.  I remember hiring six teachers about all of that, so that was a good time in my life, right.  So that kind of thing.  That off-campus thing.  I would want to revisit that if I can ever get the right director here at Snickerfritz to have students in the 11th grade, 12th grade, take classes in I guess what would be absentia so that when they went to college, they could transfer those credits there.
Story_ID: 97732
Speaker 1: Now when did you make this connection between the real estate and the art?  That you have your own gallery space and the studio [Snickerfritz].
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Years and years ago my father kind of started me on that.  He was a young entrepreneur, he bought several properties.  And, and, and looking at how--what he did, made me know what not to do, so to speak.  And one thing was not to do was never rent to your relatives or people who knew you.  You know what I mean?  So--and I knew that that was a way that I could grow and have money.  Because sometimes--I've got pieces now that I've had for 20 years.  I mean I've sold pieces that at one time I wanted, say 50 dollars for and sold 'em for 500 after 20 years, 'cause I go up every year, so to speak.  But the growth and development.  I remember put--putting my first wooden floor in at the age of 13 or 14 years old when my father was buying houses and he would buy a gym floor and I'd go you know, get the wood--we'd go get the wood and we'd put it all in the house and stuff.  And I learned how to do that because I wanted to go out and play, so I would do my part and go out and play before he got home at five.  'Cause we ate dinner as a family every day at five.  I look at it as you plant a seed and it--you plant that seed and it blossoms, bloom and bear fruit, and that's what this did.  When I first came in here 21 years ago, people laughed.  But I've been beating up on this building for 21 years.  So now here it is in its glory and we've done everything in here from having--from wedding receptions to movies to bereavement hour.
Speaker 1: And about--the connection between real estate and art.
Speaker 2: Well real estate--are we ready?
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 2: Real estate, real estate will definitely pay the bills when your artwork is not selling.  So that was my look at it.  In terms--you know my father has always had houses.  I've always grew up among--with my dad and remodeling these houses 'cause he had two or three coming through, coming up.  So I knew that if I could buy a property, or buy a property, that I would always have income.  And in my life it's about cash flow, not about being rich, it's about having money to do what you wanna do, just cash flow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is this the first gallery space that you owned?
Speaker 2: No, I had a gallery space--my first gallery space was of course in my mother's [Augustine Washington Parker] living room.  But my, my, my own personal gall--first gallery space is at--on 125th Street in the Buckeye area.  Which I took a condemned building and I lecture about this too, took a condemned building and transposed it into an art house.  I lived on the third floor, had a gallery of my own work on the second floor, first floor was for visiting artists and the lower level--I use the word lower level rather than basement, was where my gallery--I mean where my studio space was.
Story_ID: 97733
Speaker 1: You talked about some point in the future perhaps having a, a second location in Florida or Mexico.  But I'm wondering where people can go to see your art outside of northeast Ohio.  Do you have commission works in other areas?
Speaker 2: I got works all over from here again, Florida Memorial College [sic, University, Miami Gardens, Florida] was a big commission.  I did the Johnson Brothers, James Weldon and Rosamond Johnson, the authors of "Lift Every Voice and Sing".  That was a--but I got work in California, in New York, Florida, all over.  But first--I oftentimes remember the first piece I sold.  I copied a piece, my--Augusta Savage.  She did a piece called "Gangman".  Which is a little boy with a hat on, a corn hat similar to the one I'm wearing.  I remember doing that piece and somebody bought it from out of Buffalo.  So that's Buffalo, New York.  I have a piece that a lawyer bought, one of my first pieces in Toledo [Ohio], who happened to have been my lawyer, he bought a piece.  Joe Cannon in fact is his name.  So I got work all over, everywhere.  Even before I knew that I could even make money in art, I was doing portraits.  I remember doing an oil portrait for about 13, 25 dollars or something, of this married couple.  So it's been art, art, art, art.  And fortunately, here it is.
Speaker 1: Now do you handle your own sales for your work, are you represented by other galleries?
Speaker 2: I've done some of that too.  But right now I handle my own, own.  I've had--had a lady out of Chicago [Illinois] who used to buy--I do a little miniature clown painting, a Constantine (ph.).  I know I've done over 500 of 'em, 600 of 'em.  She used to buy every one that I could make.
Speaker 1: Are you still producing those, the clowns?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they're all African American themed.
Speaker 2: All African American, all different.  Look like one of a kind.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now folks can still get information on the, the work that you're currently producing by way of the website?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's under www.edwardparkermasterartist.com.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97734
Speaker 1: You know I, I wonder at this point in your career do you have a philosophy of life?  You know a motto that would really describe, you know what you see yourself doing as an artist?
Speaker 2: I certainly couldn't say it in a word.  I've written statements, artist's statements that is kind of significant.  I, that I, you know when you go to graduate school you have to write these things and I still kind of hold true to those that I've written then.  But it's just that's it's just more than a word.  And I think I can clearly say that I'm no longer my white brother's keeper.
Speaker 1: And what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: The poor art, poor is a thing of the past.  The catchword today is to do art for the sake of my people.
Speaker 1: For African American people, okay.  You know I--if, if that then is to be your legacy, to, to the students or something that you would pass on to them.
Speaker 2: Well, well, well see I, I still strongly feel that--you know what I wrote in '71 (1971), and it's in the gallery area, still kind of holds strong to my beliefs.  But if, if, if I were to sum it up in a couple of words, it would be just to maintain the energy that, that had been brought up to this point, to continue the energy.  I went into sculpting because I felt that it was a place to do historical black people, like in the cultural gardens.  And I've been blessed to have a piece over there, a couple of pieces.  One of the pieces was even stolen from over there.  John Patterson Green, you know.  You remember Booker Tall years ago who was one of my mentors.  He wasn't an artist, but he's still a good brother.  We did John Patterson Green for the cultural gardens years ago; it's no longer there.  I got Booker T. Washington over there now done in stone, and that's in American gardens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97735
Speaker 1: You know you, you mention Augusta Savage as one of the African American artists who, whose work you copied.  And they say that kind of imitation is the sincerest form of flattery.  So I assume you thought that was a, a beautiful piece if you thought it worthy of your attention.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But since you've done so much to each other students, I wonder if there are any other African American artists who really influenced your work.
Speaker 2: All of 'em.
Speaker 1: All of them.  But any in particular.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Especially, especially sculptors.  I think she had a great influence, but not as much as Richmond Barthe, or Barthe.  He was a heck of a sculptor.  But--and, and, and I met him, and I met Augusta Savage.  I'm at a good age, so to speak.  And I met Romare Bearden and Huey Lee Smith and all of those people who had been there before me who have laid the groundwork for me.  It's something to meet these people who have got some acclaim.  And I met people who were very good who never got acclaim like Hugh Moore that you probably have never heard of.  But Hugh Moore sent six kids to college.  Hugh Moore used to be the janitor at the Museum of Art.  Hugh Moore used to win all of the May shows, you understand.  Hugh Moore was the one who Sherman Lee said you ain't got no business doing art, you a janitor.  Can you imagine?
Speaker 1: This is all at the Cleveland Museum of Art.
Speaker 2: At the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio].  And there's stories like that all over.  The same guy that I mentioned to you about being my mentor who was my supervising art teacher.  He was the first black graduate of the art school, Cleveland Art School.  And I asked him, he told me his first--guess what his first job was after he graduated from the art school?  Being the first black.  His job was to sweep down the Art Museum's steps.  And when he told me that it brought tears in my eyes and I told him Mr. Batey, I couldn't have done that.  So it's about time, you know.  I'm the kind of guy that would take his basketball and go home, and I've done that.  I've had art shows and it didn't go right, I take all my art out of there and take it home.
Speaker 1: I know I, I'm not sure if I met this artist here, but I know I saw the two of you together at the Cleveland Museum of Art, Charles Salle.  And used to speak highly of his work.
Speaker 2: Beautiful man.  Yeah beautiful man, I mean--
Speaker 1: Now what was it about his work that, that you found so, so attractive?
Speaker 2: He was a chance taker.  Not only was he a fine artist, he broke off from that and start becoming an interior designer.  Charles Salle is one of the very few people that took a piece of my art and did a whole room around it.  You know that's what they say, they say you buy the art first and decorate around the art.  And for a doctor, he did a lamp that I had done and decorated a whole room around it.  And incidentally, you know he's still alive.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Charles Salle is the poster impressionist, which is a history in itself I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  When I, when I think about these eras, especially in recent art history, say the 1920s, Harlem Renaissance, and then--
Speaker 2: Even in the '20s (1920s), and even--let me get my mind together.  You take people like Robert Duncanson, Edward Bannister, that's early 1900s.  Believe it or not, Robert Duncanson in 1908, somewhere around then, had 8,000 dollars in the bank and a house.  Can you imagine?  Doing art.  But years ago artist to make it, they had to go overseas, Europe somewhere.  But you couldn't find a better romantic painter than Edward Bannister or Robert Duncanson.  Those people from Ohio around 1920, they had a slew of artists all around the Karamu.  We need to do a book on those people, like some of their names escapes me, but Huey Lee Smith was around that era.  Doug Phillips was around that era, who's a stained glass man was around that era.  Charles Salle was around that era.  And a couple of others that I--their name escapes me, but I do lecture about them occasionally.  There was a man, black artist who did the Woman's City Club mural.  Is that mural still there?  You been in Woman's City Club recently?
Speaker 1: Not recently.
Speaker 2: They had talked about moving it.  But he did the, the, the wall in, in there years ago.  So there's always been some hitting and missing.  I'm just sorry that black art is not recognized like it should be because if I might quote--see Europeans think that black art should be no black art.  And if it wasn't for people like Picasso and George Brock, African art would still be in somebody's basements.  And in fact if you go to Washington, DC at the Frederick Douglass Museum, I think that's on A and First Street, something like that, you can see actually they have a room where actually Picasso plagiarized works from the Dahomey tribe and etc.  And they have a room where he actually piece and his actually emulation of that piece.  I don't have anything wrong with copying.  In fact I do have something wrong--but I have a feeling of this being wrong to copy from one person.  Because if you copy from one person, it's plagiarism.  If you copy from more than one, which I tried to do, it's called research.
Story_ID: 97736
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know when I again talk about the various eras in our history, the Ren--if the Renaissance is the '20s (1920s) and the '30s (1930s) and the black arts movement '60s (1960s) and the '70s (1970s), where are we now?  At the beginning of the 21st century.  What era is this?
Speaker 2: I don't know what kind of era it is, I think that we're no better off than we've ever been in a lot of ways.  In a lot of ways we are.  I don't know if you can actually put a name on what we're doing.  I think black art is doing better than it's ever done before.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 96387
Speaker 1: So you have the gallery space here at Snickerfritz, other real estate holdings include the bed and breakfast which you mentioned.  And now you talk a little bit about the fire.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that--
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  'Cause it's a--I can imagine you know, you're producing these one of a kind pieces and then you have something like a fire come through.
Speaker 2: Devastating.  I don't wish that on anybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you lose artwork in that?
Speaker 2: Artwork, clothes, some all--my father [David Parker] gave me and he didn't believe in giving up anything if you didn't earn it.  He gave me a horsehair coat, gorgeous.  I lost that in the fire and cried.  Yeah.  But the fire was devastating.  I had to jump out that third floor window over there to the second floor roof.  Yeah.  I don't wish a fire on anybody.
Story_ID: 96388
Speaker 1: So Mr. Parker do you have a, a resume?  Is that what they call it?  You have a listing of all of the works that you produced and--
Speaker 2: Over the years I've put that together, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you know where all your pieces are, who you sold them to and who the new owners--
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  No, no, no.  I didn't, I didn't do that right away, so all that--I didn't know to do that.  But that's been gone.  But over the last ten years, yes.  And in my short life, I know that I have documented maybe 2,000 pieces.  And I know that I've done 3,000 in my short life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right I'm, I'm looking around the gallery now at some of the pieces and I hope maybe we can get some photographs too before we finish up here today.  But since this is your story and you are the history maker, I don't wanna wrap up the interview until I've made certain that you've said everything that you wanted to say about your life as an artist.  There any special words of wisdom you would share?
Speaker 2: All I need to do is live.  The best is yet to come.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I thank you very much for allowing us to come in today.
Speaker 2: Thank you for having me.
Speaker 1: And maybe we'll pause for a minute and gather the pictures.  And then talk about some of those.
Speaker 2: You know, you know, you know this is a very humbling experience to be chose to be a part of this beautiful thing that you're doing.  And I wanna thank you personally.
Speaker 1: All right.  Again we thank you for opening your gallery to us today.
Story_ID: 96389
Speaker 1: Sixty, let me think, let me get my think here.  When did this--I got all the names somewhere back there and couldn't find 'em.  I know it's back there.  This was in '66 (1966), '68 (1968).  Yeah, this was--should I start talking?
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is--all right this is my homeroom class at Audubon Junior High, Audubon was named after the taxidermist John James Audubon out of New Orleans [Louisiana].  Oftentimes have difficulty with that.  You might have known, know, known that--but he was a black man, the taxidermist.  And it's interesting that he had a museum in New Orleans and black folks couldn't go to it.  And I thought that was interesting.  But any rate, this is my homeroom class and I do recognize some of the people.  And some of--yeah far out, yeah.  This is me as in '68 (1968) I believe, and the fellow that you see right next to me is Allen Poe, who's a very fine artist, lost contact.  And there's a fellow way up here in the corner, the corner to your far left, Willie Barner, who is a ex-art student of mine.  I even helped him go to Tri-C [Cuyahoga Community College] to further his career.  Now he went to the Art Institute.  It took him 25 years to get out of the Art Institute.  And I remember him inviting me to his show, his senior show and I cried because it took so long.  It was so interesting that he's never given up.  And he just recently got a master's in art from somewhere in Scottsdale, Arizona.  I remember Elliott Ness, the gentleman there.  I remember Susan, yeah that's Elliott.  He was a Section One student as I mentioned before.  And Susan Pavolich, which is lady there.  And I remember Barbara Gardner, this lady there.  And remember these faces, but I can't remember some of these students' name.  But very good class as you can tell.  Everybody is just standing up there so proud.  I like to mention this lady's name--I can't remember her name, but she's a jazz, she plays guitar for a group around here.  She plays with Linda Thomas Jones who is a very prolific African drummer.  She plays guitar for her.  Over the years I've seen one or two of these students.  Good days, good days and happy days.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This particular picture here was back in my modeling days.  Believe it or not when I was 50 pounds lighter, I used to model for a lot of different magazines.  These pictures were taken here for underground magazines like "Rampart" if I remember correctly.  And that's me as a revolutionary there.  What's in the background, it says "Prepare to meet they doom".  It's somewhat crazy because you see a preacher here, a wild preacher, and you see a bigot here holding a beer.  So when it says "prepare to meet thy doom", which way are you going?  You going the religious way or you going the bigot way or the revolutionary?  And that's me with the Castro-looking hat on and the stoke.
Speaker 2: This here is with a very well recognized piece, Chicken George.  As I mentioned earlier, I tried to do things that--before their time.  I heard that the movie "Chicken George" was being made, so I decided to do a series of drawings in the culture of Chicken George.  This is a good time.  This piece was unveiled in Columbus and, and, and--we're with Ben Vereen there, the person that you see standing on my immediate left.  He performed there and this piece was unveiled in front of a couple thousand people, which was a very good time.  And in fact he wanted to buy it.  But one day I was here wondering what I was going to do and the phone rang and it was someone said "Hello Brother Parker?"  I said yes.  He said "this is Alex Haley".  I said "far out".  He said "not really".  And he was so impressed with the work I was doing, he wanted to do things with my work with Norman Lear and himself.  And as you know, he soon passed, he passed right after that so it never became--we never did this.  But the memory lingers on.  And in fact he was so impressed with my work, he sent me his resume.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's from--
Speaker 2: The "Root" series.
Speaker 1: "Roots", okay.
Speaker 2: It was called "Chicken George Revisited".  And this piece was done in '78 (1978).  I remember that because we had such a bad winter that winter.  For Red Flower.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: But it is, it's at the zoo.  This, this piece here is of my daughter when she was about every bit of eight or nine with her best girlfriend at the time, Brandy Hicks.  This particular picture was taken at Cleveland Zoo.  And it was on the day--you know as an artist, I try to go to places like these at least four times a year.  Not only do I go to the zoo, I try to go to Lakeview Cemetery, which is an excellent cemetery for artists to go.  They have monumental sculptors there, reliefs, etc.
Speaker 1: Now which one is Unique?
Speaker 2: Unique is on my immediate left.  Brandy is--I'm sorry on my, my immediate left on my right in the picture on the right.  And Brandy is on the left in the picture.  Mentioned that my daughter goes to FAMU [Florida A&M University] in [Tallahassee]Florida.
Speaker 1: This picture here is of me and my son at the, at the eastern campus of Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] where I would teach art during the summer.  This is there at the track and he's approximately ten, nine or ten at that time.  And he's a student at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] now.  And he's in his last year.
Speaker 2: This--for those of us who are familiar with Sankofa, Sankofa is a art organization here that has a annual art show.  Artists come from all over these United States and in brief, Sankofa is a bird that's flying one way with his head turned back, going back to Africa.  I do that bird as a trophy for Sankofa to give away as to important people for that year.  And some of these artists are from Cleveland like Larry Tinsley, a very fine artist there with the hat on.  Ahmed, Drake Ahmed there, Regina, Alice Sifala (ph.).  The, the, the two people that's kneeling in the front are a father and son team named Wilson from out of Indianapolis [Indiana].  And unfortunately, we lost the father of that team.  But this is--we try to do things that's gonna be remembered and obviously these artists have been doing art for quite a while, so I don't think they will stop any time soon.  Everybody's in there from a photographer to a painter, to a calligrapher to a art historian, to fine artists.  And this was a meeting of last year when Sankofa was at the western campus.  They have a annual, as I said, big art show at Cuyahoga Community College, eastern campus.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay and that's you see seated right in the center?
Speaker 2: And that's me seated right in the center.  Sharp, ain't he?
Speaker 1: Where was this taken?
Speaker 2: Right there on the stage.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's Snickerfritz.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's Snickerfritz.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: This, this, this piece here is in the gallery and it's obviously me standing there with some coveralls on.  But it's interesting that the piece, the tall piece in back of that is approximately my height, six, three, and that's the man--half of--the man half of a piece that's called "In Preparation of a Marriage Ceremony".  And the photograph is back as you see is called "The Music Lesson" in back of my head there.  But that's right by the entrance right as you come into the Snickerfritz Gallery.
Speaker 1: As, as I mentioned, I'm a retired professor.  And this is a series of my clowns playing the Concertina.  And these were being done in the classroom there at the western campus at Cuyahoga Community College.  And as I mentioned, I know that I've done over four or 500 of these pieces, which is to my benefit, right?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Approximately when was this?
Speaker 2: I've been retired six years, so this had to be seven or eight years ago.  So this let's say 1995, six (1996), seven (1997), somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Piece here is one of my first promotional pieces.  There you see me with a million dollar smile.  And that piece there is called, it was a birdbath or similar to a birdbath and it was called "In the Kingdom of the Blind, One Seeing Eye is King".  Which meant that every--all the--all those pieces had their eyes closed except one person had an eye open (unclear) title for that.  And the kingdom of the blind, one seeing eye is king.  And that piece was purchased by Joyce Whitley who is no longer with us, but she was a big collector of mine.
Speaker 2: Sort of adjacent to the African bookshelf on the south side of the building.  As you see there a picture of Malcolm X.  You see a piece that I call "Humble".  You see the African bookshelf there where we specialize in books for children.  And the piece next to Malcolm that I call, and it was done for my mother, "I Remember Augustine".  But the main piece you see there is a picture of Malcolm X, which that series was entitled "The X Factor".  I use a lot of subliminal messages in my work, and if you see this piece and look very closely in the forehead, you actual will see "The X Factor" written in that piece on his head.
Speaker 1: What a nice picture.  This is the front of my gallery, studio.  Like I said it's 19,000 square feet.  Now along--we have an apartment there on the third floor.  We have a hair salon, and we have a school teaching veterans on the second floor, and the first floor is the gallery.  And if you look very closely into the stones in front of the building, you know on the grass, it has done in stone, Edward Parker Creative Arts Complex.  EPCAC done in stone.
Speaker 2: Now planting the seed and bloss--blossoming, blooming and bearing fruit, this building is here my new adventure, it's a bed and breakfast, and doing quite well in fact.  We've had people there from China.  We've had people there from India, we've had people there from east Cleveland.  And you see probably which is one of my larger sculptors, you see that Corinthian column standing in the foreground there.  And that's about 75 feet in height.  But yes, that's a new enterprise, the bed and breakfast, which I'm kind of pleased about.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I was wondering about those columns.
Speaker 2: That piece opened up a lot of doors you know, I did this piece in '78 (1978), during the winter of '78 (1978).  It took about two months, three months to do.  As you can see, Chicken George there, you can see an actual picture of Ben Vereen in the background who played Chicken George.  And from that I've been in--I was in contact with Alex Hailey, Norman Lear, etc.
Speaker 1: This is me doing my--soon as--soon after I retired, during my political stint, you know.  Being, being the resident of east Cleveland, I've ran for school board and I ran for council over the years.  So this was my political look, as it were.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Have you won a position yet?
Speaker 1: No.  I haven't ran the last six years, but I think about running for mayor if I get Regina back over here.
Speaker 2: I'll recognize what I do see.  Emma Whatley there, the lady in the front with the eyeglasses on her head, she was president of the school board at one time and next to me on my right is Dr. Jordan who--Eugene Jordan who is a dentist.  In fact his office is right across the street.  Next to Emma Whatley is Charlie Bibb, who is a councilperson in East Cleveland.  He's no longer a councilperson.  And next to Charles Bibb is Les King, who is an entrepreneur in East Cleveland.  He has a clothing store and shoe store in this city.  And that was at an event here, a political event at the building here.
