Story_ID: 11921
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Grady, G-R-A-D-Y Emory, E-M-O-R-Y Poulard, P-O-U-L-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 15, 1936, Crowley, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell Crowley?
Speaker 2: C-R-O-W-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a personal growth trainer, an ordained clergy person.  I am an educator.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 5th, I think, 2005.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 4th.
Speaker 2: 4th, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: In my residence in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 11922
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Yes, springtime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And the last question in this series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "It all comes to pass."
Story_ID: 11923
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Leola, L-E-O-L-A Green, G-R-E-E-N Poulard, P-O-U-L-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Crowley, Louisiana and her date of birth would be--well she died at eighty nine, about three years ago so she would be ninety two years old--.
Speaker 1: Today.
Speaker 2: --today so we can compute that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what do you know about your mother's side of the family in terms of the--how far back can you trace your ancestors first of all?
Speaker 2: On her side I can certainly go back to her father, Walter Green, whom I did not know but I heard stories.  A self made man.  They had I think about six or seven children.  Times were rather difficult for them economically however, they managed to educate all the children.  The father I understand, Walter Green was very industrious, worked several jobs to make ends meet.  The mother was a housewife who gave time and attention to the children.  Her name was Cora Green.  Cora Green after Walter died went to New York to live in Brooklyn for many, many years and in her evening years, the very, very last part of her evening years returned to Crowley and she, she and my mom shared the latter years of her life together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories on that side of the family that go back you know past, about you know about had the family always been in Crowley, the Greens?
Speaker 2: Yes, to the best of my recollection that is the place where they had their roots.  Eventually not only did my mother's mother, my grandmother Cora move to New York but also three of her sons.  There were four.  One was killed in his formative years.  But the three who survived moved to New York also to Brooklyn and so did two, two daughters.  So, five of my mother's siblings moved to New York.  My mom remained in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Now was the New York connection created by a relative that moved there or did they, I mean how did they end up going to New York from Louisiana?  Because some of the passage--you know it's a lot of people from Chicago [Illinois] straight up--.
Speaker 2: I don't recall who went initially but I do know that eventually there were the five siblings and, and my grandmother there.  I used to go up, my brother and my sister--I have two siblings, my brother and my sister we used to go up in summers for vacation to visit them in Brooklyn and my mom.  My, my father [Grady Poulard] gave us that vacation during summers in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about life during slavery or during reconstruction or any of those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't have any recollection of slavery stories at all.  I, I know that my grandfather on my mother's side and my grandmother on my mother's side had--they were part Indian, I know that.  On my father--well you haven't asked that yet.  But on my father's side I think my grandfather's father was in slavery but I don't have very much recollection about any stories.
Speaker 1: They didn't talk about them?
Speaker 2: No that, that, that was kind of like way back.  It was kind of removed from where we were.  I suppose it wasn't that far removed but you would have thought so, you would have thought so.
Speaker 1: No.  Not in terms of years.
Speaker 2: You would have thought so, yes.
Speaker 1: It was close.
Speaker 2: It was mostly about, conversation was about current issues and the future pretty much, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your mother, did she grow up in Crowley?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about growing up in Crowley and what it was like?
Speaker 2: She talked about being interested in sports and music and literature and how she loved school.  She was valedictorian of her class.  She talked about her peers and the friendships that were forged in those days.  She talked about how much she loved being a housewife and raising children.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--.
Speaker 2: I had, I had a sister who died in a fire.  Her first child named Betty.  My parents had just gotten married and well not just gotten married.  Betty was about, I think about three or four and I was told that I used to sleep in the same room with Betty but this particular night I cried so much that they took me out of the room and put me in the bed with them cause I was a little baby.  And that very night the house burned down and Betty was, was killed in the fire so who knows.  Maybe I'm here for a purpose after all.  But I was supposed to be in that room also, that night of that fire.  But for some reason I cried without stopping, without ceasing apparently so, so I'm told.  And of course I have my reason not to believe that so that's, that's a little bit of history there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and a story that your mother--that your parents tell?
Speaker 2: A story, oh yeah, yeah.  Absolutely right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your mother was valedictorian of her high school class.  Did she go on to college?
Speaker 2: My mother--that's an interesting story there.  My mother did not go to college immediately after high school.  She became a housewife and mother.  My father was a minister and a minister's wife and a lot of responsibilities there supporting him in his career and supporting us, the children in their education and career development.  And at age sixty-four she went back to college, got up at four o'clock in the morning and for seven years struggled, worked hard to get her bachelor's degree.  She graduated with honors from the University of Southwest Louisiana and she got her degree in early childhood education.  And subsequent to that she taught for eighteen years.  So I'm sorry, for ten years subsequent to that.  She, she was a trooper.  She helped my sister raise her children.  She supported my father in his ministry and she went to school full time and got her degree.  And so when she graduated we all went down and gave a big party for her and celebrated.  Newspapers were there commending her and celebrating her life and her achievement at age sixty-four.
Story_ID: 11924
Speaker 1: Tell us your father's full name and spell that for us.
Speaker 2: Same as mine, Grady, G-R-A-D-Y Emory, E-M-O-R-Y Poulard, P-O-U-L-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Is Emory his middle name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, E-M-O-R-Y.  For some reason I never was inclined to use Jr., and it was never an issue.  But we have the same name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story behind Poulard?
Speaker 2: It's a French name and the literal translation of the word is big chicken.  Like some people hear about Pullet, Poulet, Pullet, small chicken or little chicken, well a Poulard is a big chicken.  Tell you a funny story, I was on a flight from Paris [France] to Barcelona [Spain] recently and the flight attendant brought some chips by in a bag and some cookies in a bag.  And I was about to open it and I looked on the bag, it said Poulards, it says Mayor Poulard, Mrs. Poulard.  So I learned that in the south of France near Normandy there's a business.  I think Madame Poulard is dead now but the Poulard name is pretty prominent in the south of France and they produce a lot of pastries and snacks.  It's a funny little story.
Story_ID: 11925
Speaker 1: Now what is your father's [Grady Poulard] date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was born in the 1920s, early '20s [1920s, sic, early 1910s] in Iota, I-O-T-A, Louisiana.  He died in 1992 at the age of seventy-nine.  So that would be like thirteen years ago and he would be ninety-two now if he were living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so he was in Iota?
Speaker 2: I-O-T-A, a small town like an Iota, a dot.
Speaker 1: Like not one Iota?
Speaker 2: About nineteen miles from Crowley [Louisiana] where my mom [Leola Green Poulard] was born, right.
Speaker 1: People use that in a sentence as a term of measurement or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, one Iota like a small, small space or point in time, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So that's near Crowley?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace them?  Do they go all the way back to slavery or beyond or--?
Speaker 2: I can go back as far as my father's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Morris Poulard--.
Speaker 1: Grandfather.
Speaker 2: --who fashioned for himself a career in insurance.  He didn't have any formal training but he learned the insurance industry and was quite successful.  And he was able to educate his children.  My grandmother Bertha Poulard was a devoutly religious person, never worked--well she worked of course in the home.  That's very much work, but not outside the home.  She was a housewife and she raised the children.  And my father subsequently learned the insurance business from his father, my grandfather.  So in addition to being a clergy person my father was also an insurance manager.  He got to be a manager of the Keystone Life Insurance Company down in Louisiana, a district manager, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories passed down from your father's side about life in that part of Louisiana and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Nothing comes to mind specifically.  I can recall one story I guess when my father had some difficulty with the administration of his high school and had to let some people have it.  My father didn't take stuff and so he was expelled and went to Texas to finish high school because he had worn his welcome out--.
Speaker 1: What did he do?
Speaker 2: --in Crowley.
Speaker 1: You know specifically?
Speaker 2: I think someone--I think he felt insulted by someone and he just let them have it back.  You know he returned the vituperation and as a consequence was expelled.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this person was an official of the school?
Speaker 2: Of the school, yes.  Yes, that's one story.
Speaker 1: And this took place what we call the old school days?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, you don't talk back, yes.  I can recall my brother and my sister in the back seat of my father's new Nash car stopping somewhere to get gas and we were almost out of gas.  But my father always asked may we use your bathroom before he ordered gas and this gentleman said no we don't serve--I don't know he called us whatever he called us, you all here.  And I, I'll never forget how proud my brother and my sister were of my father when he just sped off and the rocks just flew as a consequence and the dust just flew in this man's face 'cause my father just didn't take stuff like that.  So he just took off.  And we were looking back at the man.  This man's mouth was wide open cause he, he couldn't believe what he was seeing 'cause you know, blacks didn't respond that way in those days.  They were more docile.  But my father he never took it so we grew up with that kind of modeling--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from all of our authority figures, not just my father having an extended family.  So--.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father finished school in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now how did he, what denomination was he a minister?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist? So did he go to a Baptist training school or--?
Speaker 2: He went to seminary in Leland in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and also New Orleans [Louisiana], but he did not go constantly.  He did extension courses, he'd go for weekends because he was working full time with the insurance business.  But he did so well that Leland College honored him with an honorary doctorate, honorary doctorate of divinity even though he had not been able to earn the seminary degree.  So, but he did quite well.  He was well respected.  The Martin Luther King Park is named after him.  He established a park really through his initiative, his leadership was established in Crowley.  He was on the, I think I might have mentioned already, on the governor's commission for human rights in, for the State of Louisiana in his time.  He was good friends of the governor, Edwin Edwards at the time and did a lot to help people.  He was a real people person.  He wasn't just a pastor and a preacher, he was a community servant.
Speaker 1: Now he knew, good friends with Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 2: Gardner Taylor right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And I think Gardner Taylor's father was a minister--.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --who was trained in Rouge.
Speaker 2: Trained in Baton Rouge, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And there's a gentleman here in Washington, D.C. by the name of [H.] Beecher Hicks.  Beecher's father and my father were very good friends also and so Beecher and I are friends and our father's were friends.  I'm fortunate to come from parentage which was grounded and who modeled well not just for me but for my siblings and for all young people growing up in the community they modeled well, yes.
Story_ID: 11926
Speaker 1: Is there a story that's passed down of how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, but I'm told that my father [Grady Poulard] was quite a dancer in his early years, in his late teen, early twenties and, and loved to dance.  I never heard that about my mom [Leola Green Poulard].  I would guess my mom was the called the opposite, more serious, mostly into reading and literature.  She was great in English she said.  And my mom was a very prudy woman.  I have a picture of her.  If I had it right now I'd show it, beautiful, gorgeous woman and my father was very handsome also.  So I imagine there was a strong, physical attraction initially, but also beyond that an inner beauty I'm sure was sensed mutually.  And of course they stayed together for forty-six, forty seven-years, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until he died, yes.  Divorce was, divorce was never an option for them.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And there were times when, I'm sure times were tough, yes.
Speaker 1: They got married relatively late by standards in those days, right?  They were married in their thirties or--?
Speaker 2: In, I think they were in, they were in their twenties I think when they got married, in their twenties, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah that would make, make them married a lot longer than forty some years.  That would be near what--?
Speaker 2: Well, well wait a while.  I think--I'm looking--I don't know if I'm wrong there.  On the occasion of my father's funeral I spoke and I commented about how fortunate he was to have been married to my mother for forty-six years.  That was in 1992.  So we got to add from now it would be thirteen years more.  You see what I'm saying?  In, in 1992 it would have been forty-six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That would take them back to 1945 or so, forty--yeah.
Speaker 2: I think so, yes.
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Early or mid-'40s [1940s].  They were married before then though right?
Speaker 2: They would have to be, because--.
Speaker 1: That makes me think--yeah in--.
Speaker 2: --it would be in the '30s [1930s] I would think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  You were born in '36 [1936]--.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe fifty-something.
Speaker 2: I was born shortly after they were married.  Well actually, my sister [Betty Poulard] who died in the fire was born shortly after they were married so they had been married at least three or four years when I was born.
Speaker 1: This is the mid-'30s.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So okay, so that--.
Speaker 2: That puts it in perspective.
Speaker 1: --they've been married over fifty years actually.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll just--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  I guess whoever is viewing this can figure this out from what we said.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: If they want to get the exact date.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 11927
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: One brother, one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, are you--where are you?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you got two younger siblings.
Speaker 2: Yes, two siblings.
Story_ID: 11928
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up.  Describe where you grew up and what were some of the sights and sounds or smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I grew up--Crowley [Louisiana] was about 35,000 people.  The housing arrangement was rather segregated so we lived in what was called black communities, sort of, kind of more or less.  The school was all black.  I enjoyed sports, I enjoyed nature, walks, playing with marbles.  My mom [Leola Green Poulard] loved to cook and we all looked forward to dinner time to the smell of dinner was one of the smells that was prominent in our time.  I loved to read and we had to put the lights out at a decent hour so I had to get a flashlight and read after the lights were turned out.  My mom later told me she knew I was doing it but let me get away with it because she wanted to encourage my reading, as long as it didn't interfere with my being awake for school the next morning.  Growing up in a small town I felt very protected.  I had a wider family, aunts, uncles, cousins.  Life was safe, life was fun.  We weren't wealthy but we weren't poor.  We were considered middle class I suppose.  I enjoyed my siblings, we were close.  My neighbors were very attentive to us.  My father [Grady Poulard] traveled quite a bit and my mom always could depend upon neighbors to watch over us or just stay with neighbors or wider family when she was busy.  So life was good in the formative years, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how would you describe yourself as a little boy growing up?  What did you like and what did you dislike?
Speaker 2: I liked sports.  I got a scar over my left eye because I would take a can and throw it high and run and catch it like I'm throwing a football to myself.  I loved football as a kid.  I didn't have a football in those days.  I was very, very small and so I loved football in an early age.  I loved boxing.
Speaker 1: So the can hit you in the head?
Speaker 2: Yeah right here, 'cause the sun got into my eyes.
Speaker 1: Was it a full can or--?
Speaker 2: It was about that big I guess you know, a normal can.
Speaker 1: Was it a full or empty?
Speaker 2: No, no it was an empty can, yes.  I had a neighbor, Mr. Vorhees (ph.) next door, used to watch all the, listen to all the boxing matches on the radio, Joe Louis and all that.  I would go over with him and listen to the boxing matches.
Speaker 1: Now Joe Louis was a big deal in those days.
Speaker 2: In those days, absolutely.  And as I said I loved to read.  Movies were segregated so we didn't like going to sit up in the balcony that much and we didn't go that often unless there was some big movie like a Lena Horne coming out.  So most of our fun was home centered.  We loved games and we loved to sing.  My mom and my brother and my sister and I were, we were a quartet, the four of us occasionally.  So we, we--holidays were great you know.  All the stops were pulled out, food and entertainment and fun you know, pretty much a full life though.  Life was fun.
Story_ID: 11929
Speaker 1: What grade school did you go to?
Speaker 2: The name of the school was Ross High School, it was a grade school Ross High School, named Ross after a minister Dr. H. C. Ross who was the first principal of the school there in Crowley [Louisiana] and subsequently the school was named after him.  And I, I went from first to twelfth to Ross School, elementary, middle and high school in Ross.
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the teachers that taught you that you remember that--?
Speaker 2: I remember one named Ms. Ennis (ph.) who was very strict, hit you on the knuckles with a ruler if you did not get the mathematical equations correct.  One named Ms. Bias, B-I-A-S, who taught English and art, who taught me English, Ethel Mae Dorsey and a favorite cousin of mine named Evelyn Peete Plessier (ph.), taught me algebra.  She was only nineteen years old.  She had finished college and was my algebra teacher.  I used to hate math but she helped me to learn to love math.  So those were some favorite teachers.  My uncle was the basketball coach and I was quite a mediocre basketball player in those days.  I went to Temple Prep School in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I made the first string and nobody in Crowley could believe it because I wasn't that good in high school, but in prep school I guess I kind of like moved up a notch.
Speaker 1: So you went first through twelve at--?
Speaker 2: And went to prep school in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Now did you all--how large of a school was Ross--I mean in terms of how many students?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd say probably the senior class would have had about forty-five, fifty students.  Wasn't, that--.
Speaker 1: It wasn't very big.
Speaker 2: It wasn't huge.  No it wasn't huge, no.
Speaker 1: All right, and were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was salutatorian of my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well did like Ross like serve like a number of different counties around there or something?
Speaker 2: Oh no it was mostly--well yeah, there were some kids coming in from the smaller towns, yes.  Yeah, there were some.  But there was also a very prominent Catholic school in the city, in the town, St. Theresa's [School, Crowley, Louisiana].  And so it wasn't the only high school.
Speaker 1: A lot of students were--okay.
Speaker 2: Right, there was a couple, right.  And of course the schools are all integrated now as you can imagine and there's a quite a different picture now.  But in those days we had separate, separate schools.
Story_ID: 11930
Speaker 1: So at Ross High School [Crowley, Louisiana], now did you--oh you said you played the trumpet.
Speaker 2: Trumpet with the band.
Speaker 1: And there's a trumpet story.
Speaker 2: Well I was not a very diligent student of the instrument.  My interest was to play around with all the instruments.  So when I should have been practicing my trumpet script, I was often with the tuba or the trombone, the clarinet.  And the band teacher would often yell at me.  He was, his name was Mr. Auger (ph.), Creole fellow.  He, he used to chew tobacco and he would often talk with the tobacco juice in his mouth and I would get him very upset with my shenanigans and so he would often say, damn it boy, put that horn down and everybody would kind of like get a big laugh out of it because they knew he was talking about me because I was the one who was not paying attention to what I should be doing with the trumpet.  So as a consequence I never got to be real good with the trumpet.  But I had a lot of fun with the band and even at, in college I played a little bit, played the baritone horn and the trumpet.  I don't know how they let me in but somehow I sneaked in.
Story_ID: 11931
Speaker 1: Prep school, now how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days it so happened that the high school I attended [Ross High School, Crowley, Louisiana] was not teaching a language.  I had been accepted to attend Temple University in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but they made a mistake because in perusing my transcript they did not notice that I had not had a language.  And then after they had accepted me they told me, "Sorry, Mr. Poulard but you need a language to get into Temple University."  And my attitude was, well I got a language.  And they said, "Well you need two years of a language."  And I inquired, I said, "Can I speed it up?"  And they said, "Well can you do an accelerated course."  And I said, "How about double acceleration?"  They said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Two years in six months."  Never been done before.  I said, "I'll do it."  I did it and got an eighty-nine average and I entered Temple University in six months.
Speaker 1: So you went to prep school in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Spanish right, in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: In Philadelphia, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the--?
Speaker 2: I took some other courses also since I was there.  I didn't just confine myself to Spanish but it was a funny story there.  The teacher was a very good teacher and I asked him, I said, "Sir you know like I'm so close to a ninety to be an A, could you just put one point on there? " He taught me a good lesson.  He said, "You didn't earn ninety.  You earned eighty nine so you get a B, a B+."  And that has stuck with me all my life.  That was a very important--I'm glad he didn't give me that point.  I don't want anybody to give it to me, I want to earn it.  And so that was a big lesson, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me get the dates right.  Now you graduated from Ross High School in what year?
Speaker 2: 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you graduated from prep school in '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: --four.
Story_ID: 11932
Speaker 1: I went to summer school at Southern so I finished Southern in two and a half years really.
Speaker 2: Okay, so at Southern University [and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And did you play the baritone in the band there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, baritone--just in the first year.  Just to travel with the, with the football team.
Speaker 2: It's a big tradition there I know at Southern to--I mean the band is--.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --is, sometimes get more attention than the football team.
Speaker 1: Oh I wouldn't be qualified for the band now.  I mean they wouldn't take me then--now.  If the requirements were what they were, what they are now, then, they wouldn't even look at me.  Those guys are really magicians in the band now at Southern, Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana], all those schools.  But after the first, I spent two and a half years there.  My second year I got to be student body president so I could travel with the band, with the football team just you know if I wanted to because I had some control.  And the, the court and the officers of the student body usually would go on football games.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when did you graduate from Southern?
Speaker 1: 1957.
Speaker 2: Now before we leave Southern who were some of your teachers at Southern that made an impression on you?  Were there any special teachers?
Speaker 1: There was a Dr. Blyden Jackson.  I was an English major and Dr. Blyden was a professor of English.  He made a big impression on me.  The president made a big impression on me, Felton Clark.  I was just able to spend a lot of time with him for many different reasons.  In addition to being student body president I was also able to drive him around sometimes.  But anyway--.
Speaker 2: Was this the same president that, he expelled a number of students for demonstrations?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes, that's Felton Clark, right.  All that happened after I left.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now you found him to be--.
Speaker 1: He was a good man.  He was a good man.
Speaker 2: Were you surprised that he did that when he expelled those students?
Speaker 1: Well--.
Speaker 2: Right after they--they were involved in a civil rights activity--and I think--.
Speaker 1: I don't judge.  I don't judge.  Now this professor I told you about Blyden Jackson, Blyden and I were friends also and we would talk.  I was a friends with a lot of the faculty.  I just liked older people and you learn from them.  I can recall Blyden and I at a conference after I'd graduated saying that there are two qualities a great leader has to have, one is courage and imagination.  And he said that president Clark showed neither during the time of those demonstrations.  I wasn't there, I don't know.  But I do know that some friends I have who were there at the time who were underclass persons when I was there and they share that opinion that there was not a lot of courage shown in his leadership during that era.  As I say I don't judge.  People do the best they can given their perception of what they have to work with.  And so I'm going to give everybody the benefit of the doubt, of the doubt and say that--well given their perception of who they were or what they have to work with they did their best under the circumstances.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, I've heard that story a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Oh yes well that story was out there, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay, anything else about Southern, you know--?
Speaker 1: Southern was fun.  I really enjoyed Southern.  I was fortunate to be the editor of the newspaper.  And when the bomb went off in Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s home in 1956, I got on a plane that very next day and went to interview Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King for our newspaper, our campus newspaper.  Dr. King was out of town.  I had met Dr. King previous to that when he came to speak at the church where Gardner Taylor was formerly minister there in town in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and so I, I took it personal when that bomb episode occurred.  And so I spent three or four hours with Mrs. King the following day, came back that night, stayed up all night pretty much writing the article about Birmingham.  And that, that, that particular issue of 'Southern University Digest', the paper was called the 'Digest' was widely circulated and so that's one specific memory I have from my editorial days.
Speaker 2: That must have been exciting for a young man to do I mean to, as the editor of the paper to go into Birmingham [Alabama] and interview--.
Speaker 1: Well I was kind of a maverick.  I didn't ask anybody's permission, get an advisor, I just, I just went.  We had a budget and I just dipped and I'm not saying I was right, but I was just that kind of person and I guess all my life I've been that way pretty much.  I was also involved with the debating team and I've debated against Barbara Jordon.  I was the extemporaneous one on the debate team and she and I hooked up on her campus at Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] in an extemporaneous debate one, one day.  I remember that fondly.  Southern was great.  It was a great experience, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what did you major in, in Southern?
Speaker 1: English.
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: English literature and I minored in Spanish.
Speaker 2: English literature, okay. Now did you have aspirations to become a teacher?
Speaker 1: I was going into law I thought when I was at Southern probably.  I was thinking about politics probably and law is a springboard for it.  I wasn't sure because I also was thinking about going to divinity school because Southern in that day had a dean of students by the name of Martin Harvey who also served as sort of the chaplain for the college although that wasn't a title.  But he kind of like served that role as dean of the chapel as it were and in those days there was a Sunday evening vespers and Dean Harvey brought the real, heavyweight theologians and philosophers to the campus to speak.  Dr. King came of course for that and Carl Michaelson and Benny [Benjamin Elijah] Mays and all those giants, intellects came.  So I was deeply inspired to maybe be like them so I had a conflict between going towards law and divinity school.  I didn't feel any call to the ministry but I felt maybe I could be like those men, a teacher, a philosopher and maybe a chaplain or something.  And so when the opportunity came to apply for a fellowship to Yale, I did and was very fortunate to get it, a Rockefeller Fellowship.  So--.
Speaker 2: In divinity?
Speaker 1: Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut].
Story_ID: 11933
Speaker 1: Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut] is set up such that one is not confined to theology.  One could do a lot of things there.  There were six different areas where you could specialize and I specialized in religion and higher education which allowed me to take a lot of courses in the university at large in philosophy and psychology because I was preparing myself maybe for college presidency I thought in those days possibly, at least a teacher or chaplain or something like that.  I never thought about being a pastor of a church.
Speaker 2: Okay, so was Yale like a culture shock at all?
Speaker 1: Oh no, not at all because I was exposed to all these people at Southern, and as student body president I went to a lot of conferences on all these campuses around the country and so it was not at all.  In fact I was, I was a shock to them in many ways cause I was a maverick remember.  I'm the one who does it my own way and I had a--I was going around waking them up, the students at two o'clock in the morning for a wiener roast in the snow and you know going to New York for, to see plays when you should be studying for final exams.  So I was quite comfortable, had a lot of fun there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So were the academics difficult?
Speaker 1: I didn't approach them as if they were difficult.  I'll be honest, I took shortcuts and I wasn't the greatest of students but my grades were not as good as undergraduate.  I had about a B-minus average.  I'd say the curriculum was very tough.  I had to work, yes.  But I, I didn't work as hard as I could have.  I was, I was into enjoying, I've been into enjoying the journey as well as working, both you know playing and working have been very important all along the way.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So your degree at Yale was what?
Speaker 1: It was called--in those days it was called B.D., Bachelor of Divinity.  However, subsequently they call it an M.Div, a Master of Divinity.
Speaker 2: Okay, so now it's an M.Div.
Speaker 1: M.Div, Master of Divinity.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a professional degree.  Some people feel that it ought to be a doctorate like a professional doctorate, but you have to do another three years to get a Ph.D. from, from Yale on top of that if you're going to do it.  That's how rigorous they are.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So who were some of the teachers at Yale Divinity School that you remember who--?
Speaker 1: [H.] Richard Niebuhr the ethicist, Liston Pope the dean--.
Speaker 2: Richard Niebuhr, now that's the same--?
Speaker 1: Richard Niebuhr, he's the brother of Reinhold Niebuhr, they're brothers.
Speaker 2: Okay, right.  Reinhold Niebuhr is the one that--.
Speaker 1: They're originally from New York.
Speaker 2: --influenced Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr..] very much.
Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely right.
Speaker 2: So Richard Niebuhr--.
Speaker 1: Richard Niebuhr, Liston Pope the--he was a specialist in sociology of religion. Mr. Dittes, D-I-T-T-E-S.  They didn't want to be called doctor, I loved that.  They weren't into titles.  Dittes was my major professor, one of my major professors in psychology of religion.  Seymour Smith, religion and higher education. I, I studied a whole lot of the history and philosophy of higher education as well as religion and higher education.  So a lot of my courses were in the university.  Maybe one third of my courses were in the university.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Like I said, the university, the, the Divinity School is part, is, is part and parcel of the university but I'm talking about the graduate school of the university.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, Yale.
Speaker 1: The divinity school is one of the professional schools of the university.
Speaker 2: And Yale Divinity School is a very respectable--.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah, it's, it's the place.
Speaker 2: Now when you were there, when did you graduate from Yale Divinity School?
Speaker 1: 1960.
Story_ID: 11934
Speaker 1: 1960, okay.  And those were days when a lot of new perspectives on theology were being formed.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: I think it was, it's the early days of liberation theology and--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, people started talking about--.
Speaker 2: Paul Tillich, the ground of being, all that was coming out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very furtive period, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think later on I guess maybe '67 [1967], '68 [1968] that God is dead period came out.
Speaker 2: That came out also, right, that was the era, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: A lot of agnosticism even in divinity school in those days, yes.
Speaker 1: And contrasted with nowadays it seems like everybody is trying to become you know a--taking it to the belief you know is the bottom line.
Speaker 2: Well they got, they got all the visibility, you know and they make most of the noise.  But there's a, there's a group out here that's quietly there and I think in time you're going to see a, a more sobering voice will be heard about religion.  Organized religion has some challenges today.
Story_ID: 11935
Speaker 1: What would you call yourself cause you're not really a theist, so--?
Speaker 2: I, I would say that I'm a Christian.  I, I believe that Jesus gives me and the world, I'll just speak for myself, gives me the very best picture I can get of God and the very best picture I can get of who I am.  I distinguish between Jesus and Christianity.  I believe at some level, Jesus has been hijacked by Christianity and that--so I juxtapose, I dichotomize here.  I think Jesus would be very surprised if he came back and saw a lot of the things that are going on in his name.  I think he'd be shocked.
Speaker 1: For instance, give us a for instance.
Speaker 2: Oh all the hocus pocus, yeah.  You know, all the hocus pocus.  He was, he was, he was--he had integrity I believe, and he would not want anybody to write about some of the supernatural declarations that are in the scriptures.  It's a good book by John Shelby Spong, I think I mentioned to you earlier called 'The Sins of the Scriptures', ought to be required reading for every human being probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Scriptures have to be interpreted and at Yale [Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] we did do a lot of that, perhaps not enough but we did a lot of it.
Speaker 1: And that's by Spong, right?
Speaker 2: John Shelby Spong, S-P-O-N-G.  He also has one called 'Rescuing the Bible From Fundamentalism'.  He has one entitled 'Why Christianity Must Change or Die'.
Story_ID: 11936
Speaker 1: When you came out of Yale [Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], now you were cognizant what's going on in the Civil Rights Movement and you went down there and interviewed Dr. King's wife [Coretta Scott King] after the bombing in '63 [1963].  And so at Yale, now see you come out of Yale in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: In '60 right.
Speaker 1: In '60, okay that's prior to the--okay, no okay I got you, all right.  That was '57 [1957] when the bomb--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in Birmingham [Alabama]--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s porch.  Okay, it was 1960, what did you do in 1960?  I think you--.
Speaker 2: After I graduated from Yale I went to Columbia [University, New York, New York] and began working with Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a two year stint.  I was doing a doctorate in psychology and instead of doing a dissertation I opted to go to India.  Well first I went to training, international relations training at Drew University [Madison, New Jersey] for six months and then to India, became what they called a missionary.  And specifically I was dean of students in a medical college in South India, place called Christian Medical College [Vellore, India].
Speaker 1: You were a pretty young man now to be a dean of students?
Speaker 2: I was very young, yes.  Very young, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That's, but from '60, this is '61 [1961] to '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: This is was sixty--'61 to '62 right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: Actually I was there two years.  A little more than two years so it was a part of '60 and part of '60, '61 and '62.  And I came back to the States in '64 [1964] so that--'62 to '64 I guess you could say cause I traveled all over Europe and all over the United States speaking to over a hundred universities as a goodwill ambassador to get students to go into this kind of overseas ministry for a thing called the United Church of Christ Division for World Ministries.  And so I was also--well let me back up a bit.  Part of the reason for all this travel for a whole year, six months in the states and six months in Europe in the Middle East was that I was waiting for a visa to go to France for five years to be the chaplain to the American students at La Cité [Internationale] Universitaire in Paris [France].  In those days [Charles] de Gaulle was not granting Americans visas for five years.  The most you could get would be like a three month visa.  But we were hoping that that would change so while waiting for the change I was doing all this traveling.  Great experience, don't get me wrong but after a year we decided well this is not going to change probably.  We can't continue this.  I was getting tired of the circuit.  By that time I had a wife and a child and I wanted to get some stability in the family.  So we sat down with the people in New York with the World Ministries board, and just said, "Well, where else can we use somebody like you who is interested in students?" So India was the only other option.  And like I've done many times in life I said why not?
Story_ID: 11937
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married my second year at Yale [Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first time.  As I will tell you later, I do seminars in male/female relationships and I think I'm a--I got some experience in that because I've been married three times.  That was my first marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the first of three.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you have a child too?
Speaker 2: I have two boys.  That was my first child.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did you meet your wife at Yale?
Speaker 2: I met her at Southern [University and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, all right so she accompanied you to--?
Speaker 2: She was a French teacher and part of our motivation for wanting to go to Paris [France] was also her career development as well as my own.
Story_ID: 11938
Speaker 1: How was India?  Now where in India did you go?
Speaker 2: South India, Vellore, V-E-L-L-O-R-E almost equidistant between Madras [India] and Bangalore [India] near the tip, near where the tsunami hit not too long ago [December 26, 2004].
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you--was that like a culture shock?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No they accepted me like I was one of them.  I felt like one of them.  I loved their food and it was a, it was a--I didn't like the climate, the heat, that was difficult.  But the culture, the cuisine, the people, the activity it was good.  I'll just be honest and tell you that I did--my wife and I did develop some differences in the marriage and that was the stress that aborted my stay there.  I went to stay five years.  We stayed about almost three and came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you, in terms of Indian people I mean I've heard a lot of people in South India look like African Americans.  They're actually a darker people and they--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's, there's--.
Speaker 1: A lot of them are have some sort of African ancestry.
Speaker 2: --some, there's some similarities in terms of appearance.  The further south you go in India the darker people are but I fit right in.  My, my wife at the time loved it.  She's a great person and the people there recognized her greatness and the young ladies were in our house constantly with her, and dialogue, and for tea and so forth.  And she really, she loved it over there.  She could have stayed I'm sure.  But I was the one who felt a need for the change.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now is there anything--now this is a time where you know a lot of people were talking about India because that was the influence on, it had, [Mahatma] Gandhi had an influence on Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I think when you were there, [Jawaharlal] Nehru was the leader of India.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have any observations about the lifestyle of the Indians in terms of non-violence or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Indians are by nature non-violent.  They're not a violent people by nature.  And so Gandhi did not have a super difficult time selling the idea about non--of course he had a lot of opposition, he did.  But the Indian spirit is one of great, it's a generous spirit the Indian spirit and I felt very much at home there.  I came back also not just because of this marriage situation and some other things that were happening but because my heart is really in the struggle back home, what was happening here.  And I would correspond with Dr. King and others and I wanted to be in the struggle.
Story_ID: 11939
Speaker 1: When I came back [from Vellore, India] I dove straight in, head first.  National Council of Churches hired me to be their man in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To be part of COFO, the Council of Federated Organizations.
Speaker 2: Now that's a historic organization.  That's--COFO circa 1963 or--?
Speaker 1: Sixty--I joined up in January '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You represented the National Council of Churches?
Speaker 1: Right, in, in, I was based in Canton, Mississippi and--?
Speaker 2: In Canton?
Speaker 1: Canton, right and as a COFO official, my primary role was to recruit and train students and clergy persons for northern universities and churches.
Speaker 2: Okay, now this is part of the strategy of Bob [Robert] Moses I think, and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: Yes, voter registration was a big push that, that summer--that year.
Speaker 2: He strategized to bring in some of these college students.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Especially a lot of white students from the North.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, I was in the middle of that mix, right.
Speaker 2: Hoping that I think--can you articulate for us what his aim was in bringing these white students down who hadn't been there before?
Speaker 1: Well you know we thought that since they were white, the pressure would be less on them, it would be on us.  That wasn't the case necessarily but that was part of the strategy.  And also we knew that they had a concern.  They would often write or call or come down and say what can we do?  They wanted to be involved so it was not a hustle on our part.  Certainly we invited them but the response was overwhelming.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were part of the recruitment of these students?
Speaker 1: And the training, and the training right.
Speaker 2: Of course there was hundreds of--.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, just all over the place.
Speaker 2: --black and white students came to Mississippi that summer.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That summer started as I remember with the death of three of the students.
Speaker 1: There you go, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Goodwin--[Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner and [James] Chaney.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Summer of '64 [1964] was a hot summer down there, yes.
Speaker 2: So how did you--were you in Mississippi when they were killed?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.  How did you feel when you heard about it?  Did you know them?
Speaker 1: Well it was--yes and it was not easy I mean to--but you have to keep going you know.  It's--you don't have time to stop.  You, you cry, you grieve as you, as you go, yes.
Speaker 2: Now you were in Canton and they were in what, Philadelphia [Mississippi] I think it was?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And is that close by?
Speaker 1: Not too far away, yes.  Canton is about thirty miles from Jackson [Mississippi] and but our, our headquarters was very much Canton and we, we worked the whole [Mississippi] Delta area also.
Story_ID: 11940
Speaker 1: You were in Mississippi when [Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner and [James] Chaney were killed that summer.  Now what was the, how did you all feel in Canton [Mississippi] as a result of that?
Speaker 2: There, there was great depression about that and all of the tragedies caused depression.  But as the saying, we, we had to keep going.  We had to grieve and cry at the same time that we kept moving.  And it was not an easy time for the movement.  It was very, very, very difficult for all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you ever go up north to the, where they were training, I think they were training students up there.
Speaker 2: Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Oh Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Mississippi you mean or--?
Speaker 1: No, north to Ohio where they were training--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --at a western college.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and went to Kent [State] University [Kent, Ohio] also and Southern University [and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  But most of the training that I did was in Canton.  We had a training facility in Canton.
Speaker 1: Now is there a college in Canton?
Speaker 2: No, there was no college there.
Speaker 1: Where were you all located?
Speaker 2: There was a building we had which was our headquarters in Canton.
Speaker 1: Now that's a--I've heard stories that colleges like Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] above Jackson was used as a--.
Speaker 2: We used Tougaloo a lot for conferences and meetings, we did.
Speaker 1: Because it was a neutral space--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that the white racists wouldn't encroach upon it, that's why--.
Speaker 2: We did use Tougaloo a lot, but our headquarters was Canton and our big training room was Canton.
Speaker 1: You didn't have to--did you worry--I mean so you, it was a fairly safe I guess--I mean safe--?
Speaker 2: No, just the opposite.  You were really at risk, very vulnerable.  One, one--there was a cop there who, who really wanted me bad and he got me one day by saying that I was driving a rental car that had switched tags on it.  I had never heard of that term, switched tags.  The charge was that I had switched the tags on the car, whatever that means, so I was arrested for driving a car with switched tags, a Hertz car.  So of course I called New York the national Council [of Federated Organizations, COFO] and they got on the case and well--but that was, they got on the case the following day.  I spent the night in jail.  Now I, I was so tired.  I don't think I had slept for three or four nights cause sometimes we'd have bullets shot through our windows.  We, we were really, you know it was hard to sleep sometimes.  And sometimes you'd get so tired you'd just fall off.  But I think I was exhausted and so that night in jail I felt, well I don't care if I die if they kill me in here.  I didn't expect to wake up but I went to sleep.  Let's put it that way, and didn't care.  I was that tired.  Not that I didn't want to live I was just so tired that I couldn't care so I went to sleep.  They offered me some cold pancakes for dinner or something.  I kind of like chuckled, are you kidding, and went to sleep.  And I was surprised when I woke up the next morning.
Speaker 1: So what happened--.
Speaker 2: And I got out the next morning.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Subsequently because the national Council got on the case and had a lawyer down there.  And you know they--and I never had to go to court or anything.  They dismissed the charges, trumped up you know, and went back to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what was the response from the community?  You know you were training them on voter registration?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what else, did you train them in non-violent direct action?
Speaker 2: Well that was not, that was not my, my role.  My role was the, the technique of communication with the community, the leadership, the grassroots people, what to do, what not to do, how to respond if you were arrested, those, those strategies, those techniques.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now who trained you?  How were you trained to train them?
Speaker 2: I got my training from those who had been down there before I got there.  Remember I was in India and those folks had been down there for two or three years already.  So it was like passing on down big brother to little brother sort of kind of. Hosea Williams and those guys were all, all there.  And you could always turn to the upper council, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what, do you have any--now that summer that was a long summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a long hot summer, long hot summer.
Speaker 1: Some people got, got killed that summer and--.
Speaker 2: Long hot summer.
Speaker 1: There was a you know.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) A lot of them yes.
Speaker 1: --people had been shot at and pinned down.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: And run off the road and--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --threatened different ways and beat up.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know, gee whiz I mean this--the culmination is the trip to the Democratic National Convention?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Fannie Lou Hamer yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Fannie Lou Hamer going to in August.
Speaker 2: Sure.  And I would have stayed, I would have stayed beyond August but end of August I was asked to come and be the senior minister of People's Congregational Church in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 11941
Speaker 1: They [People's Congregational Church of Christ, Washington, D.C.] said they wanted somebody who was nontraditional like me and so forth and so forth.  A consideration I had was again trying to get some stability to this family situation.  I wanted to give marriage one more chance and this could possibly stabilize things and settle down, stuff, all the travel and running around.  And so my wife and my son settled in Washington.  And, but I continued to be involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  It was just a few months later I was down there for Selma [Alabama].  Walter Fauntleroy was a schoolmate of mine at Yale [Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and invited me to be his assistant in managing that whole Selma march.  So I was still involved and to be honest I guess I was using the church at some level as a base to operate from as I did my activist work.  But I told them going in that that was important to me and they said, "Okay, we're, we're fond you're doing this."  I don't think I overdid it but I certainly continued to be involved.  Fauntleroy and I were active in something called the Coalition of Conscience which was the Washington, D.C. civil rights movement you might say where we had lots of programs, had Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] here as often as we could get him for rallies and so forth.  So I was pretty much an activist in the church, yes.  I thought the church's mission was to be out in the world, not behind the walls.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now you kind of made a--now you're pastor of Congregational Church.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You grew up as a Baptist.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But did you have any trepidation about changing denominations or--?
Speaker 1: No, not at all, not at all.  I'm not into denominations.  I mean I'm really basically nondenominational.  I'm not even religious, I'm spiritual.  When I say I'm not religious what I mean is that I'm not into all the polity, the politics, the doctrine, the traditions, I'm not into all that.
Speaker 2: So you can work with--.
Speaker 1: I'm into just spirituality and love and beauty and truth, you know.  I'm in love with beauty and truth and decency and honor and all things that are good and godly.  But you don't--that has--I think Jesus was spiritual.  I don't think he was religious.  I think he was, he was a radical.  He was trying to, to address the religious situation of his time which is what I tried to do when I was in the church and said hey, let's get out here with these people out here, you know.  I mean imagine this country spending five hundred billion dollars on a war when there's so much hunger and starvation in the world.  It, it, it's--that's ugly.  And so what's the church saying about that?  I don't hear much.  Every now and then you have some but I hear a lot of hallelujahs and a lot of hocus pocus.  I think the role, I think Jesus calls the church to be as he was, out where people are to empower the people so that they could have heaven right here on earth and I feel strongly about that, very passionately about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you would say your religious philosophy is a--are there a lot of people that feel like you in the church today?
Speaker 1: Oh I think there are a lot of people who are deeply spiritual.  A lot of them don't even go to church.  I go to church.  I speak to churches.  I, I live it.  But I'm in it as one who wants to reform it, not in it as one who espouses it as it is.  I'm in it but I'm in it as a spiritual being.
Story_ID: 11942
Speaker 1: Does it make any sense to you to hear people say they're a conservative Christian and they're there to preserve a certain tradition in Christianity?  I mean does that make any sense to you?  I mean we now supposedly have a conservative Pope [Benedict XVI] that's going to keep the Catholic Church exactly where it is right now at this moment I guess when--cause the Catholic church has evolved over time to become what it is right now.  You know, it didn't start off that way.  I don't know, does that make any sense, people say they want to preserve the status quo?
Speaker 2: Well when I saw all this, you know, parading and promenading and all these colorful robes and all this big pageantry on television recently, I don't know if it was the funeral [of Pope John Paul II] or after the funeral or whatever it was, I said now what would Jesus say about this?  He's probably come in here and like turning the tables over in the temple he would say, come on, get out of here.  Take these robes off.  Go out there and help the people instead of being in here with all this formality and all this opulence.  It doesn't compute for me, the whole idea.  Just think of how ludicrous this is, in Africa where AIDS is a serious problem as we all know, yet Catholics are forbidden to use condoms.  So the implication of all that is that they don't care about people getting AIDS and dying 'cause they will have sex.  And if they're going to be a good Catholic they must do it with--without protection.  Is that caring about people?  I don't know.  Or you know they talk about they don't have enough priests.  A lot of women would love to be priests.  Tradition says you can't.  Well just because you didn't do it way back when and you thought it was wrong back then, doesn't mean that you have to continue with that.  When [Charles] Darwin came along in 1859 with 'The Origin of Man' and 1861 with 'The Descent of Man' and 'Origin of Species', those two books, the church had a chance right then to espouse evolution and to become scientific.  And see there's no conflict because God can work through evolution just as well as God can work through a quote unquote a man named Adam.  But they want to talk about, you know a lot of folk want to talk about Adam being like you and me and man and Eve being a woman and from those two came everything, when it, as if it was history--whereas it's really a myth.  It's like these people didn't have a good way of explaining our history so they, out of their faith they created a history, a beautiful story.  But the word Adam means man generically, generally, not a man.  So there's no conflict between science and religion but people who are insecure and, and to feel that to be scientific is to be anti-religious, I think they're dangerous.  And so there's a whole lot of change that needs to take place if the church as an organization is going to survive this, this century.  I believe that.
Story_ID: 11943
Speaker 1: What do you think about the mega churches today, huge churches?
Speaker 2: If those folk weren't tithing they couldn't exist.  It's based on these people supporting it financially and the, the support comes because these people are taught that if you don't do that you're not in the will of God.  I'm not against tithing.  I think it's a great idea.  But don't do it out of fear, fear of going to hell or not being blessed.  Do it because you just have a desire to give, because you love the organization, the church.  And so it's the teaching that raises the money and the teaching is not predicated on something that I think is very healthy for people.  I think the whole idea of the mega-church is--number one when Jesus was around and even you know for decades after he was gone, the church was a, a small fellowship where they knew each other.  Most of these people don't know each other in these mega-churches.  There's very little fellowship, very little camaraderie, very little communion and they say bigger is better.  I don't know, maybe it is.  But I'm not a devotee of mega-church.  I would much prefer smaller units where people knew each other, loved each other, cared about each other and expressed it regularly.  So I wish them well.  I'm not against them.  I'm not in judgment of them but it's just not my spot of tea.
Story_ID: 11944
Speaker 1: As pastor of People's Congregational Church [of Christ, Washington, D.C.], what were some of the highlights of your pastorship there?
Speaker 2: The young people are supposedly the biggest highlight where there was such camaraderie between us.  We--I transformed the basement of the church into a gymnasium and we played basketball and learned to play the guitar.  We learned folk songs and traveled together, excuse me, had a lot of fun.  And we tried to make church life interesting for the young people.  And secondly, I would often go into the pool halls, bars and talk to people and sometimes reporters would follow me around.  Think I might have shown you some things where some pictures and stuff were done.  Stories were done about my involvement in the community.  The time came when I could no longer spend the majority of my time in that role.  It was too confining.  And for that reason I responded when Lyndon [B.] Johnson's people called about my coming to set up the community relations aspect of the civil rights thrust of the War on Poverty.  It was to me, was like going from one kind of a ministry to another kind of a ministry, one where I felt more comfortable.
Speaker 1: Now what year was this when--?
Speaker 2: This was 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay, so '67 [1967], now did you take a spot with the Johnson administration?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your official--?
Speaker 2: My--I was the chief of the community relations section of the Civil Rights Division where, which means that my role was to move around the country and get grassroots community leaders like Urban League people, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] people, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] people, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] people and not just civil rights people but also people with fraternities and sororities and civic groups, get them into dialogue with the entire poverty officials in all the major cities.  Then we had CAPs, Community Action Programs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so each CAP would be a base that I would work with and from that CAP I would reach out to all of the civil rights or civic organizations in Detroit [Michigan] or Chicago [Illinois].  I was all over the country and--.
Speaker 1: We had them in Dayton [Ohio] too.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Community Action Programs.
Speaker 2: And I would also go out and speak about the War on Poverty like for my fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha.  I can recall in Los Angeles [California] being the keynote for a luncheon trying to get them to appreciate what we were trying to do in this effort.  So it was some, some community--it was mostly community relations but it was also some promotional work also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long did you work for the administration?
Speaker 2: That was 'til [Richard] Nixon came in.
Speaker 1: Okay--and that was until 1960--.
Speaker 2: And they had the audacity to give me the litmus test to see if I could--I was, I'll never forget it.  They invited me to come to some place, I walked into a room and there was a table and a light and two chairs, like we're sitting here in two chairs.  And I walked in and I, I never knew who this guy was.  And he said, "Mr. Poulard how are you?"  And I went out of curiosity and the first question he asked me, "Could you speak for the president?"  Talking about Nixon.  I said "No," and "No thank you," and I left.  So that was, that was it.  That's when I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was pretty clear to you that you couldn't.
Speaker 2: I couldn't, you know.  How could I do that?
Speaker 1: Now in those days now you know, I guess give us a sense of the flavor of that, 'cause Richard Nixon was--in 1960 he, he received--he didn't receive a whole lot of black votes but he did receive some votes for president.  And black folks in the '60s [1960s] were still, and it was still a time when the Republicans had some kind of chance in, you know the black community running.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But how did you feel about Nixon at that point?
Speaker 2: I never did feel any strong feelings toward him, no.  He just was not my cup of tea what he stood for policy-wise.  And after, after Johnson things took a turn for the worse in this country I believe.
Speaker 1: Now was it your feeling that Johnson you know fought for the rights of African Americans?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Johnson went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and said "We shall overcome."  I didn't believe it.  You know prior to that the, the greatest I had heard from a president was when [John F.] Kennedy--I was in India.  I heard this on the radio in India, short wave radio in India and I heard Kennedy say segregation is morally wrong.  That was in that time.  But then when Johnson said "We shall overcome", that was it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Kennedy made that speech on the night that Medgar Evers was shot.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not that I think Johnson was some god or something, no.  The man has his frailty as we all do.  But as, as presidents go, I think he did more than any of them, including Kennedy to foster civil rights.
Speaker 1: Now do you have an assessment of Hubert Humphrey ?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he was a darling man.  Humphrey was, he was the man.  I mean impeccable in my view, not because he was a Congregationalist or whatever.  And if he, he had gotten to be president I was kind of like on that train you know to go with him, but he was just too much of an intellect like Adlai Stevenson.  People like that, what the country needs for leadership it, it disavows, doesn't want.  It's bent on suicide almost that the potential savior type leaders either, either are assassinated or you don't appreciate them or they don't get elected.  So Humphrey was quite a man I thought.
Story_ID: 11945
Speaker 1: Now '68 [1968] was the year that Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed too.  Were you still working for LBJ [Lyndon B. Johnson] when he was killed?
Speaker 2: When Dr. King was killed I was working with the poverty program [War on Poverty], yes.  I'll never forget it, I was on my way to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] speaking at chapel 'cause I did a lot of speaking like I said, to speak in the chapel that Sunday.  The funeral was that Monday so I had to change my talk to talk about the leader, we called him the leader that Sunday at Fisk and then to the funeral that Monday.  And it was a, it was a sad time of course, you know.  I mean let's face it.  It was like the bottom had fallen out when he was killed.  Walter Fauntleroy and I walked the streets in Washington with the fires burning.  We walked all night almost.  I'll never forget seeing Walter cry so, so heavily that night and I was trying to comfort him.  And I was of course saddened too but it was, it was a rough time.  It was a rough time.
Story_ID: 11946
Speaker 1: What happened after you left the administration, I mean the government service in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Well I was fortunate.  Here again, something always comes up at the right time.  I knew I couldn't stay, see I knew I couldn't stay in organized religion and then I had a place to go with the War on Poverty.  I knew I couldn't stay there now because [Richard] Nixon was around and I couldn't work in his administration and I needed somewhere to go and I wasn't worried about it because I was offered a fellowship to become a National Urban Fellow.  It was a new program.  I got in the first year of it and it involved going back to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and to Occidental College [Los Angeles, California] for a year and then--for six months and then for six months being mentored by the mayor and deputy mayor of Washington [D.C.], Walter Washington and Tom Fletcher, who was the deputy mayor at that time.  So after that I got a masters degree out of it all in urban affairs.  So it had an academics part, academic part at Yale and, and, and Claremont College.  I mean Pomona College in Claremont, California.  And so that, that was the academic part of it and then the, the practical side of it was in the mayor's office here in Washington and I worked on higher education issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Principally higher education issues.  And I would shadow both Tom and--Tom Fletcher and Walter Washington for meetings and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Learning how a city operates.
Speaker 1: All right.  When did you--now at that point--well this is seventy, we're talking about seventy--?
Speaker 2: This is like--.
Speaker 1: Was this after Washington, Walter Washington is mayor?
Speaker 2: This is '69 [1969], '70 [1970] like that because the election was '68 [1968] I think, right?  When did Nixon come into office?
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well shortly thereafter I began this program at Yale with Urban Fellows so that, it was '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 11947
Speaker 1: I went to the American Institute of Architects as the first black administrator.  I was the administrator for community services.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You notice this word community relations, community services keeps coming up wherever I've been.  I've done a lot of that kind of thing because I, I liked the idea of getting people together and fostering change, community change.  And so my role was to get the AIA, the American Institute of Architects involved in the urban crisis.  We did several things.  We raised money for a scholarship program to get more blacks into architecture.  We helped to get accreditation for six schools of architecture in historically black schools at that time including Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and Southern [University and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and so forth.  I took it on myself to work with a friend of mine who at that time was vice president of the AIA named Robert Nash, who's deceased now, and together Robert and I helped to form NOMA, the National Movement for Black Architects, like a black caucus of architects.  This was very threatening to the majority group of the AIA.  We had James Forman, for example, to come in to a national AIA convention in Boston and talk about reparations.  Frightened the you know what out of those people and I introduced Forman.  And so what I'm saying is that here again I had an opportunity to get on the cutting edge where I thought a need was there to use the resources of a big prestigious national organization to foster change in this country.  And I was insubordinate with the executive director many times, and he tolerated me, I tolerated him and after a while it, it got to be untenable that we work together.  But here again it was something to do.  I organized, not organized because the organization had already begun, but I continued the organization of a thing called IF, the Independent Foundation which is an entity that it's purpose was to organize, mobilize, returned Peace Corps and VISTA [Volunteers In Service To America] volunteers and to give them a continuing outlet for volunteer services around the country.  So raised about a million dollars initially and formed chapters of this organization in seventeen cities.  Tom Bradley, mayor of Los Angeles [California] was one of our sponsors, came on our board, president of Haverford College [Haverford, Pennsylvania] we were talking about earlier, Wofford [College, Spartansburg, South Carolina].  Sargent Shriver was our great inspiration in this movement.  He of course was on our board.  So that, that had, that happened for about maybe two years and then the [Richard] Nixon people saw what we were doing and they were threatened by--they thought--the 'New York Times' came out with a huge article following a big party that Nixon and his people had had.  And it happened on the same night that I had--we had, we had gotten a big grant from the Lilly Foundation of a hundred thousand dollars so we had a big reception to celebrate this fund, these funds.  Our whole board was here.  Shriver was there and so reporters were all over the city but they--and they covered both as if we were the Democrats, my little foundation, and here are the Republicans.  And the headline in the 'New York Times' the following day was "The winners and losers get together in Washington."  And it was a big picture of me and Eunice [Kennedy] Shriver at the reception talking, conversing.  And so after that happened, our funds began to dry up.  We thought places we knew we had money coming.  So we were on Nixon's enemy list, it was clear.  They had an enemy list, did you know that by the way there was an--?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah we were very high on it.  I was on it individually and the organization was on it.
Story_ID: 11948
Speaker 1: The opportunity came to go to HUD, [U.S. Department of] Housing and Urban Development.  I had this background in urban affairs and so--.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?  You know we're like in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 1: This is '74.
Speaker 2: '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: '74.
Speaker 2: '74, okay.
Speaker 1: And I headed up a program to study whether or not human relations commissions in the Midwest--that was my region the Midwest--were, whether or not their policies and programs were substantially equivalent to the requirements of Title VII.  And that was interesting, but I never intended to stay there for a long time.  I just wanted to see what it was like to do that kind of urban affairs work 'cause I had the background in it and I'd used it and I was thinking about other options, thinking about going back to school to finish my doctorate at Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  And then what happened was I guess you could say is a great blessing in a sense because it allows me to be independent now financially.  The U.S. General Accounting Office, it's now called the Government accountability Office, it changed the name in the last few years, invited me to come over and direct a project on functional racism to train all the employees about racism.
Story_ID: 11949
Speaker 1: You were with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] from 1974 to when?  How long were you--?
Speaker 2: To '75 [1975], one year.
Speaker 1: All right, then what?
Speaker 2: To December '75 [1975] and then I went to the United States General Accounting Office which is now called the Government Accountability Office.  I went not to stay but to manage a program that would train all of the five thousand employees in the realities of racism.  We called it functional racism training, how did racism function?  What are the causes of it, what are the consequences of it, how could you neutralize it, etcetera.  I did have some consultants working with me and we put the entire workforce through this training program in one year's time, all five thousand of them, the comptroller general on down to the lowest graded person.  In the process of doing this program, this project I made an amazing discovery and I wrote it all up and told the comptroller general.  I said "Look, not only do you have problems of racism here, you got serious problems of sexism, ageism, handicapism, looksism, elitism.  I read the riot act all across the board."  I said "Now if you want, I'll develop a human relations program where we can help enlighten your people for all these areas, all these isms, about all these isms and try to neutralize them to some extent."  I said "On one condition, that I be free to be involved in my civil rights activities, that I can represent the agency and go out and make speeches and go to conferences.  I don't want to be tied down.  I am not a bureaucrat but I am a change agent and if you want some change here, I'm your man.  If not, tell me straight out."  "Oh fine, fine, fine, fine, fine."  And for twenty years I was able to I think make some positive differences there in that agency, not by myself because a lot of collateral people worked with me.  And so that allowed me to retire without having necessarily to work now.
Story_ID: 11950
Speaker 1: I still work.  I have my own business which is called Grady Poulard Associates.  And--.
Speaker 2: Now when was Grady Poulard Associates formed?
Speaker 1: Well I'll be honest with you now.  They didn't know--we didn't talk about it but I started this part time when I was at GAO [United States General Accounting Office].  I used my weekends and nights and I was, you know, working half time for my own business while there and I used leave time to do things, etcetera.  Anyway, so when I left GAO in 1995, I was able to begin attending to my own business full time.  I don't work at it full time.  I go to my health club and work out a lot, I read a lot, six times a year I take people overseas for cultural educational ventures and I don't make any money with it.  But I enjoy sharing, going to places I've been, friends with my family. That takes a lot of time.
Speaker 2: Now where are you going now--you go to some diverse places.  You go to Turkey, Egypt--.
Speaker 1: All over, Turkey, Egypt, Italy, Mediterranean [Sea] whole basin, going to Oslo [Norway] and Denmark, Denmark, Norway and Sweden next week, three countries.  So, so--and I'll continue to do this because--.
Speaker 2: And you take people there on a--?
Speaker 1: I take people and I'm a host, I'm a tour host.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I have some people in Florida who do all the administrative work.  And I get to go free but that's no big deal.  The point is, is that it's, it's something that I enjoy and so half of my time is spent working and giving workshops and male/female relationships or helping people to align their work with their life's purpose because I have a passion about empowerment where people can be happy at work and at home, they've got it made.  This is heaven on earth.  But if you're not happy at home, you're not happy in your relationships, you're not happy in your job, that's double jeopardy, that's hell.  And so my life feels very purposeful as I try to help people to see that the results they get in their relationships are the results they create.  The results they get at work are the results they create and therefore to help them see that, that, that they can have whatever result they want or there can be reasons why they don't have the results they want.  They can do either one cause there are only reasons and results.  And so the purpose of my workshops is empowerment to assist people to have positive results in the work place and in relationships.  And I also did diversity training and stress management--.
Speaker 2: What are the--?
Speaker 1: --and all that kind of stuff in that boiler plate stuff but my passion was those two areas I just mentioned.
Story_ID: 11951
Speaker 1: What are the key issues, I guess in say, relationships, there's a lot of discussion, a lot of books written in the black community about it, every black bookstore's got you know twenty titles of people that come out.  And some--everybody seems to have something to say about it.  But how do--what do you see as the key issues to be dealt with in relationships in the black community?
Speaker 2: Honesty.  I know people say you just can't be honest in relationships.  You can't, I think you can't, you can't afford not to.  And if you find the right person it's easy.  The reason why people are dishonest is because they, they don't have the right connecting you know and they don't have an equation.  Something happens there's a corrosion of the soul when you play games and when you're deceptive.  So--and I guess I'm talking about emotional honesty more than anything, meaning that you tell the person how you really feel and how you really think, you know what I'm saying.  You don't keep them in the dark.  Let them know where they stand.  Then you're free and then they can be free to stay or go or whatever.  So I think that's one key issue.  Another issue is how you manage money.  You know people come into marriage with different priorities and different value systems and oftentimes that causes conflict economically.  These things need to be worked out before married.  You try to work them out in marriage it's impossible, they get worse.  You know there's a cliché that says communication is an issue, but it is.  And not just words but the nonverbal stuff because we will let people know what we think or feel even when we do it unconsciously, and most often we do it unconsciously.  We don't know we're doing it but they're picking up the cues.  We use the term unconditional love, you say you need that.  Well if it's love, it's got to be unconditional, otherwise it's not love.  If it's conditional it's not love so that means accepting people totally as they are without any desire to change them.  Should there be change it should be coming from within them and their desire to change not from us trying to make them change.  Number one you can't do it.  So--and this whole idea of loyalty and fidelity, I'm not, I'm not one who talks, who, who, who's so concerned about duty, it's my duty to be faithful.  I want to be faithful because I have a desire to be faithful, 'cause I want to be, not because of some restrictive code or expectation.  And I think in this day of AIDS and this day of fragility of marriage that, that fidelity is a key issue and yet when I, from what I can see out here it's, it's really a time, and it's always been this way I suppose to some extent, where people are straying a lot and not very faithful in marriages.  So those are a few of the issues that I think that, that face all marriages and particularly might impact upon us a little more.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think in the African American community I think because it's less stable economically and educationally--.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Sure, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and otherwise I think it's probably a lot more divorcing.
Speaker 2: Sure, fifty-seven, fifty--fifty-seven and a half--57.5 percent of, of marriages are ending in divorce now here.  Well of course you talk about the children, the way to have healthy children, successful children is to have happy mother and daddy.  If a child is raised in the context of a happy home with mom and dad hugging and kissing and loving each other, that kid's going to pick it up, those vibrations, that modeling, that's the key.  So all too often the kids are, are fractured because they're in the context of a fractured marital situation.  And so the key is not to get married so much as to become whole in oneself and to find somebody else who's gotten to be whole in himself or herself and come together and put one and one and make it three.  You, me equals we, a great mathematical scheme.  One and one equals three called synergy.  But what most people do is they feel like I'm not a whole person, maybe I'm a half, my other half, my better half.  But one half times one half equals one fourth so you have less than you have less than you had to start with when you're going in looking for somebody to fill in the missing, the missing pages in your notebook I say.  So marriage is a very serious step.  I know 'cause I've tried it three times and I don't think my wives and I failed, we just grew and learned and I don't have any regrets, I really don't.  We did the best we could with the knowledge we had at the time and we're all friends.  They know each other, they're friends and I feel blessed.  I'm not saying I'll never do it again but if I do it again for only one reason, to share and care with somebody who reciprocally has that as the primary motivation also, to share and to care, simple.
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on your life having been married three times and you're not the first person who has written books about you know how people should--.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --stay together and whose been married more than once.  I think Jawanza Kunjufu has been married four times--.
Speaker 2: Right, correct.
Speaker 1: And he's still writing about--did all of your marriages have the same problem or they had a different--?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't call them problems, I'd call them challenges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, the challenges were different.  In each instance I, I know in my, in my case I did not feel complete in myself and that was my contribution to the ending of those relationships.  Those relationships didn't fail, they completed themselves.  I have a very positive attitude about it you see.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they ran their course?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  There was a good book by a guy named Gary Zukav called 'Seat of the Soul'.  Her has a chapter in that book and he, he says that, we need a new paradigm for marriage, one in which we say it might last--our relationship or marriage whether it's a relationship or a marriage or both.  Either one might last two weeks, two years, ten years or a lifetime.  He says it should last as long as the two souls can do the work that they need to do.  And when they can no longer do the work they need to do then that's a point at which they try other ways of doing the work they need to do.  See marriage should be a school for learning among other things and serious, and we need to know ourselves pretty good before going into it and most of us don't.  Most of us don't have a clue as to what it's going to be like.  Relationships will change after marriage.  The only question is will they change for the better or for worse?  And they built that phrase in there for better or for worse, you see and 'til death do us part, for better or for worse.  And any intelligent person knows that there are some situations that are so bad that they are, they're so deleterious that, that you just have to dissolve them so, so that, that doesn't compute.  What's important is to know before going in, not to know necessarily because you cannot know.  There's an element of risk and taking a chance with marriage, always.  But to, to fairly well know yourself first, to be involved with somebody who has self knowledge and to understand that happiness is something that must be found from within, that nobody can make you happy.  In fact, to get rid of the word happiness, it's not a good word.  The better word is joy.  To experience joy bubbling up from within you and to find somebody else who can experience joy coming up from within him or her.  And so when you come together it's like, that's the soulmate thing.  That's where there's oneness.  See we think that, we, we human beings think that we, we're like a basket okay, and when you're born you're given a name and that name becomes our basket, okay.  Grady, I'm the basket and so the body and the personality, the sense perceptions, the hobbies, the proclivities, everything is part of what Grady, the basket.  That's not me.  That's, that's what is observable.  That's temporary.  That comes to pass so it's a real life.  What is permanent is the spaciousness around the basket and the spaciousness around the woman if she's going to be in my life.  That's who she is, not the basket.  So many get too hung up on how they look, the physical appearance.  It's, it's the spiritual, the inner beauty and so the spaciousness.  Now it is only in that spaciousness that two people can feel as one.  You won't experience your diversity in the form, in, in the, the, the mortal sense but in the, in the spaciousness, in the spiritual sense, there you can find the meaning of love and be in love because why, you are one.  There is no you and no me, see.  So I say hello me.  You are me.  When Jesus said love your neighbor as yourself, he didn't mean, I don't believe, I don't believe he meant love your neighbor the way you love yourself, love your neighbor because your neighbor is yourself.  There's no separation.
Speaker 1: It's an aspect of yourself.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's just one, yeah.  No, it's the same 'cause in the spaciousness there's just one and that's where I find God in that spaciousness.  That's why I don't have any fear of death 'cause I can't die.  This, this is not me.  This basket is not me, it's not you.  It's not her.  So that's my faith, that's my spirituality in a nutshell and you see why it would be hard for folk to have me in a pulpit every Sunday (laughs).  Probably drive them crazy, some of them.
Speaker 1: You know, it might drive them--.
Speaker 2: But some of them would love it too.
Speaker 1: --to, drive them to some--.
Speaker 2: Yeah to thought, to reflection.
Speaker 1: --thoughts that they, reflections that they probably.
Speaker 2: But whatever, as you see whatever I believe, I believe it passionately.
Story_ID: 11952
Speaker 1: How many seminars or workshops do you do a year?
Speaker 2: I don't count them.  I don't, I don't go around I'll use the word hustling but I don't go around asking to do them.  Whenever I'm invited I'll do them.  Now fortunately I speak for blacks in government nationally.  I get invitations every time I do a keynote address there.  I'll do religious conventions and civil rights meetings so I'm often, I'm quite often invited to speak somewhere and, and I usually if my calendar is free, respond.  So, so--now in say ten years ago I was doing much more.  But I found out something.  I don't need but so much to be happy.  I have enough.  Enough is as good as a feast.  So I don't do any work for money now.  I'll make money but I don't work for money, I work because I enjoy doing it, otherwise I don't do it.  10 percent of what I do is pro bono and I'm, I enjoy doing it and I might expand it twenty, I don't know.  So I'm very blessed and very fortunate that at this point in life I don't have any baggage in my life, none.  I'm not boasting, I'm just telling the truth.  And I don't fear dying, I don't fear getting older.  I'm having a ball.  I love my hobbies, football, poker, travel, friends, cooking, entertaining, reading, I'm blessed and I felt this way all along, even when I was going through what folk would say, difficult times, I never looked at it them way.  So I think some of us are given an outlook on life that serves us well because it's very positive even when it's dark.
Story_ID: 11953
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: One, that we'll come to see that blackness is not enough to bring us together or African American is not enough to bring us together.  Two, that the quote unquote middle class and upper middle class will come to see that unless we join hands with the underclass and those--'cause we've lost about a generation and a half of kids out there in terms of preparation for a career and all.  Until we join hands, there's not going to be any progress for the quote unquote race.  There has to be more of a feeling of oneness with our brothers in the inner city where there is hunger and poverty.  And I don't see this happening, but I hope and pray it does happen, that churches would become what Jesus would have them be, bastions of change, havens of hope for those who are deprived and who feel depraved.  This government, I'm not so sure we can call on it because I'm not so sure it cares.  When you got 55 percent of Americans controlling--I'm sorry, 5 percent of Americans controlling 55 percent of the wealth, 10 percent controlling 86 percent of the wealth and want to get more, that's the greedy and you got the needy.  And the greedy don't care about the needy, they want to get more.  They're getting more greedy.  George [W.] Bush says that's my base.  What is my base?  That 5 percent, that 10 percent, that's his base, going to look out for them first.  Anything left over, maybe you people, maybe.  I'm not against George Bush.  I think he probably is doing what he thinks he ought to be doing, given his perception of what he's got to work with, he's probably doing the best he can.  So until that changes--see, you see, capitalism in my view is inherently unequal.  Now folk will say oh you shouldn't be saying that.  Well I believe that.  Why shouldn't I say that?  In, in--built into the whole philosophy of capitalism is the assumption that it will be an unequal distribution of wealth.  It would be, it's predicated on, inequality.  That's why you got the 55 percent you know and, and the 85 percent and then the, the masses.  So what I'm saying is that historically we've been able to look at the government as being a mitigating factor, to some extent, in this whole situation so that the inequality does not impact so much from the underclass.  But now we've moved to a point where the government is exacerbating the situation, not mitigating it.  And a lot of folk are deluded about this regime, that's how the man could get reelected because of the delusion.  And there's a lot of racism going on that's involved in his election, I believe.  I also believe that there are not quite half of the American people, but close to half who are intelligent and who want change.  And I believe we're not that far from it but I think--I'm keeping hope alive like our friend says.  I'm keeping hope alive.
Story_ID: 11954
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done you've had so many positions and done so much.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: It's kind of hard for me to answer your question for this reason, I don't think that way.  My whole mindset is it's all good.  I think I, all of us do at any given point in time whatever it is that we perceive to be the thing to do at the time.  So we can't do other than what we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we do predicated on our perception of what makes sense at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rabbi Moshe had a big funeral and Rabbi Mendel went to the funeral and Rabbi Mendel was asked--no, Rabbi Mendel asked one of Moshe's pupils a question.  He says, he said "What was most important to your teacher, Rabbi Moshe." And the disciple said, "Whatever he was doing at the moment."  And I think that's what it's all about.  What we're doing at this moment this is most important to me.  And hour from now I'll be somewhere else as you know.  I'll be doing something else and that will be most important.  Tomorrow, next week, I'll be in Scandinavia, that.  So in the past well there is no past you see.  I live in the now, in the moment. So back there is history and I know you're talking about history here, the legends and so forth, but I don't, I don't, I don't live there.  I reflect on it to make this more valuable.  Future hasn't happened yet, doesn't exist, so there's only now, there is only now, N-O-W, there is no past, there is no future in the sense that you can't live anywhere, any time but now, here and now.  And that's what I think I've been blessed with, the capacity somehow to, to be in the moment without knowing it.  So when I read that little thing about Rabbi Moshe I said oh, that sounds familiar.  So I could say, I could answer your question this way, family is the most important and family is very important, I love my family, friendships, good health, all that.  That's important.  It's all important.
Story_ID: 11955
Speaker 1: When you look over everything you've done at this point--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: See here again, that question does not compute for me but I'll try to respond.  I, I don't think in terms of my legacy.  I, I, I see myself as simply a vehicle through whom certain stuff, certain communication, certain I hope, a lot of love has come, just a vehicle through whom it's come.  So it's not mine.  I don't leave anything behind.  I just hope that I have been open to the cosmic intelligence, to the divine source as much as--well I have as much as I, as much as possible.  And as I grow older I want to become more and more open to it so that maybe this might be an answer that, that he, he expanded his openness to his source to the point where he was one with the source before he left the planet.
Story_ID: 11956
Speaker 1: What about your family?  Your parents got a chance to see you get involved in your career.  What do they think about your career?
Speaker 2: My parents were proud of me and I was proud of them, proud of my siblings also.  We've had a great appreciation for, for each other, closely knit, valued each other a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your own family we haven't talked about them that much, but you have a son?
Speaker 2: Yeah I wanted to get to that.  I have one son who is in Michigan, moving up very fast in his company, fast tracker, and another son in Indiana, has been a fast tracker all his life, both doing very well.  Both family centered husbands with family centered lives.  I should say child centered, spouses, husband and wives.  Their children, my grandchildren, their children are making A's, getting scholarships and, and the children are doing well and their children are doing well.  That's the biggest blessing in the world.  I'm going to be all right.  And when they are all right too, that's the big blessing.  And I find so many of my colleagues worrying about their children--never had to worry about them, never, not one moment.  Now I'm not saying I've been the most responsible parent but I did what I thought I should do.  I'm not pleased or proud with everything I've done, but what I've done I've done.  The bottom line is, it came out all right and I feel blessed.
Story_ID: 11957
Speaker 1: Is there anything we have not asked or not touched upon that you think we ought to discuss before we ask the last question?  And I'm serious because there might be something we haven't touched upon that's important, it's all important.
Speaker 2: Well during the break we were talking about marriage.  I'd like to see black people and all people but particularly black people become more careful about entering that institution.  It is too serious to be cavalier about it.  The implications of it if it doesn't work are grave and gross sometimes.  And I'd like us to be more careful, more reflective, to get to know ourselves better, to become more whole in ourselves, to develop a relationship with ourselves that is one of integrity and wholeness and completeness and joy before even thinking about signing a piece of paper contractually with somebody of the opposite sex.  And I'm straight so I say the opposite sex.  I'm not against anybody but that's my orientation.  I believe that the laws of love and loyalty must be written on the heart.  They can not be written on a piece of paper.
Story_ID: 11958
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well here again it doesn't compute because it matters not to me if I'm remembered at all 'cause it's not about me.  It's about--traditional religionists would say, the one whom I serve, that's fine.  What language would I use?  It's about, it's about my being a faithful, open--and it's not so much that I'm faithful.  It's a growth, you know to what extent am I growing?  It's like your arteries man.  It's like the arteries in your body.  If they are clear and clean then the flow can go through them.  But if they are stuffed up with plaque and corroded in there, they're not open they're kind of closed and it can't get through.  So I want to be like a good, open, clean artery through whom love and truth and beauty can flow to everybody I touch in my seminars, one on one, on planes and hotels, whatever.  I could care less about a casket or a suit when I'm, this body is dissolving and smelling.  I could care less.  And I could care less what they say about me.  I, I, I--'cause, 'cause it's not about me.  You see what I'm saying?  So, now to try to give you a, an answer that computes to where you're coming from if they want to say something which is, that's their choice whatever, I hope they say well he was a good vessel for the truth and for beauty to flow through and he helped people to feel empowered.  Not that he did it, but that he gave a message that was an empowering message from a source that is all powerful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But if not, but if you don't say anything it doesn't change the fact that I gave it my best shot.  You see what I'm saying?  Another one, he had fun.  He had fun.  He had a good life.  He did it his way.  He loved, he laughed, wasn't a bad poker player (laughs).  He had enthusiasm.  He kind of learned who he was and whose he was.  He wanted to serve and he served.  He understood that he was not a mere human being, but that he was a spiritual being merely having a human experience, something like that.
