Story_ID: 18999
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and observing is Jessica Preston.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling for it us, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: It's not listed on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The initial is, but not the name.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your date of birth and today's date?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is William Pinkney, P-I-N-K-N-E-Y, middle initial D.  I was born September 15, 1935.  Let's see what else I need to put in there--this is caption.  I am Captain, a U.S. Merchant Marine officer.  And that's the moniker behind that.  The other letters and numbers are (unclear) just put in there usually.
Speaker 1: Okay, and "D", what does that stand for?
Speaker 2: It's Deltorius.
Speaker 1: Deltorius, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: D-E-L-T-O-R-I-U-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know, I--hold on one second, I need to turn off the phone here.  Location, here, which is at the Historymakers.
Speaker 2: HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois, 1900 South Michigan Avenue.  Today's date is August the 8, 19--ah, 19--2003.
Story_ID: 19000
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Can't get it, but it is fresh peach and wild strawberry soufflé made at the LaBon Verge in Anteff (ph.) France.  That's my favorite.  Can I get it?  Not hardly, but that's my favorite in the whole world (unclear).  One taste, if I could have one before I die, that's what it would be.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Anytime when it's warm.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: You know, it's kind of hard, being artistic, I--just millions of colors.  To have a favorite would be doing a great--I would think that most of my clothes are, are pretty much in the earth tones, most of my clothes.  I don't, you know, own any powder blue or suits or lemon colored shoes or anything like that.  So mostly soft tones, I would say.
Speaker 1: And this seems a strange question to ask you, but do you have a favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: No.  The whole world.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'd say the one that my, that's on my family coat of arms, which is not a family coat of arms, but I got it done when I was in England a number of years ago, for the Pinkney, and there's code of arms.  So I quote that my mother used to say, and it's "Cassese maleeto omaterry (ph.).  Now, that just really translates out to be "Never let a chance go by".
Story_ID: 19001
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start, and I'd like to start out by asking about your mother and what you know about her growing up and her background?
Speaker 2: She was the youngest of four daughters.  She was born in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Give her name too.
Speaker 2: Her name was Marion, was her, M-A-R-I-O-N.  She was the youngest of the daughters of Samuel and Isabella Henderson.  And she was born here in Chicago.  She had rheumatic heart disease as a child.  And she was a very short woman, probably five feet at the--maybe not, not even quite five feet; education through the eighth grade.  Nothing higher than that, worked most of her life as a domestic.  And she was a gregarious woman.  Not a lot of, of extraordinary things about her.  She was pretty much a straightforward person; really impressed upon my sister and I the, the importance of, of getting and educa--a good education, not any de--high degree of education, but a good education, a sound and complete education; did not, was not a reader, was an excellent dancer from what I understand.  A matter of fact, I've--we even went dancing a number of times.  She loved to dance, loved music.  Yeah, I'd say--those are the things that I, I remember most.
Speaker 1: Was she a talker?  Did she talk any about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot.  I'm probably one of the most gregarious people in, in that side of the family.  My sister is, is just this side of stoic, and, and the others I don't, don't know a lot about their, their proclivity towards speaking a lot.
Speaker 1: Do know where--you said she was born here, right?
Speaker 2: Born in Chicago [Illinois].  All of, all of them were born, all the children were born here.  There were, let's see, four girls and, let's see, Sam, Leroy--and three boys, I believe, yeah, three boys.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know her family?  Were they also from--or had they come from--to Chicago from someplace else?
Speaker 2: My grandmother came from Kentucky.  I don't know where my grandfather came from on that side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about your father?
Speaker 2: My father was an only son.  His father was born, I believe, maybe--I, I think maybe Florida, maybe.  He was, he was raised--his mother died when he was very young.  And so the grandmother I know on, on the paternal side was my grandfather's second wife.
Speaker 1: And your father was also Bill Pinkney?
Speaker 2: His name, he was William, he was William Deltorius Pinkney, the same as I am.  But I'm not William Deltorius Pinkney, Jr.  I, it's, it was never listed as--just the same name.  So we didn't go the junior, senior stories.
Speaker 1: And was his father also--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: His father was a William, and I found out in, in looking up--and the accuracy of this is not necessarily that great because I don't know who the informant was, but on his death certificate, his father was listed as, as William.  So that's interesting if it was, in fact, true, but I'm not really sure where that information came from because my father's death certificate, when I saw it, I had it corrected because they had, a birth date that was no where near the--they had him with a younger birth date than my mother.  And he was considerably older than she was.  So I had to have that changed.  So I--birth and death records are only as good as the person giving the, giving the information.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he--what was your father like, and did he talk about growing up--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Didn't know much about him.  He was a--well, they were divorced when I was probably around six.  So I didn't have a lot of contact with him.  He was institutionalized when I was in the sixth, sixth grade--sixth or seventh, seventh grade, mental illness.  He was committed to the, to the state institution.  And that's where he remained until, until he died at age seventy-one.
Speaker 1: Let's--can you talk about, so let's see, you have one sibling?
Speaker 2: One sister, yes.
Speaker 1: And is she older or younger?
Speaker 2: She's younger.  She's a year and nine months younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--do you know how your parents met?  Do you know any of that story?
Speaker 2: Well, I know how they met.  They, my father grew up at the home that his father owned at 4913 South Park [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and my mother and her family lived at 4911 South Park.  So they sat on the front porch.  Back in those days, you weren't hanging out.  You'd come out in the evening, sit on the front porch till it got dark and went in the house.  And that's how they met.
Story_ID: 19002
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your earliest memory of growing up?  Do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Probably, I would say one of my--my earliest memory is of my sister almost getting hit by a car.  That had to be--well, she was a toddler so that meant that I was probably five, six at the most.  We were crossing, at that time on South Park they had jitney cabs.  And we had gotten out of a jitney cab on the East side of South Park, in the center because South Park, it's the, it's the main roadway, a little grassy knoll--grassy area, then the inner service road.  Well, we had gotten out on there, and my father was paying the, the fare.  My sister had a pinwheel.  And she's absolutely fascinated by this thing, and as it started turn, she started to follow it.  And she started to walk into the street.  My mother who was on the, across the grass, across the, the street is sitting on the front porch because that's what people did in the summertime.  And I could, I recall hearing her shout, and my father realizing what was going on and grabbing her.  But I remember.  That's probably one of the earliest things I can remember.
Speaker 1: And as--you know, were you a typical older child in that they instilled in you the sense of responsibility or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't recall that consciously being instilled in me.  We were taught to be very self sufficient.  My sister and I traveled by Greyhound, by train to Michigan, to, to--where my grandmother had a place, around town, at very early ages.  So although I was responsible for my sister to a great degree, but we both, both were taught to be independent and self sufficient.
Speaker 1: Was that, was your mother working?  Was that it?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother working, but we had--it was the fact that we had other things that we wanted to do.  We were exposed to, I was exposed to theater, classical music, ballet, art, at a very young age because within the family, there were people--I had two musicians in the family.  One, one uncle was a drummer, another one was a piano player.  There were a number of people in the family that worked in the Art Institute, that worked at the Goodman Theater, that worked at Symphony Hall.  So they would get tickets and things of that nature and we would go.  So it was nothing for us to go, I--in elementary school I was, loved to do art.  I won scholarships two years in a row to go to the summer program at the Art Institute in Chicago.  A matter of fact, one of my classmates, in the second year I went, was Marlin Perkins' daughter.  And Marlin Perkins, of course, was the head of the Lincoln Park Zoo at the time.  So we were very broad-reaching in our, in our, our interests, and our ability to move around.  Of course, we're, we're living in a very different time where there was not so much concern about the things that we, that we are nervous about letting children do today.  So at that time, it was nothing for us to go down to Twelfth Street station.  My parents--my mother would take us down there, and we'd get on the train and go to wherever, someone would meet us on the other end, so we traveled.  We did that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--can you just share some other stories of growing up, your household--now, you stayed on South Park, is that correct?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I didn't stay, that's where my, that's where my parents grew up.  We moved a lot.  My mother moved a lot since she was a single parent, we moved a lot.  Sometimes at night in jitney cabs, with shopping bags  That was how we moved.  But we moved a lot.  I think I must have gone to four, at least five elementary schools.  Let's see, I went to Corpus Christi, Forestville, McCosh, Dewey, Douglas.  I went to five different elementary schools because we moved all over.
Speaker 1: And so that moving, did that affect you at all as a child in some respects? It's like someone being in the service and move all the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't.  I, I don't recall any affect.  What it, what it gave me was a sense of, of--that you, you were not rooted to any place merely because that's where you happened to keep your clothes.  Home was where you were, and the, and your, your family was, no matter where that was.
Speaker 1: And was either your mother--I know you talked about your, you know, other family members who were, you know, who were artistic or involved in the arts.  Were either of your parents artistic?
Speaker 2: No, I just said my mother was a, was a dancer.  There was the family story that she won a twenty dollar gold piece for dancing in the twenties [1920s], you know.  I imagine the Charleston or whatever.
Speaker 1: And you also said that you took an interest in art very early, and I'm wondering were you doodling or--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I, I painted, I drew.
Speaker 1: Starting when?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably--I recall some of the earlier drawings that I've done.  I remember drawing the presidential candidates when Tom Dewey was running for, for president, with the--he had the face that, that lent itself well to sketching with the bushy mustache and that thing.  That's one of my fairly--my earliest recollections of actually drawing.  And I drew all the time, and doodled a lot.
Speaker 1: And I want to know--I want to take, even though you were moving around, I want you--we always have sort of childhood memories, and I'd like to sort of take you back.  And I want to ask you, you know, what sights, smells or sounds remind you of growing up here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, probably sounds, of course, were very, very big, growing up on the South side in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  It was very sound oriented.  Radio, since I'm a radio child, my hearing and listening and being able to discern things by sound and to conjure up images by sound are probably far greater than someone who had grown up in television era where they, they had certain circumscribed visions of what someone or something should look like.  I was able to, to develop a very vivid, creative imagination on myself--my, my, sounds, the watermelon man, the ice man, the coal man.  These were sounds you heard in, in the, the--in--as, in the alleys during, during the day.  To hear, on warm summer nights, to hear the fights, particularly, the Joe Louis fights, on the radio as you walked down the street because it, everyone had the window up.  No one had air conditioning, and everyone listened to the radio.  So all the radios were tuned to that, so it was a constant flow of, of sound for that.  To hear the sounds of the Second World War, the things that went on with the air raid warning practices, those sort of things; radio very much; music, sitting down at, behind the tavern on 35th and Indiana where there was a liquor store in the front, a kind of juke joint in the back with no air conditioning, but with a screen door, where you could sit outside the screen door and hear Muddy Waters, Howling Wolf, Jimmy Reed, those kind of things.  These were the kinds of sounds that I recall growing up, with smelling the, the, the skin man as he came down the street with a large baskets, with half cut brown bags with cracklings inside.  And he'd sell those.  The hot tamale man, these--the street vendors, that kind of, of cacophony of sounds and smells were the things that I remember growing up to; going to Maxwell Street and smelling the onions and the mustard and of, of the hot dogs that you got when you went there.  These were all parts of my growing up.
Story_ID: 19003
Speaker 1: And what were you like as a child?  What kind of child were you?  Were you--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Wonderful, certainly.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), I know, but were you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: I, I can't be objective about that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), I know, but were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say mischievous.  I would say that I was in some precocious.  I had, I, I had what I found out later was an exceptionally high I.Q., which I didn't know what that meant.  But my reading level, I recall my reading level in seventh grade was fourth year high school.  And I don't know where it went from there.  Those sorts of things.  I was interested in reading, reading, I, I developed a reading in the--an interest in reading in probably about the seventh grade.  Early school was kind of uneventful.  Probably the most traumatic portion of it was my, was sixth grade because I went to Dewey School at 54th and Union.  At that time, this was about, let's see, it had to be about 1947, '48 [1948], and the school was predominantly white.  There were probably five black kids in the, in the whole school.  And I was related to three of them.  And I--an incident, a really traumatic incident then was, I was in school, and we were studying geography, I was in Ms. Clendon's class.  I never will forget this as long as I live, a teacher named Ms. Clendon.  She was my, my teacher.  She was giving a class in geography, and we were, the subject was Brazil.  And we were talking, and she was explaining the products of Brazil, and one of the things she came up was Brazil nuts as major project--product there.  And, and so she's explaining, and the kids were very inquisitive Brazil nuts.  They couldn't relate to that was; says, "you know, you know, nigger toes".  And, of course, all of the kids laughed and looked at me.  And the next move she made is what did it for me because she's, she, she--they, they were laughing, and she turned and says, "Well, that's what they look like".  And so I found no solace or protection by my teacher.  And that said, (whistle sound) for school.  And from then on, I was like dead zone for it.  And I was, I transferred out of that school the next semester and came to Stephen [A.] Douglas School [Chicago, Illinois], which was an all-black school, with all black teachers.  And my seventh grade teacher at that time was a woman named Gladys Berry.  And Gladys Berry was the one who, who got me interested in, in school again and reading and in, in learning by appealing to my artistic drive, cause that's what I used to do, is sit in the back of the room and draw, just draw.  I wasn't interested in the rest of it.  And she challenged me to, to enter a school contest which would allow me to get out of school to go to Oakenwald, which was, that was the big time to go to Oakenwald [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] for this inner city, this, you know, this city-wide art contest.  So I went in--but I could enter as many pictures that I liked in the school contest, but for every picture, I had to do a book report, which was all right because I would read the first chapter and the last chapter and figure out what happens in the middle and write a book report.  People still do that.  And I caught on to one book which was a book by Armstrong Sperry, the 1940 Newberry Award winner for children's books.  It's still in print, still in schools today.  And it, it was about a young Polynesian boy who was a social outcast because he was afraid of the water.  And he'd just enough of it, and finally just ran away, by taking a canoe and his dog and some food and, and the, an albatross followed him, who he befriended.  It was kind of his pet, who had, who had--he had mended its broken leg and found--(unclear) bonded with him.  So the three of them took off and went to another island, and they stayed on the island for some indeterminate period of time.  But the first encounter on the island was with a wild boar, and, which terrorized him, and he ultimately ends up killing the boar, cooking the boar for food, ending up with the boars' tooth necklace, and just having the run, and had a--just had the whole run of the island to himself, until one night, he hears this noise out at seas.  And he realizes that the people who used the island, which he had discovered had lots of altars and things on it, used it for human sacrifice.  And they were coming back, and he just barely escapes, goes home, goes home a hero.  Everybody loves him, greatest thing in the world.  I wanted to do that, and that sort of sparked my desire to have a great adventure in life.
Speaker 1: And was that--you said that was in seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when--the, your sixth grade teacher, when she made the comment about Brazil nuts and nigger toes, was that--did you talk to your mother about that at all?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, I don't recall, I don't really recall talking to her about that.  I may have an just blocked it out, but it, it sealed the thing for me about, about school.
Story_ID: 19004
Speaker 1: Was there anything important in your development, you know, from that, like, you know, kindergarten or first--to, you know, to sixth grade, that period before we go to seventh grade?  Anything else, anyone else influencing you, any of the other, you know, any people that were sort of, you know, a part of your life other than relatives or, you know, your parents or?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  Since I have cousins who are peers to my sister and myself--one cousin's older by a couple of years and one who is, who is my twin almost.  Actually, I'm older than him gestation wise because he was born August 21, and I was September 15, but he was four or five weeks premature.  So technically, I'm older than he is, but he's the one.  And, and then my sister, so that was the four of us.  So we were all in that, in that range.  There was one other cousin who was just a little bit younger than, than my sister.  So we're all, you know, all kind of ran around together with the--however, the female cousin being, being the eldest and the one who is the, you know, the dominant factor or sister who was in charge when would do anything, when the four of us would do anything.  And a lot of times we'd do things together because we lived at one point with, with their mother, who was my Aunt Helen.  They, we'd, we shared a house.  So we had that kind of relationship.
Story_ID: 19005
Speaker 1: Was church a part of your growing up?
Speaker 2: It was a part of the family's growing up.  It was not a big part of ours (unclear).  Ultimately, what happened is that I was--my grandmother was very, very much a part of what is Metropolitan Church, which I just found out recently, they're trying to, trying to demolish, which just sickens me.  And she was.  My Aunt Alice was very, very much involved in an organization called Junior and Christian Endeavor.  And I was involved in the activities of that, not so much the organization because I was never part of the organization, but when she had plays, she always drew me into that because of my creative ability.  I used to make costumes and do scenery and things for her because of my artistic development.  And I played roles in some of the, some of the plays that she put on.  Strong religious, no.  Probably religiously, I didn't have any--my religious development didn't start till much later, and at a, at a relatively early age I embraced Judaism.  So that's the, the religion that I practice, and I have for, for many, many years.
Story_ID: 19006
Speaker 1: Now, when your father was committed, was that traumatic at all for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was traumatic, not initially, but later on because it was, there was always a question of was it something hereditary?  That was always a concern of mine, and it wasn't until many years later that I found out that it was, it was disease related as opposed to hereditary.  So that had, you know--.
Speaker 1: But was there a point--?
Speaker 2: --Kind of expunged any of my, my feelings of, of--that it was gonna happen to me.
Speaker 1: But didn't you say that happened around your seventh grade too, or was that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he was, yeah, he was committed when I was about, about seventh grade cause I was just coming into [Stephen] Douglas School, so that was seventh grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: And don't remember--was that time period traumatic, you know, do you remember or was he just sent away?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, I, I had no contact with him prior to that.  My mother came to school, got me--and I don't know why she came and got me.  And we went over to [Cook] County [Hospital] to see him at the County.  And he was completely restrained and just rattling off incoherently, and the locks through the--locks into, into the, the mental ward was very scary for me.  But that's all I, I really related, because he wasn't somebody I really knew.  And so I didn't get that, that thing.  My connection, of course, with that, with that incident was later in life wondering whether or not I would be prone to the same type of thing.
Story_ID: 19007
Speaker 1: Now, can you also describe the Chicago [Illinois] of your youth, you know, things that you were aware of as a young person, and, you know, things?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, Chicago, now, remember, I'm growing up in the--from my real cognizance of, of youth started about just after the first World War, cause I was born in '35 [1935].  So, as the second World War started, I was about six or seven years old.  So I'm now becoming aware of things.  So eight, nine, ten was during that time.  Chicago was very different than it is now as far as, as its look.  It was--there was a restrictive placed on black people particularly.  We didn't live West of Wentworth, North of 31st Street, South of 63rd Street or East of, of Cottage Grove.  That pretty much was the black belt or Bronzeville as it was euphemistically called.  We had two, two police departments in the City of Chicago.  You had the Chicago--you had the city police and you had the park district police, very different.  Park district police wore gray shirts, city police wore blue shirts, different jurisdictions.  All the police cars were black.  The forces on the South side were people, were out of the Fifth Police District; Forty-seventh Street was "the" street and Grand Boulevard or, or South Parkway as it was called was the, was the, the main drag whereas Michigan, Michigan Avenue was somewhat of a, of a secondary street in that, in that transit from North to South.  We had celebrities abounding.  They--it was, you could walk down the street and see people that, that we now would be in awe of--
Story_ID: 19008
Speaker 1: And you were saying that, you know, there was music abounding in the Chicago [Illinois] you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Oh, Chicago, certainly, because you had, you had music.  You had--as I said, people, you'd walk down the street, and you'd see people.  Sugar Ray Robinson, you'd see, you'd see Joe Louis and Marva Louis.  You would see whomever happened to be in town playing at the Regal Theater.  The Regal Theater for, for less than a half a dollar you could go and see a movie, and you could see Duke Ellington, Lionel Hampton, Count Basie, and some--even, you'd even see sometimes Stan Kenton or you'd, or you'd see comedy acts, Butter Bean and Susie, Mantan Moreland, Pigmeat Markham.  You would see, I recall seeing a, a group called "The Will Masterson Trio" with Sammy Davis, Jr. as a side act.  There were the dancers the Nicholas Brothers, the Stepbrothers, Peg Leg Bates, tremendous, tremendous (things?).  And these were people you would see not only on stage, you'd see them walking up and down 47th Street.  They would going to the, to the Palm Lounge or, or you'd see them going to one of the eateries on 47th Street or down on 51st Street, very different because we, we had a limited range of where we could go.  Therefore, you could live on a block where the person who was on, on welfare could live next to in--and a kitchenette apartment building would be next to a, a mansion, a converted mansion or mansion that had been in, in past times a mansion, beautiful house on, in the thirties and forties and fifties on South Park that was owned by T. K. Lawless, a doctor, or doctor, or someone of that, of that ilk.  The, the head of Provident Hospital, ministers, I mean all these people lived, they were in close proximity.  So you could see the possibilities of where you could be.  The restriction that held us all within that bounds was, of course, very evidence, but you really didn't care.  To go downtown was an unusual thing.  What did you go downtown for?  You want to buy something, you go to South Center Department Store on Forty-Seventh Street.  If you really wanted to go to big time, you would go to 63rd and Halsted, (whistle sound), that was big.  That was a big trip, to go to Sears and Roebucks on 63rd and Halsted, another shopping mecca.  Movies, entertainment, you had the Metropolitan, you had the Regal.  You had the Willard, you had all these things within, within the neighborhood, very different than it is today.
Story_ID: 19009
Speaker 1: Were there people that you looked up to during that time?  Yourself?
Speaker 2: I don't if there was a, there was a concept of people I looked up to or who I wanted to be like.  I really loved my grandfather.  He was a--my, my father's father, he was the man that knew it all because he had something in his house that I just coveted, and I would just dive into when I got there.  He had a subscription to "Popular Science" magazines.  And I would read them.  And he would (nominate?) all, and had the magazines.  He, every little trick that you learned and every little gadget and stuff, he had them in his house.  He had a graystone which had been at one time a mansion with huge twelve-foot ceilings with doors that slide back in the, into the walls that separated the front room from the middle room from the dining room.  It had a butler's pantry with all sorts of glass doors, a, zinc sink, a kitchen, huge kitchen with a combination stove, which was just amazing to me, part wood stove, part gas stove.  And then there was a servant's quarters behind it.  And that's where my grandfather and my grandmother lived, and the rest of the house, the upper floors were, were rented out, the rooms were rented out.  But still, it had the leaded glass entrance, the beveled glass door, and the terrazzo entryway and the vestibule with the number of the house in terrazzo; wood paneling throughout, huge chandeliers over the kitchen table, built-in, built-in china cabinets in the living room with curves glass, those sort of things.  That was just amazing to me, a stone basement where he used to, where he used to make something called "drink", which was a grape juice because they had property up in Baldwin, Michigan, which is near Idyllwild.  And they would buy--when the concord grapes would come into season, he would buy the grapes, press them and make this, and make this great juice drink, and with--he had a bottle--a thing to put caps on a bottle.  I thought that was incredible, this thing you'd put these caps in there (hydraulic air sound), you capped it, just like the bottles that you saw in the store, those sorts of things.  It was a lot of awe and wonder.  And I always loved to visit my grandfather's house because of that.  And he loved to give me cookies.  And he obviously had not done with, with false teeth.  And this is an amazing thing, I hadn't thought about this for years, but I sort of--he used to, since he didn't have teeth, he liked things like peanut brittle and nuts.  Now, if you don't have any teeth, you can't do that.  He used to take a pair of--he had a pair of pliers and he'd put the pliers in and crunch it up as he chewed it, which was amazing, you know.  And later, I'd never thought about it when I was a kid, but that's what he did.  But in later years, you say, whew, how could he--but it was practical.  He did that and had a, had a chair that's, a big leather chair that sat at the end of the hallway so he could see right straight out through to the, down the long hallway, out through the vestibule, into the, into the street.  So he used to sit back there with, with no lights on because that, the lights made heat.  And that's, and that's where you'd find him.  And he'd (whispering) and that was Grandpop.  He--and one of the frightening things that happened to me a number of years ago, as I was talking to my grandkids, and I realized that I was now Grandpa Pinkney.  I had become him now.  That was my status within the family.  This is amazing.
Speaker 1: Did he tell you ever any stories or is it just the gadgetry and, you know, and "Popular Science".
Speaker 2: Just the gadgetry.  Now, I don't come from a family that really told stories and much of that.  Most of the things were things that I kind of discerned or picked up offhandedly.  There was no sessions of, of passing down the, the family tree or any of that kind of thing.  So I had to, had to do my own investigation on things I was interested in.
Story_ID: 19010
Speaker 1: Now, so--and you went to [Stephen] Douglas to Tilden Tech, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Right.
Speaker 1: And why Tilden Tech?  Was that because that's where you lived closest cause it--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, Tilden Tech was not, was not a school--my school would have been [Wendell] Phillips.  My, Tilden Tech required that you sign up for it, that you take a test to get in.  You had to take a test to get it because it was a specialized school.  Lane [techinacl High School], Crane [Technical High School] and Tilden were pre-engineering schools.  I wanted to be an artist, and my mother said, "You can't make any money being an artist.  The only people who make any money from art are dead white men."  You got to get yourself a real job.  So I thought, what's the closest thing to art where you can draw for a living?  Being an architect.  So that's what I decided I was gonna do, and that's when I, and I applied for--to, to Tilden.  And I was accepted in Tilden.  And that's, that's--because it was pre-engineering.
Speaker 1: And how--the Tilden that you went to, how large was the black population there?
Speaker 2: In the school?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Probably around 3,000.  It's always been big.
Speaker 1: No, no, black.
Speaker 2: Oh, black population.  Oh, probably, I would say not even one percent.  I graduated in a class of three hundred and ninety some, and of my class, I think maybe there were about fifteen, ten to fifteen.  It was--my father had gone to Tilden.  But he got thrown out for fighting.  And I talked to someone else who was a little bit younger than my father, recently, and--well, he was a lot, lot younger than my father when I think about it, but he was in there at a time where he could have, where, where he had the same problem.  He got thrown out for fighting.  Most of the fighting things that they got thrown out for were racially motivated.  When I was there, we came back from one summer session and the population of blacks had, had increased somewhat, and painted on the walls of the school was "nigger tech" in, in--on the school.  We'd, routinely, if you didn't go, if you didn't get out of school--go right straight out of school when school finished and go right to 47th Street, get on the train, the, the streetcar and go back, chances were that some of the neighborhood kids, you were gonna mix it up with them as you, when you left school.  That was just standard procedure.  And you had the two school stores, one was a school store where the black kids went and the other was a school's--the other two were the school stores where the white kids went for lunch, where you go over and get your whatever, the sandwiches or pickles or whatever you had (unclear) or candy for lunch or buy your school supplies.  Some school supplies you could only buy at one of the stores.  So you'd have to, gird your loins and go in there and take whatever verbal abuse came out of that to buy what you needed to do, drafting paper or pencils or T-squares or whatever.  And, and then go on to school.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--so, did Tilden turn out the way you wanted it, I mean in terms of the classes you took?
Speaker 2: I graduated.  That was, that was the main thing.
Speaker 1: No, but I mean--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I graduated.  I was not, I was not a stellar student in, in the school.  I, I graduated in four years without, I think in the whole time, I think I, I got one "F" in the whole four years I was there.  So I was moderate student in most things.  I took the general courses required, of course.  In addition to those, I took the shops, model shop, pattern shop, and what other shop I had to take, I think I took the three or four shop classes you had to take, and drafting, of course, the whole four years.
Story_ID: 19011
Speaker 1: And so when you graduate, what are you thinking you want to do at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated I was not sure.  Now, in 1953 I joined Naval Reserves, still while I was in, in high school.
Speaker 1: And why did you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to, I wanted to be in the Navy.  I wanted to--it, it appealed to me.  I wanted to go to sea, in order to see what was out there.  Looking at the lake and the water, I was drawn to that, so I joined the Naval Reserve.  I met some guys who were in the Naval Reserve, and it sounded really intriguing.  I went down there and talked to the people there and decided that's what I was gonna do.
Speaker 1: And so were you in your junior year--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Junior year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Cause you could join I think at seventeen and a half or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, you--did you go to the Navy after you joined the Naval Reserves, I mean--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no, you--I joined Naval Reserve and it's one night a week, just like the National Guard I think is now.  And so I would go to school, and one night a week, I would do it, and--I mean one, one weekend a month--or was it one, one night a week or--it was either one night a week or one weekend a month.  But anyway, and in the summer, you'd take your two week cruise or your duty for two weeks, and that's, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the first time you were on a boat, what that felt like to you?
Speaker 2: I'd been on boats before.
Speaker 1: Okay, growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Not pleasure boat, but a boat--I was on, I lived on the Wendella Line in the summertime, you know.  And boat, well, I had a boat ride all over the shore for--all the boats, for a boat ride, from down at, at, behind the, the Aquarium and, and then to,down at the, downtown at, down the river, go and do those river tours and things.  So I, I liked being on boats.  It was a comfortable place for me.
Speaker 1: So you, that's what I'm just wondering.  So when you graduate, do you get started with--no, that's not.  You graduated in nineteen fifty--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: And I went in the Navy on active duty in 1956.  I went to Provident Hospital X-ray School for two years and got--and learned to be an x-ray technicians.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what made you decide to do that?
Speaker 2: One minute.
Speaker 1: X-ray technician?
Speaker 2: Yes, one minute, one minute.  I wanted to go to, I went to the school because it, I had, I had an appendectomy, emergency appendectomy in the year I graduated from high, graduated from high school.  And I met, I met a young woman who was a student nurse, and I was so intrigued with her and so intrigued with the medical thing.  So I decided to become an X-ray technicians so I could be close to her, which was not too bad.  It gave me a profession and kept me off the streets.
Speaker 1: And then what made you decide to go on active--or you got called into active duty--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I, no, I went, I went on active duty, yeah.  I decided that I wanted to go on active duty.
Speaker 1: And you served in the Navy for how many years?
Speaker 2: 'Til 19--from '56 [1956] to '61 [1961].  I expected to go in '61 [1961], actually ended in '60 [1960] because of my, my obligation and they discharged me early to save money.
Speaker 1: Was that, oh--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The Navy did.  I mean they, they do it, just say the, if you're in a certain place, they'll, they'll discharge you.  If you're closer to home for the last portion of your, of your enlistment, say for the last six, six months and you're subject to be transferred a longer distance for the, for that last part of your, your term, they'll give you an early discharge just so they don't have to pay you to take you from point A to point B, when it, whereas you're at point C which is closer and it's cheaper for them to pay off.  So they'll, they'll discharge you early.  They, they did that with me.
Story_ID: 19012
Speaker 1: Now, when you--were you stationed at Great Lakes [Naval Base, Illinois]at all?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to basic school where like just about everybody from this area went there.
Speaker 1: And then from there to?
Speaker 2: I did this, I did this all as a reservist.  All this was done as a reservist.  When I went on active duty, I went to Hospital Corps School, in Bainbridge, Maryland, and there I went, I, I got the Hospital Corps, my specialty school.  I did my specialty school.  I went into my specialty school as a third-class petty officer with four years longevity which the majority of the people in, in my, in my group were, were out of, just fresh out of boot camp or coming from the fleet as seamen.  They had, they, they were not, they didn't have the petty officer rank.  So I was what would be, one, two, three, four--I was an E-4, E-5.
Speaker 1: And were you stationed there for how--were you stationed there for like two years?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No, not in Maryland?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  In Maryland, I was just there for sixteen weeks.
Speaker 1: Just sixteen, okay.  And then where did you go after that then?  That's what I'm--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Naval Air Station, Jacksonville.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then, then I went to duty station.  I was what they called an ACPL for my class, which means the acting chief petty officer for my class.  I was the, I was the senior member of the class.  Therefore, I was responsible for the class.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the Navy like when you were there?  You know, because a lot of times, you know, blacks have said that it was, it's the most difficult--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, oh, it was very difficult because when I went, when I went on, to go on active duty--well, actually, when I went to, to sign up for my specialty, they, they were trying to get me to become a stewards mate.  Says, well,  why don't  you want to become a stewards mate and be with, and be with your friends and be with your kind, your guys.  And I said, I'm a board certified X-ray technician, no way, I'm gonna be, I'm gonna be a hospital corps (man?) because that's the only you're gonna take it.  And my, my scores on the, the battery of tests you take were all within four points or less from perfect scores.  So there was no way they could, they could jimmy me out of this whole thing, although there was some, some pressure from them to try to do it.
Speaker 1: Did you like your experience there?
Speaker 2: The Navy?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I loved being in the Navy.  The only reason I got out of the Navy is because they wouldn't give me a commission.  I took--there were, there were--at the time there were a lot of programs, much as they are today, but not operating as well as they are today, that would get you--that you could go from being an enlisted man to being a, an officer.  You would go, the integration plan, which means you'd go two years of active duty, two years of college, two years of active duty, two years of college, two years of active duty.  Then there was the direct, direct plan where you would go into, into the military academy.  And then the other one was one, the scholarship plan, which you would go to a school and be a part of the NROTC [Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps] for four years, and then have an obligation, I think, for four years when you got out.  But you could be commissioned in any one of these things.  I was trying to get a commission in the medical service corps, which is what I was in, the medical end of it, which is essentially a hospital administrator, rather than a line officer who would have responsibility for combat vessels and vehicles and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: And what did you like about it?  What was it that you liked about--the structure?
Speaker 2: The structure, yeah, the structure, the discipline, the uniform's pretty hip.  You know, I'm (sorry?), the travel.  So it was, it was very--all of phases of it I enjoyed.
Speaker 1: And that was really the first time you had really sort of traveled in that way, right--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I'd, I'd traveled.  Like I said--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: No, you said Michigan, you were going--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: We traveled Michigan, Florida, New York, I traveled all over.  I was in the Drum and Bugle Corps so we traveled by bus all over the country for competitions.  So I, I was well traveled by the time I got in the Navy.  This was, I was not in awe of traveling.  It was something that was part and parcel of my life.
Story_ID: 19013
Speaker 1: Now, are you still at this point doing anything with drawing and art, you know, during your time--(unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, restless.  I, once I got out of, out of high school, I, I haven't done, and I haven't done anything really in years cause the--I've been focused on so many different things.  I've got six tracks running at one time.  And in order to do, to really seriously pursue something artistic, you have to be able to concentrate on that, and that was not something I could do.
Speaker 1: I just had missed the, sort of the drum and bugle corp.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was, that was part of my growing up, part of why that, the Navy was so, was so, was so great because this was a competitive drum and bugle corp, George L. Giles Yellow Jackets, which is the Sons of the American Legion.  And the whole drum corp world is, and still exists today with Drum Corp International, DCI, it is a entertainment activity done with music and precision marching, scored and done competitively where the disciplines in it, music, marching maneuvering, performance, are all very, very, very tight.  And it, the things that they expected of me when I was in the military in boot camp that were considered tough to most of them, nothing to me.  I went through that like it was easy.  You could get, gained a tenth of a point for having your stick that much higher than someone else's and that tenth of a point could be the difference between your winning and losing a competition.  So you were, it was a, it was a team, tight, tight, tight team effort.  So that taught me a lot about, about that kind of operation, and I really enjoyed that, that portion of it.  And since I was never someone who was big in sports, I did, never played basketball.  I can't play basketball now.  I played soccer when I was in school, but this to me, that was my sport, drum and bugle corp.  And I loved it.
Speaker 1: You played soccer in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's on--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Soccer's not a new sport (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know it's not a new sport, but I'm just saying that you, you know, it's a sport that's still relatively new to the United States.  That's all I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Well, not, not to my--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Except in the neighborhood, started--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Not to my, not to my school, and to, and to the city.  There've soccer leagues in this, in this city since the twenties [1920s].
Speaker 1: But what were, what was the ethnic makeup of your school primarily--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, now, now the ethnic makeup of my school was this, it was predominantly Polish and middle European.  In 1948, which is when, just before I started to get in--when I got in high school in 1950, in the fall of '50 [1950], we were getting all these DP's coming from, from Europe, the Displaced Persons.  So there's a tremendous influx of, of Europeans, middle Europeans, Czechs, Lithuanians, Ukrainians, Slovenians, people from there came into the U.S. and, of course, they, they had teenaged kids and their kids came in at a young age and then ended up going into schools.  So soccer was very popular because it, it was a sport they played all their life.  I, I played on a team in high school.  I played in the Navy on my ship's team in, when I was on the Roosevelt.  And in both cases, I was, if not the only, but probably one of the very few American black players on the teams.  The others were--they were all citizens, of course, but they, they were--their roots were in Europe or South America.
Speaker 1: Now, the drum and bugle corp, was that also at Tilden or was that--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no, that wasn't at Tilden.  That was outside.  That was, that was American Legion based, in Giles Post, American Legion.
Speaker 1: America, okay.  How did you get involved with that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just, I, I love parades.  I saw it in a parade and I said, boy, I'd like to do that.  And I found out how to do it, and I joined.
Story_ID: 19014
Speaker 1: So you don't get your commission?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And you--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I kept, I kept extending my, my, my enlistment in order to have the proper time to do it, sat for the test, passed the test.  The last phase of that, of course, is the physical; passed the physical up to the point where the eyes were, were the last thing.  And if you wore glasses, there's a thing in, for physicals called a wavier.  You can be--you can get a waiver for certain medical defects which will not be a detriment to your performance.  Being a hospital corps man, being a hospital administrator, if I had to wear microscopes, all I had to do was read.  I was not flying airplanes.  I was not taking boats.  I was not responsible for millions of dollars of exp--of non expendable equipment, nothing like that.  The people that would not give me a wavier--see, it was at the discretion of the physical officer, wouldn't give ma waiver because of the fact that I wore glasses.  And these guys were wearing coke-bottle thick glasses because they, but they had come out NROTC [naval Reserve Officer Training Corps] programs and other programs from the outside, because hospital administrators for the most part, this was in the time I was coming in, were draftees, a lot of them.  And a lot of them came out of NROTC programs during their NROTC time.  And there was not a great interest in having black officers.  That was a, a rarity, and there was no program or project to, to try to even encourage that.  And I'd, I'd been discouraged in trying it on, on a couple of occasions, not overtly, but kind of covertly.
Story_ID: 19015
Speaker 1: So do you decide to come back to Chicago then or you-- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, when I got out of the service, I, I got discharged in 1959, '60 [1960], and then I went to, I went to New York.  My last duty station was in Puerto Rico and then I went, I went back, I went to New York.  It was nineteen of December, a snowstorm.  I stayed about three or four weeks --got on the plane, went back to Puerto Rico.  (pause).  Yeah, and I lived in Puerto Rico for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Puerto Rico is not new then, okay?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: So you live there and got to know the people and--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I got--I lived there, and I blended in.  I lived on the economy, I lived in the culture.  I held a number of different jobs there.
Speaker 1: And your Spanish?  Were you speaking, did you pick up the language?
Speaker 2: Uno momento, no para enbradge (speaking Spanish), mucho en espananol, condo (unclear) tienea hombre, apren mucho.  Translated, it means I learned a little bit as I was there, but when you get hungry, you learn a lot.  And that's how I learned.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you change during that period, do you think, you know, while you were in Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: It's kind of hard to, to--there's, there's no way to objective, objective evaluation on how one changed because one had to assume that one was different.  And I assumed that I've always been me, this is who I am.  I haven't changed from who I am.  However, from, from an outside point of view, who I am may have changed.  To me, I've always been me.  And the changes have been gradual and subtle, unless they were, unless they were traumatic or self induced for  a specific reason.  So it's hard to, to give you a, an accurate assessment of that.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I did, I, I must say that I, I did mature to some degree, not necessarily a great degree because I, I feel that there was a necessity to remain immature and flexible throughout your entire life because once you become "grown", you're cast in stone supposedly.  I've never been a big advocate of that, the flexibility of youth is something that, that I think is important in sustaining your longevity and keeping you mentally alert.
Story_ID: 19016
Speaker 1: But I'm trying to understand how you got involved, as working as a makeup artist?  Okay, how--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, listen, it was, it was after, after years of doing, of doing X-ray, when you--remember there're--at some point you come to one realization.  It's called mortality.  And when your, when your job entails dealing with sick, dying and, and in some cases, dead people, unless you can be extremely objective or completely block it off, you start to think about, you know, what am I doing?  Can I, can I separate myself?  And my problem was I could not separate myself from what I did.  When I was doing the radiation part of it, if you came to see me, if you became one of my, my patients on my patient roster, you were a dead person, the minute you came to that because radiation therapy for cancer was the last-ditch operation.  All it was, was a holding action.  We didn't have at this time, the kind of medicine we have today.  My mother, had she have had the same condition today that she had--that killed her, she would have been alive today.  It's just that event.  So what came to me was that I just could not be objective about what I was doing.  And I said, it's--I, I got to do something that, that is not as depressing to me.  And, of course, art was always something I wanted to do.  I wanted to make money and do something I loved, okay.  I loved to, I loved art.  How do you make money with art?  Well, you can paint signs or you can be a graphic artist, all of which are kind of lucrative, but not--I mean they're good jobs, but where is the money in artistic pursuit?  Well, first of all take away the artistic pursuit, who has the money in this country?  Who has (unclear), women.  The vast majority of money in this, in this country is women's money.  It may not be--they may not control it as, as they'd like, but it's their money.  It's inheritance, insurance policies, divorce settlements.  Women have the bucks.  What do they spend it on?  They spend it on clothes, ah, makeup and hair.  Makeup, artistic pursuit, there we go.
Story_ID: 19017
Speaker 1: How did you get in the union, cause you worked--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I worked, I worked on a number of non-union films with moonlighting union guys from NABET [National Alliance of Broadcast Employees & Technicians], which is far less stringent that IATSE [International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employess], I tried IATSE, I tried and tried and tried.  And I met one of the, the top makeup men in IATSE.  And well, he's, he's the guy that did the "Godfather", he did, he did all of the things.  And he told me, he said that, this union is not interested in, in bringing blacks in it.  It's hard enough.  It's--the nepotism reigned supreme, and if you're really, if you're really interested in, in your art, he says to me, he said, do it somewhere, do it everywhere.  If you can get into NABET, do it.  Don't hold off doing what you love to do, waiting for, for them, for IATSE to give you a chance to go, get in their apprentice program or anything like that.  And that's what I did.  And I joined NABET, and I think the second year I was in NABET, I became the department head for makeup and hair.  But I had to go to make up school--to hairdressing school to get a license.  You have to have a hair dressers' license to do makeup in the state of Conn--state of New York.  In some states you don't, you don't have to any license at all.  You just have to a, I think, a health certificate that says, you know, you don't have an communicable disease.  So that's how I got in the union.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the difference between IATSE and NABET in terms of the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, NABET, NABET is a, is a division.  The television--there were two separate entities at one time, television, film.  The National Alliance of Brother of, of--National Alliance and Brotherhood of Electronic Technicians, yeah, NABET.  Yeah, what it was, it was basically, the cameraman and those kind of people.  But there was a division in that for hair and makeup.  And that's the division I got into.  And it still exists.  Now, what happened ultimately is that division, many years later, after I got out, was absorbed into IATSE.  So all those people that were, that were there became IATSE. IATSE controlled all the film.  You couldn't do a major motion picture.  One of the things that happened when a lot of the blacks were coming into, the Sidney Portier's, the, the Harry Belafonte's and those were coming in there, and when they got star status, they said, no, I don't want someone making me up that doesn't know what I look like.  And they brought their own makeup artists with them.  So what, in order--and what the producer had to do at that point was to hire a standby makeup artist.  They had to hire a union makeup artist to do what that young lady is doing right over there, just sit, while your makeup artist made you up because, and there were no--and then there were--one of the first one's to get, to break that line was a young black woman on the East Coast.  She got into it, and then it got--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Into NABET?
Speaker 2: No, she got into IATSE.
Speaker 1: IATSE.
Speaker 2: I got into, I got into NABET, I was in NABET for, you know, for, for years.  But, but most of the people were--the blacks that were working in, in the field were either non-union or freelancers who worked with a, who had a, who worked in a situation where they had, where a standby actually, actually--and the standby got the film, got the screen credit.
Story_ID: 19018
Speaker 1: What were the, who were the projects you were working on, and were you working on a fairly regular basis?
Speaker 2: What, in makeup, oh?  TV commercials, TV commercials coming out of my ears; did all sorts of things.  I did Calgon, Secret, Nair.  I did National Gas, the gas company.  I did just all sorts of commercials.  When I--also when I did film, we'd--I did film out of New York.  At that time, they were still doing, still doing film in New York, not a lot, but some because the commercials was the big business.  Shortly after I got out, or I went on to something else, it all started to shift to the West Coast because it--the advertising agencies started opening branches in, in the West Coast, so they wanted to shoot where they had a branch.  Up until that time, the agencies were all, it was Madison Avenue owned it.  And they wanted to be the, they wanted to shoot right on top of there.  And they would cast and everything out of New York City for commercials.  They would cast on the West Coast for motion pictures.  So I did that.  I did motion pictures with, let's see, Joe Elbock (ph.), who's now in Night--what's that?  "Law and Order", I did Jacqueline Smith, Loni Anderson, Red Buttons, David Doyle, Sam Waterston, I did album covers, things with Roberta Flack, Billy D. Williams.  I've done four covers for "Essence", just a lot of stuff.  This was in the, in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Now, were you coming across people like Stan Lathan, you know, who I think was in New York around that time, or Bill Graves or, you know, I mean who had--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I knew them, and these are people I knew, that I knew of, not necessarily knew directly.
Story_ID: 19019
Speaker 1: And how many blacks were, you know, black makeup artists were there, in NABET, were there?
Speaker 2: In NABET [National Association of Broadcast Employees & Technicians], in NABET, I was the only one in NABET.  The man for the "Tonight Show" had a black, they had, they had a black makeup artist there.  Well, actually, he was a hairdresser, and he did makeup.  And, but he did people--he was just a staunch thing with Florence Henderson, but there weren't a lot.  There were not a lot of them.  There were lot of them, a lot of black makeup artists, but they worked primarily in, in print where you had no union restrictions for, for artists, for people like, for Penn and [Richard] Avedon  and, and the fashion photographers.  There were a lot of blacks in that area.
Story_ID: 19020
Speaker 1: And you then went on to Revlon after--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I went to Revlon--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Was that more money and, you know, more--or just you--what made you decide to--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, Revlon, Revlon made me an offer.  I was doing film, and I was introduced to someone in the professional hair color of Revlon, and Revlon at the time was starting to get heat about not having any black cosmetics, so I was hired.  And I was hired to put--to produce a line for them.  And I produced a line of cosmetics for them called Polished Ambers in 1974 or '75 [1975].  Now, I came in initially--I was support--I was part of the professional hair care division.  They put me in the marketing division doing this product, this line, this project to make black cosmetics.  Well, I did that.  And I did it a little differently.  See, knowing--when I got it, it was a project in progress.  A young white guy who was a, who was a product manager, it was his responsibility.  When I came in, I'm, I'm the first black marketing manager they ever had.  And here, and here I come into the office, and I'm working on Natural Wonder and basic, and basic Revlon.  This guy sees me and says, oh, I'm glad you're here.  You can help me with this project cause I'm, cause it was his project.  And, and when I look back at how it was laid out, there was a plan t this.  So I, I said, well, you know, I'll talk to you about it.  This was like on Wednesday, and I got--I get there like Monday, by Wednesday I meet this guy.  I can't even remember his name, to show you how brief it was.  Friday morning, it was--everything had a code name.  This was Project Vista.  Friday morning, my secretary, the lovely Arlene--I always called her lovely Arlene.  This is, Arlene was, was my secretary, Videa (ph.), she taught me about that business, so much about it.  She comes in with this big box with all these papers and stuff on it, and it says, says, I was told to bring this to you.  I said, "What's this?"  Then, she says, go talk to the boss, my boss.  And I said, and it, I said, this stuff is all Project Vista.  Says, I says, you know, go talk to him.  So I go into my boss's office, and says, Arlene just brought that stuff, and he says close the door, close the door, and says, you're now running Project Vista.  I said, but I thought that was, whatever, and he says, "It was.  It's your's now.  He won't be here after this afternoon, and don't say anything to him about it."  Friday afternoon, walked by his office, the lights are dark, the name tag is gone from the door.  Now, it's my project.  I'm happy as I can be.  I can sink my teeth in this baby, and I go after it like it's something good to eat; go through the whole thing.  I'm--and I set it up.  I call up my friends that I have in, the photographers, and I started get, getting photographers lined up to do some of the, the shooting.  I call my friend who had worked, I--cause I had worked with a couple of black lines before.  I'd worked--I, we did the first stuff with Flori Roberts that we did, I did the first promotion of a black line in a major department store, which was Bur, Burdines in New Jersey, and this was the summer, the fall right after the riots.  And people thought that they had put this black cosmetic line in there to quell things after the riots, but we had been set from the, from the spring before.  That was just our opening time, back to school.  And so I did that.  I did the in-store promotion, first black makeup artist to do that.  So now, I'm just running with this stuff.  I'm doing it.  The idea was, and I'm, I'm getting allies in helping me along the line in, in the art department, in the writers, in, in the, the display people; put the whole line together; gonna have to put a, a--it was supposed to go in just saying, you know, that, when we got the Polished Ambers, and that was supposed to be the display with a tester, just the colors.  Said, how you gonna do that?  These women walk by the Revlon counter, they're never gonna look at anything cause they don't care-- they knows there's nothing over there for them.  You got to get a riser on the back like the other ones with the photo.  So I say, okay, who am I gonna get?  So I get--I said, no, I can't get one person, got to get more than one cause black women come in different colors.  So I got three models that I knew before.  One was, was fair, one was medium skin, and the other one was dark, and I mean this round.  I mean she looked like Aunt Jemima at age, at age nineteen, gorgeous, full black, full lips, just beautiful, (unclear), just (slicked?) black hair.  Take those three pictures, bing, bing, bing, put them on a display.  Now, you never walked around any place in Revlon with anything they're working on open, cause you never you knew who was, who was walking through the office who may be with another company or ad agency or something.  So you always covered.  So I kept covering my stuff, and I'm sneaking around with this stuff; went out and did the training for it in three cities, test market, put it in test market, (sound), put it out there.  Now, when it's out there in the test market, my boss from the professional division said, calls me down from where I was on the fiftieth floor to the forty-seventh floor where they were, and said, yeah, we're gonna send you back out--we're gonna send you out to Chicago?  I said, what do you mean?  I got this project--he says, no, no.  You work for me.  Either you're gonna go out to Chicago to the hair care company, which was at that time was called French Perm, which they had--Revlon had bought or you get yourself another job.  Said, okay.  So I come out here and we move everything.  My wife at the time, we get a, a deal.  We move everything, and we moved to Chicago.
Story_ID: 19021
Speaker 1: I'm here, maybe--not even a year, Friday afternoon I get a call.  The call says--from, from my boss, said, Irv is gonna be here this afternoon, and he wants to see you.  Now, Irv Botner is the head of the whole thing.  My boss Ted Manual is, runs Deluxall, which is the company there.  So the day before Irv--he's getting there, my phone rings.  No, let's see, the sequence was, my phone rings on Thursday.  A voice on the other end says this, "Pack your bags sweetie, you're coming home".  And I said, is it true? If you heard it from me, you know it's the word.  I said, thank you, Arlene, and I hang up the phone.  The next day I get the call that Irv Botner's coming from my boss, said, Irv wants to see you when he comes tomorrow.  He's coming on Friday.  Friday comes in, I'm doing my thing.  Irv Botner comes in.  He brings me in, and he says, hi, how are you doing, Bill?  (Unclear), how's it going?  I'm saying, "It's fine, Irv, things are going okay."  I'm doing other things cause I'm doing hair care now, which is not something I love.  I'm a, I'm a makeup guy.  Irv now says, you know, he says, says, you're really a cosmetic guy aren't you?  I said, well, you know, cosmetics is what I came to the company for.  But I'm doing fine out here.  I'm, you know, here to do whatever at the company.  He says, you know, you know, sometimes you, you find, you know, guys can, you can do things, but you can, you're better for a company if you're in another position.  I said, I'm, I'm pretty, I'm flexible enough to want to, to want to be a team player and all that sort of thing, cause I know the deal's in now.  He says, let me see if I can find you something.  If I could find, find you something cosmetics, would you come back?  Would you, would you move back to New York?  I said, sure, you know, I, I have no problems with that if that's, if that's where you think that I can, I can make the biggest contribution; picks up the phone, calls New York, hour later than we are here, calls the guy who I worked for before Joe Levitan, call him up, and says, I--calls his office.  He's not there.  He's over Edison, New Jersey, which is our plant.  Calls Edison, New Jersey.  It is now like 6:00 o'clock in New York, calls him up and says, "Hey, Jerry, how are you?"  Says, "I, I want to ask you something.  I got a guy out here that I think can really do something in, in your division in cosmetics, can really, he said, really help us on a lot of the things we need to get done out there."  So now, this is a division president and this is a guy that's a vice president.  And he's talking to him.  So he says, says, "You think that I, I could--if, if you--if I send him out and he could talk to you and you could find something for him?"  Obviously, he says yes, and then he says, when can you--when do you think you could see him?  This is Friday.  Irv looks at me and says, "Can you be there Monday?"  And I said, "Irv, I can get a plane and be there Monday."  He says, "I'll have him come and see you when, when he comes, Monday, Jerry.  Thanks a lot," hangs up the phone.  I fly to New York on Monday.  The first person I--I'm supposed to be there at 10:00 o'clock to see Joe Levitan, the first person I go to see, of course, is the lovely Arlene, cause the lovely Arlene knows what the deal is.  She says, here's what happened.  The products and stuff I put out in the test market started--they put them in the downtown stores because one of the concerns was there was a lot of pressure; there's no products for blacks.  Revlon doesn't make any products for blacks.  They're getting a lot of pressure from, from, from--not PUSH, but NAACP, people like that, you know, major cosmetic company, why is it not--because now the black cosmetic companies have expendable income.  The cities are changing.  The interior of the cities are now shifting heavily to black.  The stores, the department stores are doing okay because now the blacks are coming into those department stores, but the one division in the department stores that are not doing well is the cosmetics cause they got nothing to sell; fragrances doing all right, skin care treatments, all right, shaded items, particularly, Revlon.  These stores have a high investment in a lot of real estate in the store, and they're not--and they're watching customers just walk right straight through.  So they come to the companies and say what are you guys gonna do?  Revlon's line is, they buy our products.  They know that they're the best products out there.  We don't need to do anything special.  Still, this is coming in.  So the deal was, they said, okay, what we'll do--this is the internal, says, what we'll do is we'll, we'll just put something out there.  It's gonna crash and burn, then we can say, hey, look, we tried.  It didn't work; we were right the first time.  Business as usual.  They didn't tell me that.  I didn't know this thing was supposed to fail.  So I'm putting everything I got, all my expertise, I'm pulling in favors, I'm doing everything.  I'm making it from what I know, that this consumer market is gonna do.  They send it, they sent my stuff out to the stores for test market.  The buyers in the store see the stuff and freak out.  They're saying, my God, now I got something I can sell.  I see two hundred black women walk through my cosmetic division every day, and I'm not making a dime on them.  Put this thing on the counter, women going by, oh, Revlon, black (whisking sound, clap), right there.  It's the high quality name.  Stuff's flying off the shelves.  They say, okay, we want to start ordering.  I want it in, in this store, and I want it in this and the divisions of these large, these large chains.  It comes up in one of the marketing meetings, the, when they list up all the things that are going, Charles (Revson?), of course, is alive at the time, and Charles is saying, okay, that's going.  What's this, a new Project Vista.  He says, well, you know, we're getting all this pressure to buy this.  He says, what's this?  Said, that's the line of our black (unclear), says, yeah, says, you--they want to buy.  Said, they're chomping at the bit.  They want us to roll it out, they want us to expand.  He says well, roll it out and expand it.  Well, we haven't got anybody--we don't know really how to do that yet.  We have to figure out how, how to do the--what shading, and how, and how to market?  And he says, what do you mean you got to figure it out?  Who, who made this stuff, who put it together in the first place?  Well, there's this guy out in Chicago that was in, that was with us for a temporarily, from the professional division.  And he said, well get him back here.  And that was the deal cause when he said that to Irv Botner, Botner's got, he's got off it cause this Charlie Revson.  And that's when the deal was in.  It was supposed to fail.  I didn't know it.  It succeeded.  Now, Botner, the man who told me I could either work for him out in Chicago or leave the company, now he's got to eat crow.  So and that's why he's coming back, doing this whole dances.  It was a whole charade. The deal was in when we came here, in spite of anything he said.  I didn't know it.  That's when I came back into Revlon, that's when I moved back to New York.
Story_ID: 19022
Speaker 1: How did you then come to work for Johnson Products?
Speaker 2: I made a mistake.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Got greedy.
Speaker 1: Because they were offering more money?
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to move out of Revlon.  And--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So the launch--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: And I had them over a barrel.
Speaker 1: So the launch went well?
Speaker 2: The launch went well, the rollout went well, the whole thing's rolling down the road.  It's just doing fine.  At the same time, a couple of things happened.  Norton Simon buys Max Factor, not the biggest competitor across the board for Revlon, but a big competitor in a certain segment of that market--of, of the, Revlon's market.  Norton Simon has got the muscle.  Norton Simon is robbing Revlon blind personnel wise.  They're taking all their top people and buying them off like that.  They're just popping them out there (finger snaps).  They're backing out the--running out the front door to go to California to work for Norton Simon.  They're scared.  At the same time, Johnson [ref. to John H. Johnson's Fashion Fair Cosmetics division] is pursuing me.  Finally, they go--so now, I did everything I could to avoid coming out here.  I, I'm saying, you know, I want a contract, I want this, I want that, I want the other one.  Finally, everything I ask they, they say, yes to, cause I don't want to do this.  But I don't want to, 'no', I want them to say, well, never mind, by just dumping more demands on them.  But they're meeting them all the time.  So finally, I said, a contract.  And the guy who I was dealing with, and then the vice president said, well, you know, Mr. Johnson doesn't like contracts.  I said, I want a contract; on-the-phone conversation that afternoon.  The next morning when I was, when I'm leaving my house--I lived on Central Park South.  I would walk out of my house, walk across two streets and enter the General Motors Building.  I lived in Central Park South in, in New York.  As I'm walking out the door, my doorman says, this was delivered for you this morning.  And it's a plain envelope with my name.  It doesn't have mail, nothing, it's in my name; open it up, and it's the contract.  So I put the contract in my pocket, put it in here, now, I go and I try to leverage--I'm gonna leverage Revlon to make me a director, which is what I want.  And I say, what do I have to make director, dah, dah, dah, dah.  And I said, well, I says, I guess, I--someone's made me an offer.  And this is where I made the fatal mistake, I said that someone made me an offer.  And they asked me who?  And I said, who.  I should never have said who.  Everyone, all of my friends in the industry said, you should have never said who; just, sir, I've got it.  Here's the contract, I've got it, boom, because if they had thought that it was Norton Simon at any point, I would have gotten what I wanted cause I was not asking for more money, you know, a lot of more money and that--I just wanted the title director.  And finally at the, he says, well, we'll, let's, let me, let me talk it over and see what the--and then finally, in the afternoon he came back and said, well, we'll accept your resignation, and go--take the offer and go.  And that's what I did.  And I came out here, and I was here three years, and I got shot through the grease by one of my brothers, you know, who was trying to climb up through the ranks.  And that's how I ended up being back in Chicago.
Story_ID: 19023
Speaker 1: Chicago, Department of Human Services.
Speaker 2: Department of Human Services.  The then Commissioner of the Department of Human Services, was a very dear friend of a fellow that I had worked with at Johnson Products Company, and she was looking for somebody to cover her back since she was not part of the regime in power, the sub-regime of, of exempt civil service people.  If her information about her department and things went out incorrectly, it would look bad for her.  So she wanted someone to make sure that everything went out right and was kosher, who was her person, and not who was there.  And that's where I got the job.  She asked me to come to that since marketing, and that's what--essentially marketing and public relations was what it was.  But you couldn't say public relations, that was a bad word.  So that's what I became, I became Director of Public Information.  And I did that with Lenore Cartwright for, 'til [Chicago, Illinois mayor] Harold Washington got in.  And when Harold Washington got in, I got kicked out.  And the ironic thing about it, is that I'm taking all my time and doing all my stuff on the side for Harold Washington (laughter) and it was so successful, I lost my job cause he got in.  But that was okay.
Story_ID: 19024
Speaker 1: So then what do you do at that point then?
Speaker 2: At that point, my wife at the time, was, was opening, was--had a business, was starting her, her first commercial kitchen, and so I worked with her and started working on what I was gonna do with the rest of my life, and I decided that it was time for me to work on making my, my dream a reality, and that's when I started working on the "Around the World" trip.
Speaker 1: Well, this is what, this, this dream that you said started when you were in, I think seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What part of it was sort percolating all this time?
Speaker 2: It was the adventure part.  And, no, I'd been sailing, at this point, I'd been sailing a lot of years.  By '86 [1986], I had, I had my master's license.  I'd, I'd done the qualifications, and I sat for the exam, and I was, I was a Coast Guard licensed master.
Speaker 1: Did you start--when did you start sailing?  Was it when you were--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I was about twenty-six when I lived in Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: In Puerto--okay, that's fine.  Okay, okay, and, but you didn't, did you own a boat up until that time--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't buy my first boat till '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was--oh, you were here, though?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I bought my first boat here.  That was part of the quid pro quo for me coming out here, that I would have a place to put my boat when I bought one, whenever that was.  And I came out here in seventy--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Seven.
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], yeah, and that next, for the next season, is when I, I put my boat in.
Speaker 1: And you had it docked where?
Speaker 2: Belmont Harbor.
Speaker 1: And you never thought about a power boat at all?  You just thought about a sailboat.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you like about sail--that sail--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: A sailboat is, is the purest way to do it.  It is, it is the ideal thing.  Any yahoo can, can run a power boat, and I'd been sailing all the time.  I had started sailing when I came out here for, for Revlon in '74 [1974].  I was racing.  I did the Mac [boat race to Mackinac, Michigan]  a number of times before I left then.  So I'd been sailing.  I was sailing with the, the man that owned Flash Cabs--the founder of Flash Cabs, Arthur Dickles, and I sailed with Dickles, and he was really my sailing mentor.
Speaker 1: And what was the sailing community like at that point?  How many--were there many blacks involved?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No, same thing (unclear).
Speaker 2: Very few, maybe, maybe one or two.  That's about it.  And then up in Belmont, there was myself and Sanders Wilson, were the only two in, in Belmont.  In Jackson, there was, there started to be a couple a little later on.  We had the, we had a meeting at my house of all the black sailors that knew each other one time--this was when I lived on Pine Grove [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And we said, this is the first annual meeting of the Mystic Knights of the Sea.  And I think there were like six of us.
Speaker 1: Had they all come to sailing in different ways or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in very different ways.  Everyone had a different story of how they came to it.
Story_ID: 19025
Speaker 1: Okay, I want you to talk a little bit more about the sailing community you became part of here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, I became not really part of a sailing community because it's--there are people that have boats that, that sail their boats in and out and don't have anything to do with anybody.  It, it's a singular pursuit.  One does not to become a member up at the yacht club.  And that's why it has become more of a egalitarian sport than it has been in the past.  In the past, you only, it was the, the route through you got, you went to sail because wooden required a lot of maintenance, required places to stay. The limited places to stay were usually controlled by yacht clubs, and that was a time.  It was a whole time in the past.  With the advent of fiberglass, of course, things happened.  Those became cheaper to operate and maintain and to purchase.  They became available to more people at a greater range of, of social and economic points of view.  And so people were there.  The boating community generally is a camaraderie sort of thing, the racers, the cruisers, kind of congregate because of, of similar interests.  One of the things you find that, for the most part, there is less, less bigotry, for want of a better word, amongst sailors than there is among power boaters.  And that's because of the people that are attracted to it.  There is a certain nature that attracts you to a power boat, a machismo, a certain, a certain--I don't know what'd want to call it, that, that draws people to that sort of thing.  And it gets more pronounced as the size of the boats get smaller and the power goes up.  There's a personality that would own a cigarette boat, a Donzi  a twenty-six foot boat with, with 400 horsepower on it, come on.  You know, trailer trucks don't have 400 horsepower.  There's a whole--you can, you could go into a lot of the Freudian portion of that, but we won't go into that.  Whereas, people who were sailors, for the most part, are, are upper-class by virtue of its tradition, but are drawn to it for esthetic reasons as opposed to expression of their inadequacies, for want of another term when we talk those guys.  But, so you have a better chance--and the other thing is a better understanding of the sea itself and how the sea itself makes no differentiation.  I've had many instances of, of relating to people because of the weather, the sea and knowing that it's a shared experience.  Seamen, professionals have always been looking out for each other because the sea is the adversary to all of us.  Here, and when you're talking about a recreational community that's small and seasonal, it, it's not as, as pronounced as it would be in, in a more long-distance cruising kind of situation.  When I sailed around the world, I mean it was wonderful.  I'd pull into a port, and I was, I was automatically a part of their family, a part of a community that existed in that port with people coming in and out.  I knew more about that place in, in two days than, than tourist who had been sitting at the Holiday Inn for a month.  It's, it's just a different kind of lifestyle.
Story_ID: 19026
Speaker 1: But see, that's the question, is how did a Bill Pinkney, the sailor, emerge out of a place like Chicago [Illinois].  See, you're saying that you were, you know, you had this sort of, you had been sort of dreaming about this trip for like--(unclear), (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I, I had not been dreaming about the trip.  I'd been dreaming about an adventure.  It could have been anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't necessarily that.  The thing that I chose as being my adventure was sailing because that was my greatest love.  I could, I've ridden motorcycles.  It could have been a motorcycle trip around the country to all the--to, to touch all the contiguous states.  It could have been anything.  It happened to be sailing because sailing was my prime interest.  And I felt that I could be more successful at that, at making that a reality than with something else.
Speaker 1: So when did the trip--at what--when did the trip originate, I mean really, that you were gonna do this series?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I decided?  I probably decided, the decision was about 1986, yeah.  And it was four before--till I really actually did it.
Speaker 1: And is there something--I mean I'm just wondering where you were at the time that you decided you were gonna do it?
Speaker 2: Well, this was not a epiphanal kind of thing, you know, the skies opened up and the voice said, "It is time to go, grasshopper", didn't happen like that.  It was, it was more an evolutionary thing; just starting to think about what I wanted to do, starting to--doing the numbers, age wise, physical ability wise; how much longer will I be able to, to do it.  But do I need to do it, and, and can I muster those resources in a relatively short period of time.
Speaker 1: And did you look at the economics of doing it at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, certainly, certainly.  You can't--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what had you--(unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: My, my original economics was to do it in a boat about four feet bigger than the one I owned, which would have, which I probably could have accomplished for not too many bucks because my boat was paid for.  I could have, I could have done it to Panama and Suez Canal which is the kiddy cruise, which is what most people do.  There were a lot of things that I was set to do, that changed, by virtue of the fact that I was, I explained what I was gonna do to a class of students at [Stephen] Douglas School, my elementary school, because the principal asked me to do that after she heard I was gonna do it, in a conversation at a, in--at an alumni function.  So I went on and started--the program started to take a life of its own.  It became a program as opposed to my own personal odyssey.  And it ceased to my personal, my own personal odyssey somewhere around 1989.  And then it became a project, and that's when it just --(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Mushroomed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, mushroomed in, in scope and in costs and logistics and a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Now, who were the people that were involved, you know, between 1986 and '89 [1989] sort of with you that made that sort of thing mushroom, and, and, you know, and became really--you became a symbol for one thing, and you became an educational project too.
Speaker 2: Well, that was never the object.  The object was never, never to either one--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I know that wasn't the object.
Speaker 2: And the bottom line to it was for my grandkids and myself, for my grand kids to go to show them what you could do with a sound basic education, for myself, to, to make the dream of having a big adventure a reality.  And that's what it was.  And, of course, every layer you put on that, of course, the complications go up.
Story_ID: 19027
Speaker 1: And, for me to do all this, of course, I needed money.  Then I had to go out and seek sponsors.  To do it properly, I needed to have people who had the academic background.  So I got a friend of mine who, who, who was in academics to do that.  I started writing letters, marketing myself and the project to raise funds.  And initially, when I thought about it, I thought it was gonna be easy.  All I got to do, I could, this is a great thing, and I'm gonna be the first black guy to do this, and coming out of Chicago [Illinois] and all this.  And we've got--I've got Johnson Products, I've got Johnson Publishing.  I've got, all great--I've got all these great successful, black organizations that--not a thing dime.  To this day, not a thin dime on either one of my projects.  And from a corporate standpoint, same thing with Amistad.
Speaker 2: They never come through on the corporate side, on the sponsorship?
Speaker 1: They never, never came--no, no.  Individuals have come through.  Corporations, business--perfect thing, perfect.  So that has always left a very bad taste in my mouth, and it still does.  When I look at the, at the self-aggrandizement things that a lot of these organizations get into that have no redeeming social quality except to get their name in the paper, and then it's with someone snickering up their sleeve while they do.  And they just failed to realize it.  And then the same organizations are the first ones to, to want to castigate someone for going outside of the "community".  So it was a, it was a learning process, a very painful one, on many aspects.
Speaker 2: Now, when you--on the first trip, you decided how large a budget that you thought you needed at the beginning, you know, because you said, originally, I was gonna--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: I originally, probably for the original thing, I, I was thinking that my original budget was gonna be about, everything, about fifty, $60,000.
Speaker 2: For a year?  For, I mean--.
Speaker 1: No, with no time, no time.
Speaker 2: No time, just fifty--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: For the project.  Two--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: For the project.
Speaker 1: To do what I want to do, to get the larger boat, to sail around through the Panama and Suez Canals and come home.  That's what I was figuring.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you weren't anticipating how long that would take at the time?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: If you sail, you don't, you don't specify (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: You don't, you don't, okay.
Speaker 1: --You don't specify time.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: It's over when it's over.  If you can't hang in there until it's over, then you had no business starting.  And that's the way it is in most things really.
Speaker 2: And what did your budget end up eventually being?
Speaker 1: Including the boat and everything, probably somewhere in the neighborhood and three and seventy five to $390,000--.
Speaker 2: So who were the key--?
Speaker 1: --Which was still, which is still a drop in the, in the bucket when you consider the amount of ink, the amount of impact, and the amount of bottom line.  For anyone who would, any organization who had their name stamped to, to it, they could not have bought the publicity that ultimately would have come from it, by having their name linked to the name of the boat or to the project, that three hundred and eighty-five thousand dollars would have bought them.  The people who did put up the money, their name is not on anything.  They never wanted it.  All they wanted to do was to see it happen.  Good people, doing the right thing for the right reason, and people who should do it for the right reason, not doing nothing at all.  But that's a whole nother story.  I can, I can do a book just on that one.
Story_ID: 19028
Speaker 1: At what point do you decide that you need a larger boat?  Is it out of just the--?
Speaker 2: --The change in the, well--
Speaker 1: Tell, okay, that's what I'm trying to do, is tell--.
Speaker 2: When I decided, when I decided that a change in route was a possibility, I knew I had to get a larger boat.  And the change in route was kind of, was starting to work in the back of my mind.  I saw a boat that had done it very well, very safely.  And I really loved the lines on the boat, and I thought well, that's the way I should, really should go if I'm gonna do this.  And also I got--I was told by the lord, small "l" that that's the way I should do it, Sir Robin Knox-Johnston told me that I should do the Panama and Suez Canals, I should go around all five of the Southern capes because if I did go through the Panama and Suez Canals and another black guy came out a week later and did it around the five capes, they would never know anything that I did.  I would be just a flame in the wind; no one ever hear about it, unless I went out and told them myself.  And he was very right because then I found out later in 1986, a young black teacher from St. Croix went through the Panama and Suez Canals, named Teddy Seymour, and nobody knows who Teddy Seymour is.  You have to go the hardest, the toughest, and then you have to make it into something.  And that's what I did, and I made it into an educational program, made it into a video, made it into a book for kids, a reading book which is part of McGraw Hill's basic reading program.  You got to do something with it.  You just can't just do it for the sake of doing it.  This is what I found out.
Speaker 1: So talk about your key team, though, that developed, just sort of to support you in this whole thing.  Who were the--?
Speaker 2: First and foremost was, was my wife.  She was the one that, that did it, Ina.  She was, she was my biggest supporter in this whole thing because I know in '86 [1986], I said, you know, and I asked her, if you would--if, if I were to do this, would you be upset?  And her reply was, I would be upset if you didn't do it because it's what you, what you really need to do.  And that's, and that's been the biggest thing from there.  My name, Iva Caruthers was the educational side of it.  She did, Iva put together all the educational stuff, and she really worked hard on that.  She was my, my biggest, biggest help on that.  So many people that I sailed with helped with me things like that.  Once--and my, the thing, the key to my first financial sponsor was from a guy who I was in hospital corps school in the Navy, and that was Bill Cosby because Bill and I were in Bainbridge [Maryland], in the hospital corps together.  And so we knew each other.  And he worked at some of the clubs that I, I worked at as a, as a hobby in New York when I was living there.  I played with Afro-Cuban band.  And then when he heard what I was doing from a mutual friend, and he asked me, asked me to send him some information, I did, not thinking anything comes from it.  Maybe two months later, I get a response from the, the chairman and president of Occidental Petroleum, the late Dr. Armand Hammer, who sent me to, who sent me to Europe to see, to meet (Ram?) Fines, to meet Sir. Randolph, to meet Sir Robin Knox-Johnston, to help plan the logistics for this whole thing.  Michelle [V.] Agins, who worked for me at the Department of Human Services, was the one--she came out, she had left when [Chicago, Illinois mayor] Harold Washington died.  She was Harold's photographer.  When Harold died, she went to the "Charlotte Observer".  The "Charlotte Observer", someone saw her stuff at the "Charlotte Observer", and called her to come up to have a meeting in New York, the "New York Times".  And she was the first black woman photographer to work for the "New York Times".  She's still with the "New York Times". She then, she was in town to do a, an article on girl gangs with a, with a writer.  She happened to the, to the commercial bakery that my wife had, and we were talking.  And I told her what I was doing.  And she said, "Oh, you got a boat, come on, we're gonna take a picture of the boat."  So we went down to the boat.  She took some photographs, and she said, the "New York Times" is gonna write an article about you.  She's a strong sister.  She said, "They gonna write an article about this!"  She jacks up this stringer here from "New York Times" who comes over, interviews me and writes about it.  A guy calls me up a few weeks later and says--on Thursday, he's says, well, the article is gonna be in on Thursday.  I said, fine.  I'm saying, hey, gonna get an article in the "New York Times" on Thursday.  The "New York Times" comes out on Thursday, open the paper, go from cover to cover, cover to cover, cover to cover, again, not one word.  I'm very upset about this.  Said, maybe it's Friday.  Come to Friday, cover to cover, cover to cover, nothing.  I'm really upset.  Saturday, who cares? Who reads the "New York Times" on Saturday.  It appears in the Sunday "New York Times".  It was supposed to have been in on Thursday.  It did not appear on Thursday because on Thursday, Hurricane Hugo hit, kicked my story right out.  Friday, Hurricane's still-- boom, my story's out.  So, got the space, want to fill it, throw it in Sunday's.  Sunday's paper comes out.  A guy in Boston reads the article and says, "mmm", takes into a partner's meeting for the firm that bares his name, and says, you know, we made a lot of money in Chicago.  This would be a great way to help this, this guy who wants to do these things with the Chicago schools.  If we help him, says, that's, that should be our way to pay back.  Let's check him out and see if he's for real.  And they started investigating me.  I didn't know anything about this.  And maybe about two and a half weeks later, I get a call from somebody who said, "What have you been doing?"  I said, "What do you mean what have I been doing?"  He says, listen, some people are asking a lot of questions about you, came from out of town.  Finally I get a call from Todd Johnson, one of the partners, said, I'd like to meet with you and talk to you about your project.  And that's when they--then they, they brought me out to, to Boston [Massachusetts], sat down and talked with the partners.  And they said, okay, it was nice talking to you.  We wanted to see you in person and, and get a feel for who you were as a person.  And said, we'll let you know.  So I'm sitting in Johnson's office, and the phone rings, and it's the other--the head, the head of the company.  He says, says, (unclear), he tells--Todd says, okay, and he hangs up the phone.  He says, "That was Tom.  Tom said stop raising money, stop doing anything.  Your only job now is to make this a reality."  That was it. The interesting thing is--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Now, that's 1980--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, this is, this is 1989, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, nineteen--okay.
Speaker 2: The interesting thing about this is not one penny of the money came from the company.  It's like four guys that did it themselves.  They formed a partnership called ComBos Limited, Commitment Boston Limited, and they put up the money out of their pockets for this.  The other--Aldridge, Eastman and Welch, Tom--Peter Aldridge, Tom, Tom Eastman, Welch was not involved in it, but Todd Johnson was.  They're all principals in that company, but this was their money.  This was not the organization's money.  At the end of this whole thing, the only thing they got from this, was they got the boat, which they bought, and they sold.  And whatever the difference was, was what they put up.  This whole project was never a 501(c)(3) so there's no tax deduction.  They did not ask for, nor did they want rights, titles, trademarks, copyrights to anything.  The Letter of Agreement said, all we expect from you in this project is that you make it do what you said you would do in your perspectives.  That's all we want.
Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing.
Speaker 2: And we lost Tom in '99 [1999].  And, a young guy, he was forty-one years old, had a massive heart attack in his kitchen, I mean wonderful guy.  Peter Aldridge, one of the, of the guys, has, has four kids.  I think from Peru, Guatemala, Costa Rica and some place else, all adopted, adopted.  The, I think the last, last--I think the last girl's in college now.  I mean that's the kind of people they are.  There are good people that do good things without any personal aggrandizement, just to know that something, something good came out of it.
Story_ID: 19029
Speaker 1: Your meeting with Sir Robert Johnson--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: [Robin] Knox-Johnston (unclear).
Speaker 1: Knox-Johnston, I'm sorry.  He--he, tell us a little bit about him, and, you know, he was--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: He was the first man to ever sail around the world non-stop alone, three hundred and thirteen days, non-stop on a leaky wooden boat called 'Suhaili'.  He was the winner of the Golden Globe which was a, a race in 1968 that was put up, that was set up by the Globe Newspapers to increase circulation.  And the rules were this, you have to start from any port in England, sail completely around the world by the Southern route and return to any port in England.  The one to do it in the shortest time, by the end of the time--the first, the first one to come back wins.  There's no second.  In that race, three amazing things happened.  One, Robin did it in 313 days, amazing.  The man who would--had the fastest, who would have had the fastest time and who would have beat Robin, was a man named Bernard Moitessier, a Frenchman.  He sailed around, and he came past Cape Horn, and instead of heading North back up to England, he decided that he was interested in the all the hoopla and everything, and he was just enamored with the sailing, he kept sailing.  And he sailed one and a half times around the world, all the way back around to the, the Marquesas [Islands,Tahiti], not the Marquesas--yeah, to the Marquesas.  The other one was a man named Donald Crowhurst  who had a catamaran, a  trimaran, who was a, just a very disturbed man who had delusions of grandeur and he had this wonderful, supposed invention that was gonna revolutionize navigation at sea, and navigation.  And he takes on his, on this boat.  He's afraid to go into the Southern ocean.  He sails into the Southern Atlantic and radios back false positions.  His idea was to radio back false positions and what the time he thinks, and then come back to England without ever having done it.  Well, as he's down there doing that, he slowly, but surely loses his mind from the guilt of this whole thing and commits suicide.  They found his--they found the boat.  They found his logs, they found the whole thing.  He's dead, all in the same race, in the Golden Globe race of 1968.
Speaker 1: So he had done this in 1968, and he you are in 1989 talking to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what are the things that you learn in that, you know, in your meeting with him?
Speaker 2: Oh, I learn everything, and this is a man, this is a man who's a merchant seaman.  He's written many, many books on the sailing.  He's, probably was, and probably still is in, in the eyes of those of us who are solo sailors, probably one of the two most memorable of all solo sailors, the first one being Joshua Slocomb who went around in 1898, and Robin, who did it non-stop.  Those people, they're prominent and they're the lord, with a small 'i'.  And his advice was sage advice about not so much on how to sail, but about the, the whole psychology of, of being out there.
Story_ID: 19030
Speaker 1: And can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, just to, to the extent that it's, that it's--the only place is here; the only time is now.  And the fact that it's just as dangerous to go around the Southern capes as it is to go straight through the Suez and the Panama Canal.  Once you go to sea, you're at the mercy of the sea no matter who you are.  Your best defense is to be prepared for anything and never look too far in advance and just keep going.  Those are, those are the things that, that he stressed.  Also, that it's--you see, it's very hard for me to explain--to, to talk about this because it--there are aspects of it that I don't know what words to use to explain to someone who's never done this.  There are some things that I can explain and anybody will understand.  Some things only sailors understand.  Sometimes, some things only people who have sailed long distances alone do it.  There are some aspects of it, I can't really share with anyone cause they weren't there.  I don't--there's no frame of reference by which they can get a clear understanding of what I'm trying to, what I'm trying to express.  And sometimes, that's very frustrating, but,--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But what if--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --there is, there is a, like an unspoken kind of understanding about a lot of aspects of it.
Speaker 1: But let's say, you know, someone who's a sail--sails man, was actually look--or sailor, looking at this, or merchant seaman, what would--I'm just saying what aspects of things?  What were sort of surprising things about that trip?  What, you know, what did you learn about yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, you learn, every--you don't to go, you don't to go around the world to do that.  That's the whole, that's the whole concept of sailing.  Sailing is a learning experience every time you do it.
Speaker 1: I know, but the thing is, is that there're not many modern-day adventures.
Speaker 2: Not, not around the, it doesn't mean, it doesn't mean around--around the world doesn't change it; across Lake Michigan, out for the day.  Every time you go sailing, you learn something new about sailing, about weather, about the boat you sail on and about yourself.  There are no absolutes.  There are no superlatives.  It is--it just is.  People say, what was the best, what was the worse?  I can't explain that to them.  It is a unique experience every single time, whether it's for a day sail or a circumnavigation.  Once you start to sail, you start to realize that.  And the more you sail, the more you realize how ethereal it all is.  It's not something you can capsulate, put in a sound bite.  It is what it is.  And that's, that's the appeal that draws people back into it.  You say, to--back to what they say, when you retire.  What I'm doing at the end of this--well, I'm not really doing it cause I'm gonna go back, but they call it swallowing the anchor, which means that when you swallow it, it's in you and you're stuck right there.  And it's something that always draws you, if it draws you in the first place.  Some people go out, and say, hey, I'll never do it again, and they don't.  But it's--I don't know if there's anything else like that.  There may be.  I've never experienced--I don't know of anything off-hand like that.  But it is a unique kind of situation.  And once you open yourself to that kind of experience, and it becomes part of your being, you talk less about it and participate in it more, because you can't put it into words.  We have become so much, particularly in this country, a people of wanting to concisely package and box everything.  And this is one of those things that--it's like trying to box smoke.  No matter how good the box is, it's always leaking out, you can't--
Story_ID: 19031
Speaker 1: Darwinian theory, the Creation theory, no matter what the theory.  It's here.  Get a--you're not gonna ever figure out how it's done.  It's here, but understanding it and looking at it, you understand this.  It works, not to our devices or control or manipulation, it works.  When you look the stars in the skies, there are more stars in your sight than you can count in numbers.  Their life span is greater than any number, any age you can figure.  By the comparison to the life of a star, our life is just, not even a nanosecond.  However, each one of those stars has a certain orbit.  It has a certain life span.  It burns it, it, it's born, it dies, it stretches, and it goes on and it goes on.  That a universal plan to make all that stuff work.  In other words, it would collapse if it didn't.  Knowing that you're part of that, and because you're part of that, you are an integral part of this, connected in some way to all of that.  And by your connection to that, that makes it no greater or no lesser than you.  The time span you're involved may be negligible compared to the rest, but it is there and it does exist.  That makes you as powerful as the Crab Nebula  and as small as, as a, as a--even a--a blink of the eye is not even a small enough thing, an immeasurable part of that.  What happens in the solar system happens in you, atoms, electrons and a nucleus, atoms coming together to make molecules, molecules--all of that.  The same system is replicated in the universe.  You're part of that.  That's powerful, that's the--you're as good as or as better--not better, but as good as anything out there.  How can you feel insignificant.  Insignificance is a mental state placed within the dogma to develop a hierarchy which doesn't really exist.  And that's why I love being out there.  That's why I love being out in that because then I can really appreciate it.  I don't have the, the, the litany that, that's presented by organizations, groups, individuals.  I only have what my senses can absorb and what exist out there in the universe.  It's energizing.  That is my being; that is everyone's being.  The difficulty is, however, seeing that, understanding it and being comfortable to function in it.
Speaker 2: That was pretty beautiful.  Have you been recording this?  Okay, that was pretty beautiful.  But I--okay, I want to, the thing that--but when you left on your first trip, you did not know that at that point, did you?
Speaker 1: No, I had an idea.  I've--we all, I think, come to ideas, but the important thing is, is when you do something like this, and just from basic sailing, my concept was this, it is not the destination, but it's the journey.  And that was my focus, on the journey.  So I had sort of a, a matrix, but not fleshed out.  The journey fleshed out the matrix that was there.  That's what drew me to sailing, not to get to point A or point B, I could fly there.  If I wanted to go by water, I can get a Donzi boat and go ninety miles an hour to get there, and I'm there.  The hardest thing to do when you're really, really, really into your sailing, as Bernard Montessier in his book, he, he explains it so well.  When he got there he become--became so numb with the sea, that same kind of mystical, if the real thing happened to him, that spiritual thing happened to him.  It's why he didn't want to stop. That's why he just kept on sailing.  He had food and he had water. Why stop?  Go 'til you have to stop because it is the voyage that's important, and that's what he did.  He stuck with the voyage.  It wasn't the Golden Globe, the winning of the prize.  It was the voyage thing, was his focus.
Story_ID: 19032
Speaker 1: the trip lasted how many days, the first trip?
Speaker 2: I was gone twenty--twenty-two months.
Speaker 1: Twenty-two months is a long time.
Speaker 2: Not really (shaking head, no.)
Speaker 1: Well, I mean it's a--I know, but it--?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two months is like--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, you were in contact though.
Speaker 2: Well, but still twenty-two months is not, not a lot of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things happen, boom, once you start this organization.
Speaker 1: You started it, I think June of 1999, right?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two months (unclear) is how many years?
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Ain't a long time, is it?
Speaker 1: That's true.  So were there--what was the most dangerous part of the trip, the first trip?
Speaker 2: The dangerous?  It's all dangerous.  It's, it was dangerous.  I, I tell you the most, the scariest part of the trip, not that it was dangerous.  The scariest part of the thing was that a night before I left, I almost lost the whole thing.  That was scary because peace with myself and my and my mortality had to be, I made that a long time beforehand cause if you don't make that upfront, the rest of, the rest of it's an exercise in futility cause you're gonna get t that point and you haven't, and you can't make it, and it's gonna all fall apart.  You have to make that decision upfront.  And once you make that decision, come to peace with that and you put that out of your mind, and you never think about that again.
Speaker 1: So you--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I never thought about getting killed.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that a month before you got scared.
Speaker 2: I got scared because, because the--I wasn't sure whether we were gonna have the money or not.  I wasn't sure whether I was gonna be able to do it or that it was gonna really, really happen.  That's scary.  That was, that was a scary notion.  The boat sinking and being out there and dying was something that could happen.  That was not, that would not be a failure.  Not starting would be a failure.  Once I untied that boat and moved six inches away from that dock, I was successful.  That was it.  The rest was just academic.  My success was I started because once I started it, I had fulfilled my end of the bargain to start it because once I started it, there could be any one of a series of things that could have happened over which I had no possibility of knowing or any control that could have prevented it.  But I could prevent it from starting.  So I was successful the minute I--(unclear) once I moved from the dock, success.  I moved away from the dock and came back.  I started it.  Why did I come back?  Something made me come back, and I did that, but I started.  I was successful.  People equate success with completion over which they have no control in reality.  Is that a fatalist attitude?  No, not really.  You never have control.
Speaker 1: Now, the Capes, though, were they the most interesting physically-- no, the Capes?
Speaker 2: I didn't see most of them.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: You don't want to hit most of the Capes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is, there's rock, they're made out of rocks.  Things that sink boats are hard things.  Don't put your boat on hard things.  And that's what you have to do.
Story_ID: 19033
Speaker 1: So you arrive back, where?  You arrive back--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Same place I started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Boston, okay.  To a great deal of fanfare?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more than I, than I thought was gonna be there, big surprise to me.  I thought there were only gonna be a few kids cause the night I was coming--before, I came in, I had radioed my sister and Todd Johnson who was my primary contact says, "Be okay if some of the kids come down to see it?"  I said, sure.  And when I came in, the tide was down, was out so that the float, they, they had to come into boat cause was docked--and this is the dock where the [USS] Constitution is, is tied up.  So it's a big dock.  So when I came in, I can't see, they had this Navy ship there.  So I can't see the--when I come in, I'm below all this.  So I come in like this, and I come up to the dock.  Well, on the edge of the dock there's about, you know, eight or ten kids standing up at the top.  That's cool, and, of course, there's photographers.  I knew they were gonna be there, photographers and videographers and so on.  And as I come off, my commodore and vice-commodore from my yacht club are there to catch my lines.  And they get my lines and my, and my--and this photographer--there a gang plank, comes up onto the boat.  And the photographer--my, my wife was standing at the end of the thing.  And the photographer is like, getting ready to step in front her to take the picture.  And she gives him a shot in the ribs, bam, I said, "Nice move," (laughter), 'cause she was--he wants to be the first.  So, and then we go up there and there's all kinds of people, and as I climb up the ladder, the gang plank to come up there, I started coming up to the top, the Navy band is up there.  And when I got to the top, then I realized that the whole pier is filled with kids, all the way back, just tons of them.  And I'm saying, whoa, this is big, yeah.  And I'd been up about three days, and I go through all this hoopla with hooplah, hooplah.  And so at the end of all this stuff, I go--I m gonna go back to the boat, but they have to move the boat from where it is to, in the shipyard.  So I take it, and I go back to the boat because they have something, the--something that evening.  And so I went back to the boat and I crashed, just like--out like a light.  And the customs, the coast, the customs people wake me up cause I never cleared customs coming in.  But I never expected, I knew there was gonna some people, but I never expected that.  I never expected any of this to go to the extent that it had.
Speaker 1: You didn't understand the significance?
Speaker 2: Oh, I understood the significance, but I understood the significance in, within a reasonably understandable group.  The kids I work with, the schools, family and friends, participants.  I never really got much of the scope out of this.  Example, we were videotaping a lot of the stuff, a film crew came down to Bermuda.  A film crew came to Brazil.  So those pieces were there from WCPB in Boston.  But what I didn't realize is that for three consecutive weeks, "Good Morning America" was doing an update as I got closer and closer.  So when I got there, the next morning some of the kids were out there from the Boston schools, and "Good Morning America" was there, CBS was there.  So I went--I did the "Good Morning America" piece, took off the mic, walked down the pier and put on another mic and I did CBS.  And I didn't realize it was that, that much, that much (unclear).  I, I figured national, national, yes--I mean not national, I mean local, Boston and Chicago [Illinois] because Warner Saunders, Warner came out to, to Boston, but Warner Saunders was my high--my elementary school classmate.  So I figured, you know, get the chance to come out and hang out.  And he, and, you know, the thing that was interesting, he said that NBC gave him a fit about wanting to come out here, come out to Boston, about wanting to do it.  And they said, ah, what the hell is that, no big thing, which is very interesting.
Story_ID: 19034
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer.  And Brewster McCauley is the videographer.  And I'd like you to start out again by stating your name and give the date.
Speaker 2: My name is Captain William Pinkney.  The date is the ninth of August, 2003.
Story_ID: 19035
Speaker 1: Now, when we left yesterday, we were talking, and I want you--I'd like to go back to your first trip.  And I'd like to ask how many ports of call you made and how, even the route was sort of devised, how you went about devising the route.
Speaker 2: I made five, although I, I stopped at two of them twice on the way out and on the way in.  The route was based on a route that had been followed, not with the stops, but the general route followed by a man who had done the first--was the first American to do a nonstop.  And what he made was what we call a counter pointal, circum seven--circumnavigation.  That means you pass through a point, a latitude and longitude on the Northern, Northern hemisphere, and you put yourself at a point exactly on the other side of the, of the hemisphere in the Southern hemisphere on the other side of the world.  So that made it a true circumnavigation.  And the man's name was Dodge Morgan.  And I started out in Boston, and I went from Boston to Bermuda, Bermuda to Salvador and Bahia.  Actually, I went Fortaleza [Brazil] first, then Salvador, then Cape Town, South Africa.  Hobart, Tasmania underneath New Zealand to Punta del Este, Uruguay, back to Salvador, back to Bermuda and then back to Boston.
Speaker 1: Now, how long when you were at any of those ports, how long did you stay in any of them?
Speaker 2: Oh, it varied.  There was no, there was no set time.  I stayed as short as a week.  I stayed as long as four months.  And it was just depending on why I was there, what I wanted to do in those ports and what the conditions were.  I stayed four months in Tasmania because I missed the window to go to Cape Horn so I had to wait for a seasonal change before I could go.
Speaker 1: And were there any--and I had asked this before, but were there any unexpected developments that occurred beside missing your sort of?
Speaker 2: Well, in any situation there are gonna be unexpected developments.  I don't care how well you plan it or how well you think it's gonna, there's always gonna be something unexpected.  But you expect the unexpected and you leave enough wiggle room in, in schedule and in supplying and equipment and maintenance so that you can absorb those, those little bumps in the road as they come.  For me, the major thing was--actually, I had planned only to be in Cape Town five days.  I was there three weeks.  That threw the whole schedule right off.  And the schedule was not so much time, but seasonal.  You can only do certain parts of the world, reasonably safely in certain times of the year.  You miss that time, you can go, but your risk of something untoward happening goes up experientially.
Speaker 1: And what was your operation, what was the whole operation that was required to have you go around the world like that on--?
Speaker 2: Operation, I mean?
Speaker 1: People, people.  You have--
Speaker 2: No, the num--number of people involved in it, directly, probably with me and the boat, there were three because the other--anyone else involved in it was involved with what happened back here on the land.  The three people involved, of course, were the person does, who did my, my communications.  It was a ham operator in Fall River, Massachusetts.  The other one was my, my handler, as it were, from my sponsors, who was in deed, a sir, who kept me up, dealt with all the, excuse me, the financial and logistics of going into port and making sure that everything with the boat was legal and all that sort of thing.  And then the third person was an advisor.  And the advisor was the man who owned the boat before I did.  He had raced it around the world alone.  He had raced a smaller version of the same boat around the world before.  So he's had circumnavigations on that design of boat, both without any major breakdowns, without any, any calamities.  So that was my advisor.  Those were the three direct people.  Emotionally, I had, of course, I had my wife.  I had the, Iva Caruthers who was doing the educational portion, people at, at the Computer Museum in Boston were involved in it.
Story_ID: 19036
Speaker 1: Then I had my medical staff because I was gonna be there alone, and I, I was not a young person.  I was fifty--fifty-five years old.  So the potential for something happen, or happening would be greater than it would have been if I'd been thirty.  Being in excellent and physical condition, that again dropped that down lower.  I had a surgeon.  I had a, an internist, a urologist, and a psychiatrist.  These were all friends of mine who knew me well, who all of them--almost all of them, with the exception of the psychiatrist, I had sailed with at one time or another.  The psychiatrist was a, was a personal friend of mine who I've known for years, lived in my building.  So these were all people that I had on call for any needs that, that I would have.  And the reason why that I had those type of people is because that being a hospital corps man in the Navy, I had my medical background.  So that the medical kit and things they'd laid out for me was like a, a small hospital.  So when I gave them my order of symptoms if something happened to me, I could describe it in terms that were, were on a physician's level as opposed to a layman's level.  And therefore, when they gave their, their diagnosis and, and what I should do about it, and treatment prescriptions, then I could carry it out because again, I had those skills.  That made it, that made it a lot more, more conducive with, with not worrying about my health conditions.
Speaker 2: And how were you in contact with them?  Were you in contact with your medical team--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, with everyone it was by single-side band radio.  Single-side band radio would call into (unclear) one of the four, actually five stations at the time, that were connected to the radio telephone link, with a radio call to a specific frequency, to a specific station.  They would in turn, put me in touch with the, the phone company (cell phone ringing)--
Speaker 2: You've got, that's you? (cell phone ringing)
Speaker 1: Yeah,
Speaker 2: And where are you? (cell phone ringing), turn off, turn off.
Speaker 1: Oh, over on the top of my hat--I'm sorry.  I was constantly in touch with the medical team.  Well, single side band radio, very simple.  You have a radio, long distance radio.  It is efficient at certain distances at certain times of the day, which means you just can't pick it up and talk 2000 miles.  At certain times of the day, the range, because you're skipping the, the radio waves off the ionosphere only work at certain times of day for certain distances.  So you don't have just a carte blanche.  So when you make the radio call, you try to get to the station that you could get within the distance range for that time of day and the frequency you can get.  Once you got--you connected with a station, let's take an example, Whiskey Oscar Mike, which is WOM, I would call them.  And when I got them, I would say who I was.  I had an I.D. number but what happens is because that, that traffic is so peculiar, and they have a fixed number of operators, after about the first month, I just didn't, I--it didn't make any difference.  And  when I'd call in and say Whiskey Oscar Mike, this is Commitment, and I'd give my call sign, but I can't remember (right off hand?).  I'd give my call sign, and they'd know who I was.  And I'd get a line, I'd give them the number I'd want them to call.  The, in turn, would call that number on the telephone.  And when they got the number, they could connect us.  And I would have then a, a, what we call simplex telephone connection, which means I could press and talk, release and listen, unlike a blueplex, which we have in our home phones, where you can talk and, and listen at the same time.  You couldn't do that.  So that meant that the conversation was a conversation as we know it.  It was more a transfer of data back and forth, which made it kind of difficult for any really kind of personal conversations.
Speaker 2: Now, how often did you, during your twenty-two months, call on your medical team?
Speaker 1: Never, no, no, I'm sorry.  I did it once, did it once.  I called my psychiatrist friend about the first week I was out there.  So I was having a little--I was having lots of dreams during my nap period, which meant that I was going way deep, and, and dreaming and coming back up cause I was going into REM sleep to do it.  And it was, it was just disruptive.  And we'd, we talked a little bit about that.  I told him some of the things, some of the apprehensions, and, and we kind of worked out a better way of me arranging my sleep habits so I eliminated that part so it wasn't a traumatic change from sleep to, to awaken.  I could come out of the sleep a lot, a lot more refreshed, and also be really cognizant the minute I woke up as opposed to being very confused, which is what was happening to me the first, the first time.
Story_ID: 19037
Speaker 1: Now, that brings me to another question, and that is, what was your schedule?  You know, what kind of schedule does one have--or is there--
Speaker 2: You don't have one.  You don't have one.  You go back to, to a very, almost circadian rhythms.  You eat when you're hungry.  You sleep when you're tired; very simply.  We set our bodies to the clock, and our bodies rebel to that by falling asleep in the afternoon, by being hungry, by storing fat in our bodies when, when--that never gets used, excess calories that don't get burned, things of that nature.  Almost every other animal that has a, an ability to eat on a regular basis without having to say, hunt to eat.  If you had to hunt to eat, then your schedule is a little different cause you, you may get lucky and you may not get lucky.  And so that's, that's a little different.  But that can eat at will, eats only when they're hungry.  Just like people with cats.  They don't understand, you know, they put the cat food down.  Well, the cat never ate.  The cat wasn't hungry.  Dogs, on the other hand, you put the food down, they'll eat it, just--it's just that different kind of, kind of relationship with food.  Once I started to do that, my weight went down and my energy went up because I ate what I wanted, when I wanted, and my body would only tell me when it needed certain things.  So I might eat--some days, I might eat six times.  Other days I might eat four times, some days I'd eat only twice.
Speaker 1: But the sun is rising in the morning and setting at night,so--
Speaker 2: Different times.  Remember, I'm crossing time zones.  I'm crossing time zones, I'm, I'm doing--and I'm changing latitudes at the same time.  So the position of the sun is not consistent day-to-day because of my position on, on the earth.  I'm moving on the earth different, at, at a different pace than I would be if I were in my home.  The seasonal, the seasonal sun would go slowly from, from North, from, from the equator, above the equator to below the equator to back again.  However, I was going from above the equator to below the equator to back again.  So sometimes I was moving with it; sometimes I was moving against it.  Then every fifteen degrees is an hour.  So that I'm crossing--if I'm going South and going diagonal, I'm crossing time, and I'm crossing, I'm crossing the time zone.  I'm crossing the latitude change too.  So you don't have those kind of seasonal rhythms.  All, all bets are off when you, when you do something like this.  Your body establishes itself in the context of, of where it is, when it is.
Speaker 1: So your first, you said your first port of call was Bermuda.  That's not a, that's not--but after Bermuda was what?
Speaker 2: Fortaleza, Brazil.
Speaker 1: Okay, was settling in port a little unsettling at all or no?  I'm just trying to figure out because peop--we're used to, and I know you wanted to be an adventurer, but I'm saying, and, you know, we're used to some reutilized way of being, and you're say--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Not really, it's not, because it--remember now, I'm coming from--I'm sorry, I'm coming from, from not a nine-to-five job to this.  I have not had that kind of routine over, for six months, eight months, almost a year.  I have not had the nine to five routine, that most people feel is the, the way that one is supposed to do it, with weekends.  And my time was flexible and my own.  My responsibility was making this event happen.  So I didn't have that.  So to break from that, I was not breaking from the routine that most people have their mind of what you'd have to break from to do this.  Remember, this is a very unique kind of situation that, that apply--the causes you to apply things that you wouldn't ordinarily do because it wouldn't be part of what we generally do in the kind of society we live in.  You're stepping outside of that.  And in stepping outside of that, you assume a lot of different attributes that you wouldn't norm--ordinarily do.  And that's, and that's all it is.  So to kind--to try to compare it is, is kind of, kind of hard because there, there is no comparison for it.  It is a unique situation.
Speaker 1: And, but you have no sense about the changes, sense of time or what were you doing?  I mean would read?  I'm just saying was there any--would you read?  Would you sit up and look at the stars--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Here's, here's what you do.  You're not, you're not doing thing you would do normally.  There's, there's not the time to be--your first concern is survival of the vessel.  No vessel, no you.  That means you have to--it has to maintained.  It has to sailed properly.  It has to be dealt with.  You have to think ahead.  You have to do your navigation, your positioning, all of these things.  That's a constant all--that's always going on.  You're always doing that.  You're not saying, well, I can read now.  Yes, I read a hundred and fifty books on this trip.  But I only read them at times, intermittent times.  I can't say, oh, it's time, I can sit--time to read, time to--no, no.  I read when I had, when I had time.  When, when I was in, in absolute perfect conditions, I would sit and read six hours straight without a break cause there was no necessity for that.  Everything else had been taken care of, and in that, that period, I could do that.  Not that I said, okay, I've got six hours to read.  I would read until I had to, until something came up that I had to take care of.  If nothing came, I continued.  I didn't--on the routine, routine things I have.  I would watch television once a week.  And when I say a television, I had a little portable, 8 millimeter, twelve volt operated player that would play tapes.  And friends sent me tapes, the people at, at Sony gave me, I think sixteen tapes to watch.  I had the, was it the "The Empire of the Sun", I had "The Hobbitt" thing, before they, they--before they had "Lord of the Rings", I had "Lord of the Rings" animated, "The Hobbitt and (unclear) that sort of thing.  So I had those things to watch.  Plus, friends would send me tapes.  So I'd get some place and, and go to the yacht club or wherever the, the contact spot was, and there'd be a package and it would be maybe all the "Hill Street Blues" series or, "Law and Order" was the one, not "Law and Order", the one in California, the law show [ref. to 'LA Law'], whatever that was in 1990 that I liked a lot.  Those things I would do.  So it was no real routine.
Speaker 1: And did you--but your, what about your senses?  Did they become more acute sort of?  No?
Speaker 2: No. When, when people lose their sight, their hearing doesn't get better.  It just means that they concentrate on it more.  They rely on it more.  It doesn't get better, they just rely on it more.  You rely on your--your senses didn't get better.  You rely on them more than you ordinarily would since you don't have anything--for example, when you're, when you've been out a month, month and a half, you can smell land.  How can you smell land because the, the thing that's been in your nostrils most of the time has been the sea air.  A change in that, that means you'll, then you start to recognize has a, has a unique smell.  It always does.  You always smelled it.  You just don't concentrate on it as much.  It's not something new.  It's just that where you put your focus and your concentration.  You watch, you watch things in a different, a different way.  You're able to scan the horizon and pick up things which shouldn't be there because you're used to seeing that horizon in one way, and anything out of the ordinary--in the biggest storm, a boat could be slamming around and banging and sail flopping and everything, if something went tick tick tick, which wasn't supposed to be within that, in my sleep I could wake up--I'd wake up because it, it's not in that cacophony of sound.  You become more aware of using your senses than you would in normally, because you don't have to--they're taken a-- the, the necessity to use them is taken away from you by convenience.
Speaker 1: On a regular basis.
Speaker 2: Certainly, routinely.
Story_ID: 19038
Speaker 1: And was there a point in the trip that you sort of hit the wall, and what--had that been advised, you know?
Speaker 2: No, what wall?  There's no wall.  I'm not running.  I'm not running.  I'm not running.  This is not a physical.  This is not--this is more a mental.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking about, then mentally?
Speaker 2: No, no the--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: After the first week?
Speaker 2: No, no, once you start to fall into the routine, you develop, you do--and you know the things to expect, your body adjust and is flexible enough to make those adjustments as you need them.  And so what you do is--I mean they're, they're imperceptible.  You don't sit and try to go, I must do this or I've got to change that or so and so and so is gonna happen.  These things come as naturally as, as you, as you can--you can't even figure out how natural.  You--it's already happening before you--and then you realize, oh, now, I, I just happened to do this better or, or different than I usually do.  The fact of a wall, running into a wall is a physical thing.  Your body gets to a point where it just has reached its, its capacity for being able to, to do everything.  And you don't feel yourself being able to advance past that.  Mentality, you don't--at least I didn't run into, I didn't there was no mental capacity stop.  It was constant input and outflow constantly.  There was no (unclear) if I use, think this much, I'll stop thinking.  And you just go right straight through with it.  Your limitations, you have no limitations.  We want to accept limitations.  We have no limitations.  If we do have limitations, we never do anything that comes close to them.  What we do is we quit when we feel that we've reached them.  Example, if you say that's my limitation, six inches from your body.  You walk six inches, you stop.  That's as far as I can go.  However, if you go another step, your limit moves with you.  So it only, it only stops you--limits stop you when you stop, not them, not when, when they are physically there.  And that's what happens with most people.  They stop before their body, and their physical capability and their mental capability max out because we're never press them that far.
Speaker 1: Then that's why--then let me ask a question, another question, and that is, when you came in to Boston, you know, at the end of your trip, you said that you had not been to sleep for three days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: Well, because I was coming, the worse thing that can happen to you is, is getting close to land, dangerous, the most--hard things sink boats.  Getting close to land is real treacherous; coming into--when I, when I crossed, when I crossed the, what, what we call is the, is the intersection.  And the intersection is this, on a chart you'll see an intersection.  There's commercial traffic lanes, the commercial traffic lanes that run from New Jersey, New York Harbor, that run East.  And, well, it runs East out from there, and West back.  And there's specific lanes of traffic.  If you're Eastbound, you go in this, you take--you're between this latitude and that longitude, latitude.  If you're Westbound, you're between that.  And then there's, then there's a dividing latitude you don't go into.  And so this, those are laid out, and you find that on the big commercial charts.  The same thing comes out of Boston.  Now, what happens is there is an intersection of these two, these two paths, from which ships just go out in all directions or wherever they want to go.  That's how we control the shipping coming in.  It's just, just as you would have something controlling into, coming into O'Hare, air traffic control says you're going in this way.  When you come into, into that section, you say this is where, wherever, I'm Eastbound, Westbound, this is my latitude and longitude.  This is my course speed.  Big ships do.  Little ships like mine would, we're insignificant of that.  We're considered recreational vessels.  We don't get into getting into that, that pattern or being recognized as being in that pattern.  We fend for ourselves in those things.  Knowing that, in order for me to get to Boston, I had to cross the intersection of these two things where all these big ships are coming in and out.  I'm a little blip on the radar, if they even see it.  They're looking for big ships like themselves.  What I do is, on the radio, I call security.  Securita, securita, securita, this is Commitment, Whiskey Alpha Hotel, 2968, I just remembered that, it was my call sign.  I'm heading on a course of so and so, zero, a course of, of three, three-forty-one at a speed of, of six knots, destination, Boston.  I called that, every half an hour, so that even though they don't see me, they know there's some little nut out there chugging across at a slow speed, keep an eye out, you may see him, you may not.  If you run over him, you know that you hit him, that sort of thing.  Now, I've got to do that.  I've got to weave my way through all of this traffic, two lanes, each one's going North and South.  It's like, you know, what--I'll tell you a comparison.  It's like trying to ride between on and off ramps on the Dan Ryan in a 10-speed bicycle, during, not rush hour, 'cause that's, that's easy cause everybody's stopped, but during the time when the traffic is moving the fastest.  That's what it's like.  You don't sleep through that.  And then I had to go all the way up Cape Cod and around Cape Cod to go in.  You've--Nantucket Shoals.  Nantucket Shoals was not something that I had to worry about cause that was shallow.  It's twenty, eighteen feet.  I'm drawing six feet, no big word, but when I hit the intersection, the Southern portion of that, fog completely, absolutely no visibility.  Now, you don't sleep.  You listen for sounds, you're watching radar.  You, you're doing everything, you're doing security calls.  So I'm up, I'm up, I'm up, I'm up.  By the time I got up to the Cape to make the turn for the Cape, by this time, I'd been up a long time, I woke up laying across my bunk after I sat down at my chart table.  Time in between, I don't know.  How did I do it?  I don't know.  Those kind of scary things.  Those keep--things keep you up.  So you can twenty-four, you can go forty-eight.  You can go thirty-six, if you have to, whatever time it takes.
Story_ID: 19039
Speaker 1: Now, when you got--when you came back, you know, we talked about how you met much, you know, fanfare, and I--and you had been in touch with--who was the gentleman that sold you the boat?  What was his name again?
Speaker 2: Mark Schrader.
Speaker 1: Mark Schrader.  Okay, and you had been in touch with him the whole time?
Speaker 2: At various points in it.  I didn't, I didn't talk to him constantly, but I had been in contact with him when I had questions about the boat, when I questions about things that, where equipment might be located or spares, what spares may have been someplace that I didn't find.
Speaker 1: But you, did you--his experience and your experience, were your routes different?
Speaker 2: My route was the same as, as his.  When he started out in the West Coast and went around at Cape Horn, Cape Horn was his first Cape.  It was my last.  Sailing the ocean, we both, both sailed, we sailed both boats in the Southern ocean.
Speaker 1: And so how did--did his experience differ from yours in any way?
Speaker 2: Oh, certainly.  He's, he's a different personality.  He came around in the racing condition the first time.  The second time he was not in a race.  All, there are a lot of conditions that were very different.  There's, there's no--if I did it the same route, it would be different.  I couldn't do exactly the same route because there are so many variable in it.  The same general area, yes, but exactly the same, no.
Story_ID: 19040
Speaker 1: And so when you got back, were you asked to speak before a lot of--I mean, not just schools, but--
Speaker 2: Everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I spoke, I spoke for, for everyone.  I was, I was on the speakers circuit right after I got back.  And that's what I did until the time I was with, I went with Amistad America.  I spoke a lot to people like--I spoke to the FBI, to the IRS, to the Army and to the Navy, to IBM Seaman's company, insurance companies, college, everything you could think of, anyone who would pay the money.
Speaker 1: And so you really catapulted your career in a new way, not intentionally, but--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, there was no career involved in this.  This was not a career, a career direction.  I was not gonna be a sailor or circumnavigator, no.  That was, that was a, a, a project, a, a goal to complete in and of itself.  What would come after that?  There was no, there was no project of what it would lead to.  It was, it was the end in itself.  Other things happened as a result of that, but it was the end in itself.
Speaker 1: I was talking about the things that happened as a result of it.  That's all.
Speaker 2: The things that happened were, were not things that I, I even knew would happen.  I had no long-range estimate of what would happen, any more than any of us have any long-range estimate of what will happen with us in our careers.  We say well, I'm going to be a career, whatever, whatever.  Stuff comes up, and--ninety degree turns, hundred and eighty degree turns happen.
Story_ID: 19041
Speaker 1: But can you tell anecdote?
Speaker 2: Well, there's, there's all sorts of things that have happened to me.  I tell you, I, I told you about the understanding of where your place is in the universe, about the empowering events that happen.  To give you an example that's very much like that of suspending disbelief.  You can do that.  Brazil outbound, maybe two hundred, 300 miles offshore.  Intertropic conversions--no wind, none whatsoever.  It just stops.  So there I'm sitting.  I only got eighty-five gallons of fuel, not gonna waste it because it, what's gonna happen with that fuel is that it's gonna be used to run the engine, to run the alternative, to charge my batteries.  I have solar cells, but they charge rather slowly, and you have to do them--usually, what you do, is you want use the engine, charge your batteries up to the top, and then use your solar cells to keep them topped off.  Single-cell band radios which I used every night, drained those things.  You could key the mic and you could mark, watch the needle drop on, on how much you're--yeah, how much you're drawing from it.  So when that happens, when you come the calm, you sit there, that's all you do, and wait.  Patience is something you learn.  Patience-- you learn it.  So I'm sitting, and it's night, no su--no moon at all, dark.  You haven't seen dark.  There, it's dark out there.  I mean, don't see your hand in front of your face, dark.  That's how dark it is.  Running lights were the only lights I had, so they had them on, but I, but it was one of those nights, it was just beautiful, so I'm, I'm gonna just switch it off.  It's nobody on the radar, switch them off, absolutely dark.  Stars from the horizon all the way up over, all the way, completely covered.  Now, it's dark enough and the stars are bright enough and the water's calm enough that the stars reflect on the water.  And for an instant, the illusion becomes that the stars are all the way around.  So you're suspended in the center of a glow of stars.  Your eyes tell you that.  Now, when your eyes tell you that, before your brain can realize, 'no, that's the reflection of the water and the stars and the whole thing', for that transit in between, you get this--feeling.  That's the feeling that you can't--that you had, one of those things, you had to be there.  I could describe--you can kind of get the idea, but you can't--the, the power of it when you're there is just unreal.  It's, it's otherworldly.  Things like that happen periodically when you're out there.  You don't expect them, you can't plan on them, but if you pay attention, all will be revealed, as they say in the, in the books.
Speaker 1: Anything else on--?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a, well, not so much like that.  That, that was a singular experience.  Weather phenomena, of course, they were always, always fun.  The sun devils, moon devils, horizontal, horizontal rainbows, multiples, doubles, triple rainbows, those things, and the usual cloud formations.  Those, those are commonplace.
Speaker 1: And had you, had all those things you'd seen before, you know, like the double and triple rainbows and the different cloud formations or you saw things you had not seen before on this trip?
Speaker 2: Oh, certainly, I'd never been out there before.  This was all new.  This was a totally unique experience.  To do it again would be a unique experience because that, these things happen when they happen.  You can't conjure them up.
Speaker 1: And so are you saying, you know, because yesterday, and even just now, the whole description of the stars, I--that's what I'm saying, you almost took me to another level.
Speaker 2: And there are lots of things that'll take you to another level out there, lots of things, if you let it.  And if you're out there, and you're out there long enough, you'll have to let it.  If you read the books [Bernard] Moitessier, who was very eloquent--and he's got a good translator cause his books are all written in French, if you read some of the, some of the accounts of people like the [Niles & Beryl] Smeetons who, who sailed in the early fifties [1950s], when boats were not as sophisticated and were more difficult to sail. And you, and you read their accounts of their experiences, not so much the land experiences, but their sailing experiences, you'll find all sorts of little gems in there of things that happened to them.  Most people want to read these kind of books for the storms.  How bad was it?  How terrible, but not for the other things.  Storms are really a small portion of this.  Eighty-five percent fantastic, ten percent miserable, and five percent life threatening.  It's a good ratio, if you can get that in your life, you're doing all right.  So it's a unique thing.  To understand it fully, well, you can't because in experiencing it, you can't understand it fully.  You walk away from some incidents and some things going, whew, what was that?  Other things, you come back to say, a-h-h-h, now, I know.  So it's a wonderful experience.  Do I recommend it for everybody?  Absolutely not because there's a certain mindset that has to happen way before you get there, and when that mindset happens, then you can go on to it.  There are other ways that it can happen, that same kind of experience.  It does not necessarily have to be at sea.  It does have to be outside of the realm of those things that are artificially constructed and manipulated, to give us emotional and physical excitement.  Riding roller coasters won't do it, skiing in front of an avalanche probably will, if you survive it; trekking across trackless wilderness can do it.  Those things that put you and the natural sense of the universe in close conjunction, without outside stimulus can cause all sorts of things to happen to you if you're open to them, if you don't spend your energy fighting them and attempting to assume you can manipulate them to your will, as opposed to seeing what is happening in them that can, you can use to do what you need to have done.
Story_ID: 19042
Speaker 1: So you're really talking about the psychology of the adventurer, in many ways?
Speaker 2: I would say, well, there are all sorts of adventurers.  There are adventurers who are into adventure to conquer.  There are others who are into it for gain and notoriety.  There are some that are into for the experience and all shades in between.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: So the universal term adventurer doesn't mean much.  I think that anyone that decides to have children is an adventurer cause that is an adventure.  It certainly is.  So the term is rather loose in its application, and the true sense of how it's applied to the things that I've been doing, yeah, that's, that's another kind of adventurer.  My joke about adventure is that I decided to have an adventure.  I did not want to have drama, big difference.  And that's it.  You know, the ship sinking, you know, running into a whale or hitting an iceberg.  That's drama; didn't want that; wanted the experience of the trip.  That to me was adventure.
Speaker 1: And what type of adventurer were you though, did you find yourself to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I, I had no way of, of discerning what kind of adventurer--in other words, I'd have to categorize it--.
Speaker 1: Well, you--it wasn't the notoriety--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--.
Speaker 1: It was in part?
Speaker 2: It was for, for a personal, a personal enlightenment.  That's what it was about.  And that's what I went out for.
Speaker 1: You came--?
Speaker 2: And an object lesson to a very specific group of people, initially, my grandchildren, ultimately, the kids involved in the program I was in.
Speaker 1: And the kids, what was your aim with the kids?  And did that come to be, to fruition?
Speaker 2: An object lesson, just some object lesson, of being able to see what you could do with a basic education, a dream, and understanding what a dream was, and a willingness to persevere right straight through to the end because one of the, the--my five principles says, adversity ends--most bail when it gets adverse because they say, I can't stand this, not understanding that adversity ends.  Your only responsibility is to stay with it until it ends because once it ends, it's gone, and not let it get you.  You're not gonna beat it.  All you have to do is outlast it, and that's what happens.  People try to fight and beat it.  You can't--you're not gonna beat it.  You have to accept it.  That's what it is.  It's bad, I'm not happy about it.  It's miserable, that may be about those things that I don't have to concentrate on it, but if I can just hang in here long enough, it's gonna move over and I can move on with what I have to do.
Speaker 1: So, and the reason I asked that question is that, you know, you had said to your wife that you wanted to go on the adventure, and then I'm thinking about the other people, you know, when you were talking about the gentleman, Sir John, Sir John Dicken--what the?
Speaker 2: (Unclear), oh, Sir Robin Knox, Robin Knox-Johnston and Sir Ronald Fines.
Speaker 1: And how, you know, and the race that he won, one person, you know, just continued to keep going.  So he just got into the experience--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and didn't want it to end.  And then the other person who was trying to manipulate, you know--?
Speaker 2: Right, and he was looking for the aggrandizement and the, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, what I was asking sort of in a way was what you essentially learned about yourself in this process?
Speaker 2: Oh, I learned those same things.  I learned I was smarter than I thought I was.  I learned I was dumber than I thought I was, and that I had no limitations.  And that's, it--essentially, that's it because from those three lessons springs everything else in life.
Speaker 1: So how was the Bill Pinkney that came back after those twenty-two months, different from the one who left?
Speaker 2: Can't evaluate that.  Again, that's an, that's an objective evaluation.  I can't be objective about it.  I'm too much involved in it--.
Speaker 1: I'm not asking you to be--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't say how I was different because I had to, to know how I was beforehand.
Speaker 1: Did people--did your wife tell you had changed?
Speaker 2: Oh, everyone tells me that.  We all change.  Age does that to us, doesn't it?  Experience does that to us all.  It's the magnitude and direction that, that is hard to gauge.
Speaker 1: You came back in 1991?
Speaker 2: Two, '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], okay.
Story_ID: 19043
Speaker 1: So your next trip for the Middle Passage was not for--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999].
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999], so like a seven-year period.  So in that seven years, you're lecturing, you're--that's what I'm saying.  You probably were starting to--or I should ask you, you were starting to see some change in yourself and things had sort of catapulted, and you even admit, in ways that you had not anticipated.
Speaker 2: Opportunities came to me that, as a result of that thing which I didn't have before.  The trip I made in '99 [1999] was the one I wanted to make in the first place.  That's the trip I wanted to make, but I felt that I couldn't make that one because I had no credentials.  So to establish the credentials, I did the first one, the around the world alone.  That I could do it, I didn't, I didn't have to--and in that, I established my sailing credentials, my--for want of a better term, educational efforts credentials.  And then when the time was right, I was able to take that and go to do the first thing I wanted to do, which was to go to the West Coast of Africa and see some of the things that I had read about in a journal that I found in the New York Public Library about a sailor who was on the anti-slavery fleet in 1820, traveling the West Coast of Africa.  I often wondered why that there were sailing ships coming out of--that were indigenous to West Africa, whereas in East Africa, there were, the Dehaus and those things.  West Africa, I didn't realize was a very rugged coast, does not have any, any--it's a, it's a lee shore.  It doesn't have any natural harbors, so it was not conducive with that kind of development.  Overland routes were, were highly developed because of that.  My trip to Africa was to see those places where Horatio Bridge, the author of this journal, had gone in their travels of two years as an anti-slavery squadron ship.  That's what I wanted to do.  So I was able to do that.  It happened because now, I have also--I've, I've been able to establish credentials as a speaker, a lecturer.  I've got a book that's in print in the text of the reading curriculum for, for hundreds of schools across the country.  My project with Amistad America is in a stage where I don't have to be there.  It is already--construction's started and it's rolling right along, I can take six months and go and do this.  If I don't--if I didn't do that then, I would have to start to do that now, at age sixty-eight.  I'm in fantastic shape, most of the time, but again, it's taking all of that time to focus on that project and not living a life outside of that.  So the reason why I'm retiring, I've done most of my, my stuff.  I've done three; it's enough.  Now, I want to go on to other things that I can be not under the pressure of having to produce something for someone else, which is what I wanted to do, which is what I'm so happy to be, to have been able to do, but to, now, I want to do something for myself, or nothing for myself, to have that option.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the middle passage voyage and what, you know, what the route was and what--and even, you talk about Horatio--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Bridge.
Speaker 1: Bridges' book, and what was of appeal to you in that book, and what sort of, what caught your attention?
Speaker 2: I, the book, the book--I stumbled on the book.  I stumbled on the book in the New York public library under looking for books about Afri--West African sirs.  This was journey, the, the title of the journal was "Journey of an African Cruiser".  There you go, journal.  And it was in the card catalogue and one of many books that I pulled out.  This one was a tiny volume, a first edition in the reference department, written in 1920; opened it up and I read it, and the forward was very interesting because the forward was written by Bridges' college classmate, who he sent the journal to, who had asked him to write a journal and send it back, and who had it printed.  The classmate, who wrote the forward and had it printed was Nathaniel Hawthorne.  And it was fascinating, and I read it and I'm saying, hey--and I started reading the book.  And I'm listening--I'm reading all of what he does.  This is a very, it's a very small journal, but it was fascinating about it.  It piqued my curiosity about that aspect of American Maritime life.  You don't hear much about that.  And most people don't realize that we had an anti-slavery fleet in Phil--not Philadelphia, in Baltimore, there's a large ship called the Constellation.  The Constellation was built specifically to part of the anti-slavery fleet, and it was very successful on a number of voyages in preventing slaves ships from coming off of the African coast to the Americas and releasing those people who were held captive on board.  So that was, an end of it--the whole book intrigued me, the subject matter, the manner in which it was written, and the accounts of the ship.  It was an adventure story.  I love to read.  I'm a voracious reader, and anything that gets me in the first, in the first chapter, you got me.  I'm gone, won't close it until I have to.  So that book got me, and it kept me going on that.  And that was something that I wanted to do.  That was 1974.  So, and I would, and I kept thinking, you know, more and more about wanting to find, going to those places.  So then I went back to how to, how to get to do it. You have, you have to have some kind of credentials, you have to do something.  And as a marketer, that's what I did for a lot of years, and you figure the methodology, the creditability, the creditability will come from, from some sailing adventure.  What sailing adventures could you have the most control over?  Boom, we get down from the process of elimination to sailing solo.  So that became the effort because that effort was a means to an ultimate end, but it was the end from the childhood desire to have an adventure.  So I got two for one on that.
Speaker 1: Now, one other, just question about this, the anti-slavery ships.  What was the, why were they doing that?  Was it purely economics?
Speaker 2: Treaty, treaty.
Speaker 1: Treaty.  Treaty of 1817, United States, Spain, Great Britain, outlawing the slave trade.  Enforcing that, of course, was the thing that they were doing, and that's exactly what, what the anti-slavery squadrons did, enforcing.  That was their job.  Whether they were successful, ah, it's up for grabs.
Speaker 2: Now, but it all certainly around really economics and--
Speaker 1: Oh, certainly, the whole concept of slavery really is about economics.
Story_ID: 19044
Speaker 1: Now, talk about your process.  So middle passage voyage, how did it take to plan, you know, this time around and when did you start the planning for it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started the planning soon after I got back, not focused planning, but gathering materials, gathering data, gathering people in, in the--and when I say people, gathering people, that's the potential persons who would be involved in the, the educational development of materials who would go on the ship, the methodology for getting teachers, the methodology for documenting.  These things all came in pieces from people I knew, people I knew of, people who knew people, examples that I've seen of other things that have been out there, examples of things that, that I wanted to do.  So that the pieces started to come together.  The pieces were out there, and I'd been working on them a lot.  But not focused, that was not my focus.  My focus was making a living, and making a living was what I did after writing the book and then out on the speakers' circuit, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: And so the trip--you took off in, was it '98 [1998] or '99 [1999], you set off--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999].
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999], and the, your support team, has it changed much during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, oh, sure.  Different people, different people, different--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --different ment--a whole, whole different thing.  Educational people, and now I'm dealing with the Academy for Math and Science housed over at IIT [Illinois Instiute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm dealing with the school system on a more direct basis.  I'm dealing with funders who were very different.  I'm dealing with real commercial sponsors, Abbott Laboratories, Ford Motor Company, the postal service, I'm dealing with a whole different group of players, with a different dynamic, with a different kind of ship.  The mission's totally different.  It's, it was a situation in and to itself.
Speaker 1: Did you find that this situation was more demanding than the four guys saying, you know, you know, coming together and sort of quietly--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --It wasn't, it wasn't--the first one was not easy.  That, the thing that happened, happened right at the end and it was critical to the, to the fact that I almost lost the whole deal.  This one came, this one was also, was more traumatic because I had, I did not have that kind of money.  So much of the, of the financial resources went for the, the educational material, not for the, not for the, the vessel and the project itself--.  I wanted, I was squeezed in a, in a situation that I was too anxious.  So I made some, some bad deals, mainly because of the fact that I had the obligation to do Amistad.  If I had not had the obligation to do Amistad, I would have done it very differently, and I would not be, as I am to this date, heavily in debt about it.  But I was trying, I was--I made concessions to get it done so that I would be able to go to the Amistad project on time.  And that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 19045
Speaker 1: So you, when did Amistad come about?  How did that come about and what year did that come about?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976], it was, I'm sorry.  Seventy-six [1976] is when I heard the story.  Seventy-six [1976], I met Warren [Q.] Marr and in meeting Warren Marr, I heard of his dream to make it happen, never thinking that I would involved in it, never thinking that it might even come true.  But it was then twenty years later when I was a trustee of Mystic Seaport, that the seaport was given the option to bid on, actually, instructing the vessel.  And that's when I, I got involved in Amistad America because it was just being founded, the foundation was, and I was asked to be a board member because of my association with Mystic.  At first I thought it was gonna be a conflict, but they blessed it because then it gave--it bound the two organizations together more, more tightly.  And then after I did that one, I, the construction started in '98 [1998] when we got the money.  Two thousand [2000], we finished, and we launched and started out on our, our first tours.
Speaker 1: So really, 1999 to 2000, it was a very tight sort of period, you know, juggling act?
Speaker 2: For me, right, very much so.
Speaker 1: Now, can we go back to when you met Warren Mar and what he, you know, expressed his desires to be?
Speaker 2: Well, his--he didn't express them and just come and say, Bill, this is what I want to do.  This was at an open, an open presentation on board the Western Union, which he had chartered to represent Amistad in the parade of tall ships in the bicentennial parade in 1976 in New York, and that's when I heard it.  And it was an intriguing story.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You mean the whole story of Amistad?
Speaker 2: The Amistad story, yeah--.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  Well, you know a lot of people had not heard of Amistad when the, you know, when it just seemed to come out of nowhere.
Speaker 2: Well, it came out of nowhere because it became box office with a movie which was, it shows where our heads are at as a nation.  We don't read.  We definitely don't read history, and so when this thing comes up, it is , I didn't know that.  Well, there's a lot of things you don't know.  This is not A&E , I don't know story, this is just one of many.
Speaker 1: Can you tell the, just, you know, tell people about Warren Mar and his significance and--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, his significance, he was the, the publisher of the "Crisis Magazine", which is the outreach arm of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  So this, he, for all intents and purposes is the godfather of the whole project.  And that's what he has remained to us the whole, the whole time we were in construction and now that we've got it build.
Speaker 1: And, but I'm just saying in terms of his, his role even with Amistad as an organization and the research center.  Do you know much about that history?
Speaker 2: I know that he's, that he and his Amistad affiliates which is an organization in New York, which he has been very, very intensively involved in doing research and, and bringing to the fore, not only the story, but artifacts, but anything else that he could get together about this particular ship.
Speaker 1: And so you saw the two, so you had a desire, you know, to do this sort of--but from a desire as an African American sort of in the--.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: No.  No, you know, I--the--
Speaker 2: I'm talking about the route, the route, the middle, I'm sorry, it was--.
Speaker 1: The middle pass--the Middle Passage route was, was something that particular thing was an interest, of interest to me on two levels.  And both them really being parallel.  One is as the descendent of people brought from Africa.  The second as a mariner who looks at where and what was constantly trying to place where the development of this country, as a maritime country, got its origins, and the development, that was any country.  Where did the, what are its maritime origins?  That's, that's a fascination for me.
Speaker 2: But what I'm saying in the whole public sense, not much is known or talked about in terms of Africa and its maritime notions.  I mean it's--.
Speaker 1: --Well not--.
Speaker 2: In the whole, I mean people think of the Dutch and the, and the British, and--.
Speaker 1: During that particular time of the slave time, the West Coast of Africa was dominated, of course, by the Europeans.  The East Coast, of course, was dominated by the Arabs far longer than the European presence on the East Coast.  And their maritime, the maritime that existed, the nations did not have it.
Story_ID: 19046
Speaker 1: Well, the difference--the development between the East and West [Africa].  Well, the West Coast, of course, was dominated by the Europeans.  The East Coast was dominated, of course, by the Arabs because they were the, the nations that, that set upon the, the continent of Africa in their most readily accessible methodology which is by ship, to plunder and exploit.  In those days, there was no oil.  So, so the, the tribes of the Middle East were not super well off, nor were they, they big, big countries of, of having resources that they understood to use.  Therefore, they were traders.  They dealt in goods, be it live, livestock, produce, whatever, but they did, they were traders, and that's what they, they did very well.  Slavery, of course, was something that had been around in all of those areas for many, many years, so to deal in slaves was not, was no great stretch for, for what they did in what, in East Africa.  Having large ships that could sail into that part of the world, they were able to be successful at it, and because there were natural ports in, in that part of the world, the ports themselves and the nations built and developed their own maritime trades in, very early on.  On the West coast, that was not the case.  The West coast, the countries that had any kind of maritime wherewith all at all, are, of course, which was way after the antebellum period.  Ghana, which had, which at one time had one of the, the, the largest fleets in West Africa, Ghana had at one time more women, licensed ocean masters than any other country in the world.  They sold the entire steamship, the whole maritime business, the whole steamship line, Blackstar Line--gone, sold it.  Fishing fleets, sold it.  The government did that.  So here's a nation that's, that's got all sorts of--it's got two major harbors, and a great exporter of cocoa and no Ghanaian flag ships exploiting the cocoa.  When I was there, I had guys come to me to work as a clean--to clean up my ship who had captain's papers, who had master's papers, international.  So they kind of blew that one.
Story_ID: 19047
Speaker 1: Now, the Middle Passage, with that you--what things, can you give me a short anecdotes about it?  I know that, you know, there were, you a PBS documentary was produced and planned ahead of time, but produced as a result of it.
Speaker 2: There were two documentaries.
Speaker 1: Two, okay.  One is, was it "Captain Bill Pinkney"--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, totally different.
Speaker 1: Oh, so that's right, "An Incredible Voyage of--.
Speaker 2: The--"Captain Bill Pinkney Journey" is a book is a book that I did for first grade about the, the around the world.  "The Incredible Voyage" is the video that we did for WCBB initially, and edited for Disney.  Disney ran it for two years and won the cable Ace Award with it.
Speaker 1: And then there was "Captain Bill Pinkney's Voyage Home"?
Speaker 2: "Voyages Home" was the West African trip.  The--there's, there's another one called "Setting Sail", which was the, about the preparation.  And that won an Emmy locally.
Speaker 1: And you also--now, at this point, did you use GPS the first time around?
Speaker 2: Sure..
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was relatively new, all the bugs weren't out, but I used it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to celestial navigation.  I have not a purist in that, in that vein because I feel that I would prefer to have accuracy with a hundred yards, as opposed to within a mile.
Speaker 1: And you used--was this similar to the last time, I think I read that you read a hundred charts.  Did you have that many charts going out the first time around?
Speaker 2: The first time, no, because it--I didn't have a lot of the harbor charts cause I wasn't going into harbors.  So I didn't have, I didn't have the necessity for having what we call large-scale charts.
Speaker 1: And how many harbors did you go in this time?
Speaker 2: Five times, yeah, I only went to five ports.
Speaker 1: Five, five ports, okay, okay.  This, the last trip, the middle voyage?No, no, Middle Passage
Speaker 2: The Middle Passage, I went to one--let's see, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, seven.
Speaker 1: And what were they?
Speaker 2: There were Barbados, Fortaleza, Natal, Recife--Recife, Salvador, Acra, well, actually not Acra, Tema, Ghana, Dakar, Senegal and back to, back to Bermuda, I mean back to, back to Puerto Rico cause I started out in Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: And this, but were you--what were you hoping for with this trip?  And were your hopes--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it wasn't hope.  I had a specific thing in mind.  I was to develop a, a seven-video educational program as designed by the people at the Teachers Academy for Math and Science.  And that's what we did.
Speaker 1: No spiritual experience with the Middle Passage?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's a spiritual experience with everything you do.
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: I mean to look for the, for the wonderful epiphany in everything, I'm afraid it doesn't kind of happen like that.
Speaker 1: So it didn't happen with this trip?
Speaker 2: No, I had a lot of pain in the butt on this trip.
Speaker 1: Because of all the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Because, first, we had issues, financial, I'm dealing with people.  I'm dealing with governments, which I didn't have to deal with before, that were, in some cases, not adversarial, but less than cooperative.  And so it was, it was a different thing.  I have lots of notes and tapes on, on that thing.  I won't even look at them now.  I probably won't look at them for another three or four years.  I won't be able to look at them because I--I'm only dealing with the things that we're able to make out of the original pieces we had.  We made the educational piece out of it, and that's all that matters right now.  But the rest of it, I don't, I'll venture into some time later.
Story_ID: 19048
Speaker 1: So when you're talking about Amistad and you were talking about the benefit of that in terms of the shipbuilding, you know, and marketing, how, that that has been, you know, that was--you know, you had sailed, but it was a whole different process with building.
Speaker 2: Right, it's learning the steps of what it requires to build a ship.  That was, that was invaluable for me to be able to participate in every step, right straight through.  So if I, I ever get to the point where I'm gonna build a ship, I know what the expectations are for building each, each phase of the ship, what the expectations, what the demands that could be made upon the builder.  And what things that I would like to see change the methodology on my my personal boat.
Speaker 1: Now, this, what kind of--I know it's a replica, but what is the actual description of the ship, you know, the Amistad ship and what--it's a ship?
Speaker 2: It's a ship, yeah, we call it.  We call it a ship, call it a boat, call it a spear, call it an arrow.  You can it whatever you want to.  This day, I'm, we're not really--it's kind of in a, a strange position.  And you were saying, it, what type is it?  It very specifically is a Baltimore, a topsail, schooner, Baltimore design, which makes it a Baltimore clipper because those boats have a very different and specific design schedule, has a different sail plan.  It has a different methodology for why it was built, very unique to that particular boat.
Speaker 1: And why was it--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: And they weren't all built in Baltimore [Maryland].  It's just that, that's just the style.  It's called the Baltimore style, they build them in--Amistad was build in Puerto Ri--in Cuba.  There were a number built in France and other places around the world.
Speaker 1: And what was probably the most surprising that you learned about shipbuilding that you would have, you know, not anticipated?
Speaker 2: Kind of lost up there for a minute.  I'm starting to fade, so I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I know, I know, I know.  But that's okay, just--.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I, I--it's kind of hard to pinpoint anything on that.
Speaker 1: But if you build a boat, what kind of boat would you want to build?
Speaker 2: I'd build a catamaran, you know, a catamaran using some of the newer methods which relatively fast, relatively inexpensive.  You can't build a boat, a cheap--there's no such thing as a cheap boat, but relatively inexpensive for what--the type of boat that I want and one that would be will very single purpose for my, for what I want to use it for.
Speaker 1: Now, you, with the, the Amistad, what did it cost to build and what would, you know, if you were to--?
Speaker 2: About three hundred and fifty--not three hundred fifty--$3.5 million, yeah, which is not a bad deal when you consider that it's completely handmade.  You can't buy anything off the shelf except the machinery.  The rest of the stuff is hand hewn from logs.
Speaker 1: That's pretty impressive.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's pretty much how you build most schooners today because it--most traditional boats require that you use woods that are not easily obtained and at a great expense.  Labor, which is very specialized and hard, and hard to find, and, of course, it's a, it's a seller's market for, for the tradesmen.
Speaker 1: Now, how long did it take to build?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two--twenty-two, it took two years, actually, a full two years.
Speaker 1: And how many people?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't, I can't say, you know.  Offhand, I would approximately, including volunteers, maybe about thirty-five people--
Speaker 1: And now you're--?
Speaker 2: --Alot of it was volunteer work.
Speaker 1: And so you have--do you think it's a good thing that it got done, the replica and the, and the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, if I didn't think it was good, I wouldn't be on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's something, it's, it's a symbol of something that needs to be, to be shown.  It's a story that needs to be brought to light, slavery is brought to light in the movies, it needs to be a presence that people can, can touch.  The actors, it, they touched on an icon for one of the successes in that period in time in this country's history.
Story_ID: 19049
Speaker 1: You know, I was just thinking, so 1989, it's been nineteen ninety--so about thirteen, fourteen, thirteen years, I mean since your first sale, you know, I mean your first trip was in 1989, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety (1990).
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety (1990), okay.
Speaker 2: So it's been, it's been--I'll tell you what, I left, I left Boston August 5, 1990.  So August 5, 1990 to August 5, 1993 [2003] is thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Thirteen years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you've recently announced your retirement, and you're about to get married?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so what are your plans going forward?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, other than the basic thing that I'm going to write.  I'm gonna go back on the speaking circuit and see what happens.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what does, what does Bill Pinkney want to do that he, I mean besides writing your book, but what do you--you know, this was, this was a passion--your wife said, you know, you had wanted to have an adventure?
Speaker 2: I wanted to have an adventure and I had an adventure.  I'm having adventure.  I will continue to have adventure throughout my life because of the things that I've done so far.  When I sit on the front porch at the old souls' home in my rocking chair, I'll have (great?) hours and hours of yarns to tell.  And that, too, will be an adventure.
Story_ID: 19050
Speaker 1: And when you think back about your youth because, you know, you've had a very diverse career in many respects?
Speaker 2: I'm having a diverse career.
Speaker 1: You are (laughs), okay.
Speaker 2: We're not speaking in the past tense, and I'm still doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, you're having a very diverse experience, and, and you have--and you also wanted to reach, you know, children in many ways, and which you have and continue to do, when you think about yourself as a young, youngster, and I'm thinking of your sixth grade teacher--was it the sixth grade teacher?
Speaker 2: Seventh.
Speaker 1: Seventh grade teacher, that's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Gladys Barret.
Speaker 1: Who sort of put you, you know the whole story with the nigger--the brazil nuts and the nigger toes.
Speaker 2: No, that was the sixth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: That was the sixth grade, I thought it was the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: That was the sixth grade teacher.  I thought you were talking about the one that influence me to read and do an adventure?
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about the, you know.  When you think back about that person--the seventh grade came along and sort of gave you some, some sense of hope.  But I'm just wondering about that Bill Pinkney at that, you know, at that juncture, in let's say, sixth grade, and the man that he has evolved into and the path along the way and what that path represents in many ways.  As an example to others, I'm just wondering.
Speaker 2: See, I, I never looked at the concept of, of an example to others as a role model cause I think, I, I take umbrage to all of that.  My life is what I've been blessed to live and enjoy.  If someone can draw something of parallel or something from it, that's good.  It has not been my goal, and it's not something that, that I strive to do, to set and be the, and be an example and, and say, look, this is what I've done, this is what you can do.  You know, I think that's, that's something that I want--I think every single one of us fits into that role.  If I sat you in this chair, and I sat in that chair, it'd be the same thing.  We all have that responsibility, whether we want it or not because everyone that sees us makes a decision about their life, whether they're gonna be like you, want to learn from what you've done or, or look at you and say I don't ever want to be like that person; listening to single, individual lives as, oh, that's a great role model.  No, you're--human being prefer this, all of us.  And to put someone into that position of, of being the model which, which is supposed to be flawless and, and the path to take, I think is unfair and, and counterproductive, because it's not true.  How many of those people and places, icons are falling into dust?  And we all go, pooh, pooh, oh, horrible, they've failed their responsibility.  No, you put that on them.  Very few of them ever went out to, and look for that mantle to put their shoulders.  Someone else put it on them, and when you try to shrug it off, everyone says, well, that's not your place.  You're part of posterity; we all are at some point to someone somewhere.  Those that choose to, to go out with that direction, that's fine.  But let them put it on.  But to have it placed upon them by those, whoever they are, that can say that is our role model, I think that's totally unfair.  We do the best we can with what goals we have and set in our life.  Sometimes they make examples that people would say, I'd like to do that.  Sometimes, they don't, but to place that upon someone puts an undue pressure on them that's not deserved.  And then who has the right to do that, except we ourselves.  And if you don't accept it, we don't place and say that's what we intend you to do.  Then someone else is guessing and attempting to manipulate our lives.
Speaker 1: That's assuming that you think that role models have to be on a pedestal.  But they--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They put them on pedestals.  Every, everyone is on a pedestal.  When they become the title role models, they become the pedest--on the pedestal.  They are person who are with blemish?  Who's that?  Any mistake, any foible or any stumble they make, they're crucified for it.  That's why that--someone made a statement the other night, I did a speech for, and one of things they said, wow, you speak so wonderfully extemporaneously, wow, you should run for office.  "Not on your life" because we do not get people to run for office who really should run for office, for that every same reason.
Story_ID: 19051
Speaker 1: Captain Pinkney, though, but it all is really, you know, I'm gonna ask a question that's a legacy question of what you want your legacy to be, but that's a personal question for you?
Speaker 2: My legacy is already, is already set for, as far as I'm concerned.  It will be that I was able to make my dreams come true, my dreams.  I was one of those people who was able to make their dreams come true with the help of many, many people, some of whom did it knowingly, some of whom did it unknowingly.  But I was able to make my dreams come true.
Speaker 1: And do you believe that there's any, any example in your ability to make your dreams come true that others can follow, for those other people that have dreams out there?  What would you say to them?
Speaker 2: Well, it--first of all, know the difference between a dream and a fantasy, first and foremost.  Once you do that, you've got ninety percent of the battle licked.  Second, understand what it cost to make your dream a reality, not materially, emotionally, physically, psychologically, know what it costs.  Third, decide whether or not you're willing to pay the price, and if you're willing to pay the price, don't ever stop paying it cause dreams don't happen overnight.  One of my early supporters in my around the world was a man from Chicago named Myron Hokin.  Myron Hokin owned some (unclear) and yacht club.  His family was in railroad.  They were a very wealthy family.  And Myron, when he helped me with my project--I met him at the Columbia College Student Center [Chicago, Illinois].  He donated that.  And I, he made the donation.  It was a year before I as able--I wasn't doing anything, nothing, everything was down to a, to the--nothing was happening.  It sort of just stalled out.  And I saw him, and I was embarrassed, and I hadn't done anything, and he'd already given me money.  And I went up to him, and I said, "Mr. Hokin, you know, the progress hasn't been going as fast as I'd like it to do.  But I will, I am gonna do this, and I'm--just wanted to apologize."  He said, "Son, remember anything that has to do with boats, it takes as long as it takes."  And that's the thing I think someone should, people should remember.  It takes as long as it takes.
Story_ID: 19052
Speaker 1: But one more question, and it really has to do with what your story relates to.  And is there a story within the story of Bill Pinkney of blacks in the maritime industry?
Speaker 2: The story's been written, [W. Jeffery] Jeff Bolster  wrote the first part of it.  It's called "Black Jacks".  The second part of it's still to be written because it'll take on, it'll take on what happened after the first World War.  His story ends with the Civil War because that's when the change made, was made with blacks having prominence in the maritime.  It catches up, that hiatus ends at the end of the first World War when blacks again were brought into the maritime, both commercially and from a military standpoint.  That half has to be written yet.
Speaker 1: Do you think there is a story, though?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure it is, great story, incredible story, lots of names, lots of people.  Somebody has to write that one.  It's still to be written.  It's not hidden, it's just that somebody has to write it.
