Story_ID: 290314
Speaker 1: We're going to get started by slating.  My name is Evelyn Pounds and I am the interviewer.  And Adrian Jackson is the videographer.  Please state and spell your full name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Anita Jeanette Ponder [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder].  It's A-N-I-T-A, P-, uh, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E, P-O-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your date of birth and the location of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on April 16, 1961 in Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 19th, 2006.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: It's 700 Poplar Street which is Macon City Hall [Macon-Bibb County Government Center].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is in--
Speaker 2: Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 290315
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you just a few People magazine-ish type questions, so just bear with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ohh, let's--you caught me off guard with that one.  Oh, I got so many favorite foods--probably steak.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually don't.
Story_ID: 290316
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother.  What is her name and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mom's name is Margie Ponder and her maiden name is Jenkins, so it's Margie Jenkins Ponder.  She was born in Lakeland, Georgia, which is south Georgia.  She is one of four children and, you know, all her siblings are still alive.  Even her mom [Rosa Jenkins] is still alive who lives with us now.  So, she moved from south Georgia to Fort Valley [Georgia] where we are now where she attended college, yeah.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very nurturing, smart--I mean, extremely smart.  My mom is the one that you can always find curled up on the sofa with a crossword puzzle out of every magazine there is and the more difficult, the better.  You know, my mom is the one that's going to, you know, look to, to game shows, that's going to challenge you to think, like 'Jeopardy,' you know, as opposed to, you know, some foolishness, you know.  My mom is the, the one that's going to be on the History Channel or the, The Learning Channel [TLC], or all that kind of thing--smart woman, and non-judgmental.  And I think that's important.  I mean, I think that, you know, and, and we live in a society of judgmental people.  And, you know, it's three of us--myself and my, my two sisters [Keisha Ponder-Green and Celeste Ponder].  And she has, you know, guided us but, at the same time, giving us the space to be the individuals that we are and, you know, let us make our, you know, our own decisions, and not be judgmental about them.  But at the same time, still be a mother and a, and she has just shown a tremendous balance in terms of kind of being a friend and a momma at the same time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any stories for when she was growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Well, she grew up in, in Lakeland, Georgia, as I told you.  We had about, and still do actually, have about a five to six hundred-acre farm in, in Lakeland, even as we speak, and that's where she grew up.  At that time, the main industry was tobacco farmers, and they grew tobacco to--and sold it to cigarette companies.  And, of course, we sold other things--watermelons for market, and, you know, we're big corn farmers, but I mean, huge farmers for that, for that area.  And, you know, six hundred acres of land, even back during that time was, you know, a lot of land.  And her whole childhood was spent working, you know, working that farm.  And that was the life that she grew up in.  So, leaving Lakeland, Georgia, and coming to Fort Valley, which as you know, is extremely small to me, was a big deal, to actually come out of south Georgia.  But the thing that I loved that, even to date in 2006, you know, my mom, her sisters, my grandmom, they understood and still understand the importance of that farm, and owning land, and the history, and thsat kind of thing.  And so, none of us have ever sold any of that, and the farm is still intact, but she has a certain portion of the acreage.  My granddad's brother has a farm.  It's five hundred acres right next door.  The other granddad--his brother has a farm and so, collectively, you know, you're talking about over a thousand acres in south Georgia that are still in the hands of our family, and still being farmed.  And I, and I think that's a great testimony 'cause so often, you know, we, we give away our history.  We sell our history and that kind of thing.  And to this day, we still have our family reunions down there--always having during my entire life, you know, we've always had family reunions and they always are on, on the farm.
Speaker 1: And that's very interesting.  When was your mother born approximately what year?
Speaker 2: I don't know--I know she's sixty-six.
Speaker 1: She's sixty-six, so she was born around 1939, or somewhere around in there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, during the--well, really, toward the end of the [Great] Depression was, was when she was born, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for her family to own land at that particular time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's--
Speaker 1: --is amazing.
Speaker 2: --it's saying something--
Story_ID: 290317
Speaker 1: It is interesting, you know, we talk about history and, you know, we all, you know, have interesting backgrounds.  My [maternal] grandfather [Teroma Jenkins] was the product of a black slave and a white slave master [sic.].
Speaker 2: Now, this is your mother's [Margie Jenkins Ponder] grandfather?
Speaker 1: My, my, no, my mother--
Speaker 2: Your mother's--
Speaker 1: --my mother's father.
Speaker 2: Your mother's father, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.  And, and so, in other words, my granddad's dad was a white, you know, a white plantation owner.  Long story short, he felt, and he had several children of that union, even though that was not his wife--the--and he felt that he wanted to, to do something for, for those children--my granddad and his, his brothers and one sister.  And what he did was he gave each one of them a certain acreage of land, and that's how they acquired it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it was not--I mean, it's funny.  It, it has been in recent years, and when I say recent years, probably the last five, you know, five to six years, the descendants of those family have been trying to keep it a secret that, you know, my granddad was a child of their great-grandfather 'cause they're all still in that small town [Lakeland, Georgia].
Speaker 2: And these are the whites, the white family?
Speaker 1: The white, the white, the white family because I think somebody in that family passed, and thought that while my, my family would try to be beneficiaries in that estate, because they are children.  The will was written in a way that it goes to the descendant and the children, and so forth, and so on.  And, of course, my family falls under that realm.  But, you know, my family has taken the position that, you know, they were happy with the farm that we have.  And we understood, you know, what his wishes were.  And it, it really hadn't been a issue for us, but that's how we acquired the land.  You, you say that it's amazing that during the period that, you know, black people will have that kind of land.  It was because it was given to us from a white family.
Speaker 2: And your mother's maiden name again was--
Speaker 1: Jenkins, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Jenkins, okay.  So, your grandfather was a, was a Jenkins so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, my grandfather was a Jen-
Speaker 2: --his, his father was a Jenkins, so the white Jenkins is who father--
Speaker 1: Exactly--
Speaker 2: --the, the owner that ended up--
Speaker 1: --right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --putting the family with the land.
Story_ID: 290318
Speaker 1: Did she [Ponder's mother, Margie Jenkins Ponder] share any other stories with you about her growing-up days in the '40s [1940s] in--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, not really.  It's it--the stories that she shared were all surrounded by the fact that, you know, farming was their lives and that, you know, the way our farm was set up, we have a place now.  We, we have a house now that is the, is the newer house.  And then, you can look down the road, and see what we call the old house now.  And the old house is where she actually, you know, grew up with one of the first houses they had on that property [in Lakeland, Georgia].  And, you know, she would tell stories that, you know, their playground, you know--now we have, you know, swings and, you know, all kinds of, you know, all kinds of things.  It's an actual playground.  There, the playground would be like, you know, getting on top of the house, and jumping into a bale of hay, you know, off the house and, you know, and making their own fun.  And to her, you know, those times that she spent, 'cause she's real close in age to her other sisters, you know.  But then, she has a brother that now is about thirty something, so it was--I mean, it's a big distance between them.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, you know, she would talk about how they would make their own, you know, their own playground of fun.  And they could entertain themselves, whereas in her opinion now, you know--I mean it's got to be Six Flags or a [Walt] Disney World [Orlando, Florida], and that kind of thing--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, and how much she appreciated those times, and the fact that she and her sisters are still close.
Story_ID: 290319
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is his name and where was he born?
Speaker 2: My dad's name is Clifford Nellion Ponder and he was born--
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: C-L-I-F-F-O-R-D, N-E-L-L-I-O-N, P-O-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in Forsyth, Georgia.  And my dad's story is a lot different.  He is an only child.  We-doesn't know who his father is--was raised by his mom and her two sisters, so he was raised in, in a home with, you know, three women.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and Forsyth, Georgia is, you know, probably, you know, is part of middle Georgia as, as well.  All of them--my--his mom was educated, one of the first graduates from Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] at the time.  And so, you know, they were all about education, you know.  She was a school teacher and, you know, education, education.  And she thought that one of the biggest pieces of education, even back during that time, was travel.  And so, each summer, you know, she would put my dad on a train, and send him to some relative somewhere, whether it be in Pennsylvania, whether it be in Detroit [Michigan], whether it be wherever.  He always had to spend the summer travelling somewhere, so that he could be exposed to something other than, you know, other than middle Georgia.  And, you know, to this day, I can go places in, in, in Georgia, and meet people who now are like in their seventies or so, or sixties like, I don't know the ages, and remember what my grandmomma used to teach them.  And, you know, and they can, you know, my, you know, your grandmomma taught me, and so and so.  And your grandmomma, you know, this, that, and the other, and that was my heart.  I mean, when I was growing up--I mean she would just take me every place.  I mean, you know, wherever she'd go, she'd just take--it was Nita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder] and Stelle--that's what, her, her name was Stelle, Estelle [Ponder].  Nita and Stelle, Nita and Stelle.  Well, I went off to college, Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  And I was in the middle of pledging.  I was online for Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority], and I got a call that my grandmomma had passed away--ooff, devastated.
Speaker 1: It was traumatic, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, devastated, and so, I didn't go to the funeral.  I went to Forsyth, you know--go--they let, they finally let me off line.  You know, back then, that was something to get off line (laughter).  You know, you had to go through--hey, I think they even had to call national to give me, you know, 'cause my grandma died.  But I was going to the funeral.  I came to Forsyth to go to the funeral.  And, you know, I refused to ride in the black car with my, you know.  I said, I'll drive in my own car and trail, you know, trail in the procession, you know, to go to the, to the thing.  I saw the exit that took you back to Florida.  I don't know why I, why--instant--got to the exit.  And right when I was in line, exit off, and headed back, 'cause I couldn't take it.  The school--and they found me, probably like a day later at a rest stop 'cause, you know, they found out that I never made it back to school.  And then they couldn't find me, you know, here in Georgia, and all this kind of stuff.  And if, for some reason, my car just ended up at a rest stop, and I think I might have stayed in my car.  And I rest up for about a day and a half.  And if, some kind of way finally, my parents and them fount me at this--
Speaker 1: They did find--
Speaker 2: --at this rest stop.
Speaker 1: And about, this was what, in the '80s [1980s] or--
Speaker 2: This was in 19-, I'm pretty sure it was '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, 1981.  And so, you know, if you look at a low point in your life, you know, that, for me, was one of them.  And then, the second was the passing of my granddad [Teroma Jenkins].  You know, I had really close ties with my grandmamma on my dad's side.  And my granddaddy, you know, my granddaddy would indulge me with my turtle farm and, you know, how all my little different things--rock farm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And this is your mother's [Margie Jenkins Ponder] father?
Speaker 2: My mother's father, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 290320
Speaker 1: Does your dad [Clifford Ponder] share any stories about--that he has from when he was growing up?  Has he shared any with you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, most of, and most of my dad's stories are about, you know, his different travels, so to speak, you know, you know, going to Detroit, Michigan and, you know, the times that he's, you know, spent up there.  You know, and actually getting to see at that time--I think Detroit, I think it was Detroit, where he would just be fascinated by the car industry--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right, okay.
Speaker 2: --and like up there, you know, they made all these cars and this kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: General Motors [Corporation, Detroit, Michigan] is located, yes.
Speaker 2: You know, General Motors, and all that kind of stuff.  And I guess, like any other guy, you know, you just love cars, you know.  And, you know, he, he would talk about different places and did, you know, they had then.  He also, you know, shared a story about what I call my Aunt Geneva [Ponder (ph.)].  My Aunt Geneva is one of the other sisters that I told you that he was raised by my grandmom [Estelle Ponder]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and two sisters.  Well, Aunt Geneva had a house that was across the street from my grandmom's house that she only kept cakes in.  She was known as the cake lady.  I mean, I'm talking about, and I mean, and you can go, and I can even remember this.  You could go in my Aunt Geneva's house and on, you know, you had those kitchen tables, you know, those kitchen tables that you have.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, and it'd be full with all kinds of cakes up here, and the cakes here, and the cakes there.  I mean, the house was just full of cakes.  And people come by, "Okay, Betty, I got your cake back here, and you know.  The cake is over here."  And I mean if, you know, when I think of the economics of cakes now, I'm talking about--I mean, like, I know a lady named the cake lady now, that I pay thirty-five dollars for a caramel cake (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a cake (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know what I mean?  And, and I think now, that I think they would walk out of those cakes, you know.   I mean, five dollars or something--I mean, if that much.
Speaker 1: Oh, she actually sold the cakes?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's what she--I mean, that's what she did--
Speaker 1: She actually sold them, okay--
Speaker 2: --that's what she did for a living.
Speaker 1: --all right.
Speaker 2: It was as if, is that she baked cakes.  And everybody--I don't care what kind of occasion it was, and Forsyth, Georgia or middle Georgia, if you wanted a cake, you knew to go--I don't know what they called it, but I called her Aunt Geneva.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know to go to Aunt Geneva's house, and that's where the people, you know, if you sat down and you had a homemade cake, it wasn't made at home.  Everybody around here knew it came from Aunt Geneva.
Speaker 1: And what kind of cakes do you remember that she made?
Speaker 2: Oh, you--I mean, I mean she would make--all I can remember is the white frosting.  I can't remember the insides of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was coconut or--
Speaker 2: --yeah, they--oh, she would do coco- I mean, any kind of cake you could think of, she, she would do by herself.  I mean, she would sit there and just bake cakes.  And I mean, every kind of space you can find, a ledge, anything--cakes.
Speaker 1: Was it--do you remember she did a jelly cake 'cause that's an old cake from the past that you don't see now?
Speaker 2: Oh, girl, I hadn't heard of a jelly cake.
Speaker 1: She didn't knew the jelly cake?
Speaker 2: What's in it?  I-- we, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, 'cause, you know, by the--when she, during that time, I was really little.
Speaker 1: Right, that's true, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm talking about?  I mean, I was real little only, so only thing I'm seeing is--
Speaker 1: We're talking early '60s [1960s] now, okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  The only thing I can see is just a room full of cakes, you know.  Why would a lady have all those cakes?
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, and I used to think Aunt Geneva was getting kind of strange with all these cakes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With these cakes (laughter)?
Speaker 2: But people, you know, but looking back on it, I can, you know, I can appreciate it.
Story_ID: 290321
Speaker 1: You know, when I think of a sight, then I think of that whole time period.  The two things that I really, really think about, or three things is A: the cakes--a lady [Ponder's paternal great aunt, Geneva Ponder (ph.)] with a house with nothing but cakes, I mean, very little furniture, the cakes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause she really stayed with my grandmom [Estelle Ponder] across the street [in Forsyth, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Exactly--
Speaker 1: The three sisters stayed together.
Speaker 2: --the three sisters, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Lightning bugs, you know, you could sit on my grandmom's porch.  And the darkness, when it turned dark, all you could see was all these lightning bugs.  I could not wait for it to get dark to catch the lightning bugs.
Speaker 2: Okay, because there were no street lights.
Speaker 1: They didn't--wasn't street lights, you know what I mean?
Speaker 2: No street lights, okay, uh-hm.
Speaker 1: And then so, but so lightning bugs were your light.  And so, I mean, okay, can it get dark?  Can you, can you get this jar to catch--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, to catch the, the lightning bugs?  And then, thirdly, the Interstate 75 was off, you know.  It was kinda off to the distance to the right and so, you could go through, you could sneak through this path from my grandmom's house, and be to some, some semblance of civilization.  It's like a hotel and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, that was forbidden territory, you know, to go, go to this, to this area.  Now, I can remember, just always since it's forbidden, trying to sneak over through, you know, that path to, to get over to that part of town.  Ironically, 75 became our enemy, so to speak.  The seventy--Interstate 75, that we know now, through eminent domain, they ended up taking that house.  You know, they ended up expanding 75, you know, the very road that I used to be trying to get to see all the cars and stuff go by.  You know, later on, and I, I never forget this.  I was in law school [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas], you know, they were thinking, you know, is it something you can do, you know?  You're in law school, you know, back, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, you want--
Speaker 1: --the black people think, you know, you're the lawyer, can't you do something, can't you stop them (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know what I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  And this is what the neighborhood was asking you to do, right?
Speaker 1: You know, the neighborhood, my family, and everything.  And I'm like, you know, eminent domain, you can't fight.  I mean, it, it's going to be hard to fight that.  And--
Speaker 2: And that's what is before the courts now.
Speaker 1: --is, that's exactly what.  Isn't, isn't it amazing how it, it evolves and that, and that kind of thing?  But as a result of eminent domain, the--it--the expanded 75 Interstate South that we see now are interstate going--well, north and south--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --is, you know, part of that house that I have those fond memories when that entire property was taken--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in order to expand it.
Story_ID: 290322
Speaker 1: You shared some of your grandparents' history.  Now, your mother's mother [Rosa Jenkins], you said, lives with her now?
Speaker 2: Right, she does.
Speaker 1: She, she lives with her.  Now, approximately, how old is she?
Speaker 2: She is eighty-six--
Speaker 1: Eighty--
Speaker 2: --and I don't know how we came up with age, but, you know, that's the number.
Speaker 1: That's, she's, that's the number that she, she has--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and she, so she was born what, like 1918, 1920s?
Speaker 2: I'm not good with figures but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was born before 1920.
Speaker 2: Right, we, we know that, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: We, we know that she was born before 1920.  Now, your--her husband [Teroma Jenkins] is not alive, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: He, he passed?
Speaker 2: He passed away in--she stayed on the farm and worked the farm up until about three years ago, you know oversaw.  I mean, now, in this day and time, with farms, you know, a lot of the properties leased to, you know, different farmers like, we--I think we, back then, you know, we, we did our own farming with tobacco farmers and so forth, and so on.  Now, if you're a peanut farmer and you need land, we lease it to you, you know, for the peanut season.  And then, if you're a corn farmer, we lease it to you for the corn.  So we, we're more in property management now, more than actually doing the farming with the exception of watermelons.  But anyway, she managed that up until about three years ago, and then she started getting Alzheimer's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and it got to the point that, you know, instead of my mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder] driving to south Georgia all the time to check on her, and all that kind of thing, we thought it was best to move her, you know.  As it got progressively worse, we moved her to, you know, moved her to, to Fort Valley [Georgia].  And the, and the interesting thing is, is that she remembers, she can clearly remember what, what happened years ago, you know, as though, like my granddad is still alive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, long-term memory, right.
Speaker 2: Long-term memory, it's just a recent thing, you know, the recent stuff--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that, you know, she can forget any minute.  And so, so, with me being the grandchild who didn't have a choice, but to go to Lakeland [Georgia] every summer, worked tobacco farms, when my sisters [Keisha Ponder-Green and Celeste Ponder] got out of it.  They didn't have to do that, you know.  And, you know, and I--if you hear resentment, there is some (laughter), but I had to go and work that farm every summer.  My, my mom and daddy [Clifford Ponder] "Builds character," you know, you learn, you know, da da da, and all that kind of stuff, and, and so, I spent a lot of time there,  and so, I was in that period that, that back-then period that she can remember me,  and she knows who I am, and she knows, but, but then, my, my two sisters, because they are in, in a different fragment of her life, then, you know, sometimes she can be Margie's children, which is, you know, mom sometimes, she might be--are they my children, you know, you know, so she, she not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --always sure who they are.  But she can clearly remember, you know, that, that, that period, but then in terms of anything recent--
Speaker 1: Recent, she doesn't--
Speaker 2: --she, she doesn't.  And I--one of my things that I remember about my grandmomma did--made me think twice for some time about chicken is that, "What do you want to eat there, baby?"  And I said, "Hey, let's do some fried chicken."  She'd go out and get that chicken and do like this (hand gesture) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wring its neck (laughter)?
Speaker 2: --and they'll bring in and cook it.  And I'm like, okay, I don't think I'm (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) See that--I remember those days and you know, I wouldn't eat a chicken if I saw them kill them.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's--
Speaker 1: But did she, do you remember what it was like to see her kill it and then--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, it, it--
Speaker 1: --pick the feathers off of it?  Did you see that part?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could see all that part and I know--
Speaker 1: You remember?
Speaker 2: --I, I remember it clearly.  And I know that, as a result of it, chances are if I saw her kill the chicken, I'd--for some reason then, I think I'd just eat this and this.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, it does something to you.  I mean, you know, and it was like just, it, it was a common thing, "Okay, baby, we'll have chicken (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, because a lot of people don't know that, you know--before, people just didn't buy them out of the grocery stores.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: They, and they, everybody was so--every home was like self-sustaining--
Speaker 2: They absolutely--
Speaker 1: --and that's the way the farm was.
Speaker 2: That's the way the farm was.  And, and, and it's funny you say that.  And I'm talking about in every way--I'm talking about over here, you had a field of cows.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they weren't pets (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying?  I mean, and then over down where, we said the old house is, you had a fence with a fence of hogs.  I mean, they just piled on top of each other, piled on top.  It was a while before I knew that those hogs were the bacon that I was eating.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, and you know what I mean?  You know, you spend all that time, you go feed these animals, and you take care of them, and all that kind of stuff, and then turn around--so I can understand the whole thing about being a vegetarian.
Speaker 1: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not one, but I understand it, you know, (laughter).
Story_ID: 290323
Speaker 1: Did she [Ponder's maternal grandmother, Rosa Jenkins] share any stories with you while you were staying down there with her about family members, or when she was growing up--your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--my relationship with my grandmom and my granddad [Teroma Jenkins] was one where we just lived it.  I mean, we didn't--I didn't actually hear a, a bunch of stories other than the one about my granddad and how we acquired (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No problem.
Speaker 2: --acquired the land.  But a thing that is interesting is that my, my grandmom and her sisters married my granddad and his brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Explain that one for us.
Speaker 2: I'll explain that, okay.  So, in this house, you have my grandmother and my granddaddy--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --okay.  Down the street in the next house--remember, I told you the land was divided--
Speaker 1: There was, um-hm--
Speaker 2: --amongst the brothers, is my grandmomma's sister married to my granddaddy's brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying?  I mean, and so, you know, you had sisters who were married to brothers--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which is, I mean, and so like, when I say all of the family was on that farm--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they literally--
Speaker 1: This is when communities were family communities--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was something.
Speaker 1: --and everybody knew each other, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Ev-, ev-, everybody knew each other.  And then, I'm talking about, you can go miles either way.  And it was either, you know, one of the brothers and their family; one of the brothers, their family; one of the brothers, their family.  And, you know, like even now, when you go there, everything is named Jenkins, you know, Jenkins Road, Jenkins Lane, Jenkins this, you know, it, but and it's always--
Speaker 1: It was the Jenkins community.
Speaker 2: --community.  And they called it the settlement, they called it the Jenkins Settlement.  I think, even in the, on the land documents down in there, it's called the Jenkins Settlement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And which is, you know, which is interesting.  And, and the thing that I can remember is that, and this is not real significant, my Uncle Bull who--
Speaker 1: One of your mother's [Margie Jenkins Ponder] or one of your father's [Clifford Ponder]--
Speaker 2: Well, no--
Speaker 1: --grandfather, one of your grandfathers?
Speaker 2: --well, my, my great-granddaddy is actually my great-granddaddy who was my, my grandmomma's dad.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My grandmomma's dad and my grandmomma's mom, Jul-, Grandmomma Julia [ph.]--they lived on the property, too.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know, so they had their own house on, on the way down further.  And where my Uncle Bull--and I call my uncle, but he's my great-granddaddy.  My grand-, when he start going blind, we could legally--and I thought this was something, coming from that (unclear), we could legally take him to a place, and actually get marijuana for his blindness.  And marijuana would just sit up on the thing and it was legal.
Speaker 1: Now, where would you take him to get the marijuana in Lakeland [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It, uh, no, we--all the doctors at this time were in Jacksonville.  Jacksonville, Florida is not that far from Lakeland, you know, like Lakeland is right on the line of Florida, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, and so, like if you had any kind of real illness, even today, you know, if you have any kind of real illness, if it's something minor, you go to Valdosta--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which is about nine miles out, Valdosta, Georgia.  But if it was something that required any kind of real expertise, you go to Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I was a kid, so I can't remember exactly we'd go, but I would know that, you know, all of the kids would think--guess what that is up there--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Now, were you getting this from people, who were growing it, or were they getting it from a medical establishment, or were they--
Speaker 2: No, it, it, it was something, it was an establishment, you know.
Speaker 1: --it was--
Speaker 2: All I know, it, it was, it--I'm told that it was legal (laughter), you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which I just thought, it was interesting.  And it was just, you know, how you just have tobacco in a thing?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Just sit right up on the--and everybody knew that that was Granddaddy Bull's medicine.  And I don't even know what his real name--Bull is the only name I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he would use it for his--
Speaker 2: For his--
Speaker 1: --menic-, medicinal purposes whereas--
Speaker 2: --medicinal purpose.   And he's really old by this time.  I mean, when I say, I mean, he had to have been like--by the time it got to, to that point, probably in his eighties--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And, no, and I can't even remember what eye--whether it was, you know, blindness or glaucoma, or something, but it was something, you know, dealing, dealing with his eyesight.  And it's funny that, to this day, I can't, I can't say I know his--Bull is all I know.
Speaker 1: And that was your great (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: --grandfather on your mother's--
Speaker 2: Dad--my mother's side.
Speaker 1: --on the mother's side and your grandmother's.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That's my grandmomma's dad.  And then my grandmomma's mom was named Julia.  And the, the house that they had, it was in--I had gotten older by the time they got an inside bathroom.  They would never change and put the inside bathroom.  They still--all, all of us had built houses that had inside bathrooms, and then they kept theirs.  They wanted to keep distance, so they would rather walk out to that place in the back and use the bath--
Speaker 1: The outhouse?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, the outhouse and so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, or the toilet--that was another name for it.
Speaker 2: Right.  So, so we knew that when we went down to Granddaddy Bull's house, if we had to go to the bathroom, we were going to wait till we go to Uncle Rooster's house 'cause he finally got one inside (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because we, you know, we ain't gonna go down there--
Story_ID: 290324
Speaker 1: Okay, you said on the farm that they had tobacco?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they did market the tobacco.  They did sell it--the person who's harvested it, and they, they sold it.  First, did they have help, or did all family members actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, it, it was a big operation.  No, like we would, every morning, like when I said that we would go during the--like I had to go during the summer.
Speaker 1: You went during the summers, right.
Speaker 2: Part of that was getting in the truck with my granddad [Ponder's maternal grandfather, Teroma Jenkins].  And it would be about three trucks following each other, like pickup trucks.  And we would go pick up the hands that would actually--and that's what they called them--hands--to actually work the, you know, work the, the farm.  And so, I'm just there for fun.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I'm just there for the character building.  Now, there were actually a whole bunch of folk who actually worked the, you know, worked, worked tobacco that we hired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, you know, and, you know, we would work it, too, but it was too big of an operation just for family members.  I mean, it was huge.  And then, and I remember we would have these machines that go down the aisle, and then people sit on each one--
Speaker 1: On each--
Speaker 2: --and you pull the leaves--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and while they pulling the leaves, I'm constantly getting these tobacco worms.  They got these tobacco worms, and I would make these string necklaces where the worms just (laughter)--just when I was trying to find my momma [Margie Jenkins Ponder].  I don't care--it would drive my momma crazy if my momma was down there.  That was when I really put the necklace together, the moving necklace, and I'd run after my momma, "Give me a hug," (laughter).  I ain't pick no tobacco--I was just out there aggravating everybody (laughter).  And that's the, that's the character they were building.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wouldn't been like your mother--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --no hugs today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no hugs.
Speaker 1: And (laughter), so, what--the market that they sent, that took the tobacco to--do you know where?  Was that in the City of Lakeland [Georgia], or was it in another surrounding town, if you remember?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I don't know the details of that because I was, I was so young, but I do know that it eventually made it to the cigarette companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so it was not like selling tobacco.  We sold watermelons and corn like, at the market, so to speak, but it was a corporate relationship with a cigarette company.  And I can't remember, I don't know--can't remember if it was Philips or one of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --that we actually sold the tobacco to.
Story_ID: 290325
Speaker 1: Okay, now we were talking about the tobacco farm in Lakeland, Georgia, and your great-grandparents, your [maternal] grandparents [Rosa Jenkins and Teroma Jenkins], and your great-grandparents on your grandmother's side.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Those will be the, the great-grandparents.  And you said they lived down the, down the way, but still on the same family land--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --because it was in the [Jenkins] Settlement [Lakeland, Georgia], right?  That's--
Speaker 2: And that, that, and that's what they called the whole, the, the entire area.  They called it the settlement, and so everybody lived in, you know, on that same body of land.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now, I'm beginning to see more how so many businesses could be in a family in, you know, in, in a particular plot of land.  So, how many businesses would you say that your grandparents and great-grandparents had on that 600 plus the 500 plus the 500 acres?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in terms of businesses that the center core was all the same, and that was farming.  It's just that everybody had a different niche as to, you know, what it is that they, they farmed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 2: You know, where I know on my Granddad's part of the Settlement, as I told you, it was tobacco.  Uncle, Uncle Rooster, it, Uncle Rooster and Aunt Gulf, that's the, you know (laughter), those--
Speaker 1: Those were the grandfather--I mean, those are your grandfather's brothers.
Speaker 2: My--well, Uncle Rooster was the granddaddy, my grandfather's brother.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather's--
Speaker 2: Gulf was my grandmomma's sister.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Husband and wife, they focused on cotton, you know.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They decided, and, and for whatever reason, and I, I don't know why, for whatever reason, everybody had their own niche, but the core of it was still, you know, still farming.  And then also, on these properties, we had three lakes, you know, and, and so, and, and we did things, you know.  We could also fish our own fish, and all that kind of thing.  And I mean, and the lake is big enough that you actually had little boats that we would go out there, and actually, you know, you know, do fish and fishing as well.  And so--
Speaker 1: Did they sell the fish, too, or was that just for the family?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  For me, I just like to fish, and so, the only part I can remember is just me fishing.  I, I can't remember them doing anything economically with the fish, but I don't, you know, I don't know.  But I know that I have just these memories of going on.  One of, one of my uncles is Uncle Cat, that's another brother.  And, and you could walk on his land--all you could see were watermelons.  I'm talking about watermelons as, as far as you could possibly see.  And I'm talking about--when I look at watermelons now, I can think back and say, there's nothing like my Uncle Cat's were because they were huge.  I mean, and he did really good with watermelons, you know.  I mean, and, and I say they did really good.  I really don't know what the numbers are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He sold them.
Speaker 2: --but they sold, and then, you know, every, you know--
Story_ID: 290326
Speaker 1: And what was always amazing to me is that white people in that community really--if you were a Jenkins and, you know, for me, I was-Teroma's [Jenkins] or Peter's grandchild.  That automatically kind of just made everything credible.  I mean, you could--they--I mean, it was like, you know, that's a black family we okay with, you know.  That's a black family -- this, whatever, and so, you could go into that little town to the Suwanee Swifty, you know, that was one of the big stores there.
Speaker 2: And was that a grocery store or was that a--
Speaker 1: No, it's really, it's like a little convenience store.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But everybody wanted to go, you know, to the Suwannee Swifty, and Bates [ph.], Bates little store that was up on the corner, you know, to get your gas, and get your whatever.  As, as Peter's grandchild, I could just go in there, get whatever I want, and they knew my granddaddy would come pay for it later.  And that was unheard of in a white store.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that was your grandfather's name, Peter Jenkins?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, his, yeah, his, his real name is Teroma, you know, but--
Speaker 2: Would you spell Teroma?
Speaker 1: T-E-R-O-M-A, Teroma Jenkins, but they call him Peter, and I don't know Peter's middle name or whatever but--
Speaker 2: That's--Teroma is a very unusual name.  Did you ever find out he got that name?
Speaker 1: I, you know, I hadn't, I hadn't a very good job of asking all the right questions.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, you know, to me, Teroma and Peter was okay.  What I was always--interesting, why you call him Rooster and Gulf, and him Cat, you know what I mean?  And then, and then my other uncle was Time, you know, T-I-M-E, you know.  So, you know, those names are more fascinating.  Peter was normal to me.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, but the thing for that little town, and I'm talking about you're in south Georgia, where you're in, you're in south Georgia.  And even I, being little, would know, okay, I'm in south Georgia, and you be real weary of, you know, what, what white people may think of you, and all that kind of stuff.  But just be able to just go in the store, and just get anything you want, and they say, and, you know, "That's Nita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder], that's Peter's grand-, you know, granddaughter."  It--they were very, very well-respected.
Speaker 2: So, when you roamed the neighborhoods as a Peter, as Peter's granddaughter--
Speaker 1: Granddaughter, you know--
Speaker 2: --and then you had clout.
Speaker 1: --you watched out for.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You got, yeah, you know, you, you--
Speaker 2: And you didn't have to pay when you got things off the shelf?
Speaker 1: No, because my Granddaddy, when he would go get his little bill for the month, it would be on there.
Speaker 2: Oh, they would put it on his--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they'd put it on his thing, and he would just, you know, pay, pay the whole thing.
Speaker 2: But like most communities, most black communities then in the early '60s [1960s], and your family had been there for at least how many--over fifty-plus years, even in, in the '60s [1960s].  So, it was looking at, like early 1900s.  Then, at that particular time, they didn't have to buy a lot from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --the stores because everything was self-sustained in the--
Speaker 1: Self-sustained, that's true.
Speaker 2: --on that property that they had--a farm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Did they have any gardens where they grew the plants that they ate 'cause I know you said your grandmother killed the chickens?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, you had the meat from the hogs and the chickens and the cows?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you're talking about, you're talking about, like collard greens, and all that?  Oh, yeah, you had all that.  You had, you had, you had collard greens, you had cabbages, you had the most awesome pear trees, you know, I'm just thinking about fruit, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.  The fruit trees were on there, too?
Speaker 1: --for every, you know, everything you can think of--pear trees, plum trees, you know.  And what was funny is you didn't have many peach trees.  And, and what I was used to, since I grew up in Fort Valley [Georgia], you know, and I'm just here for the summer--Fort Valley was nothing, but peach trees, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause it's Peach County [Georgia].  You know, and that's the Peach Capital of the World, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, you know, I come from one place where peaches, peaches, peaches--come to another place, you really very seldom see a peach.  You'll see pomegranates and, you know, that kind of thing, but, you know, not peaches.  But yeah, we had, you know, we had, we had all that stuff, you know, and--
Speaker 2: And everything imaginable.
Speaker 1: Everything.
Speaker 2: Do you know if you all had a smokehouse for actually processing--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --either the pork or the beef after it was actually killed?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  We had, we had a smokehouse for, for the meats.  And we also had--and I don't know how much you know about tobacco--but in order to process tobacco, tobacco requires a house like this.  It's, it's literally a huge house that's really an oven.  And so, all you have in the house are these rolls that you can hang the tobacco on these wood sticks.  And then, I mean, and so, just imagine--I mean a huge house, nothing but tobacco hanging in it.  You close the door on the outside of the knobs, and you cook it, you know, because you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, this was to dry the tobacco leaves?  Okay.
Speaker 1: --to dry the tobacco.  And so, you can dry, and so we had several of those on the property, too.
Speaker 2: Are they still there now or do they--
Speaker 1: One, the, the shell of one of them--
Speaker 2: Is still there?
Speaker 1: --is there.  The old house, the shell of it is there.  The shell of another one, you know, but they're, you know, in just fallen-down condition.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're not like in, in restored, you know, restored condition.
Story_ID: 290327
Speaker 1: You know and you asked me about stories that I could remember, and you think about, you know, race, and the racial divide and our history, and that kind of thing.  You know, one of my--when I went down to the farm, everybody was older except for me, two of my cousins that lived there.  And one of my cousins was named Billy Joe [ph.], and Billy Joe was the son of Rooster, and that crew down there, and, and that's who I would hang out with (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you all were the only two young ones.  Everybody else was old?
Speaker 1: Yeah, most of them, every-, everybody else was old--
Speaker 2: Older.
Speaker 1: And so, me and Billy Joe, and then, sometime my mom's [Margie Jenkins Ponder] sisters, would make her children come down there on some summers, too, and, you know, so forth and so on.  But Billy Joe, real, real good-looking guy, was dating this white girl down the street.  And I'll never forget this, and the whole town was in an uproar, you know, because of that interracial--
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?  This was in--
Speaker 1: Oh, I mean, I was little, I mean, I was a--
Speaker 2: This was in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: I was born in '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I'm going to make this, I'm going to make this, probably late '60s [1960s] or 1970--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --you know, something in that era.  But, you know, the, you know, people didn't like it because whoever this girl was, was somebody's daughter, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, somebody, you know, somebody's daughter, and she was crazy about Billy Joe.  Well, they saw each other for, you know, quite some time.  And, you know, and people in protest, blah, blah, blah.  We like them, but, you know, don't need to be with this girl.  One night, we couldn't find Billy Joe, you know.  And, and everybody, "What's up with Billy Joe, Billy Joe?" Well, only to find out that he had run off of a bridge into a river.  And to this day, if you let my grandma [Rosa Jenkins]--and, of course, died--and they ruled it a, like drunk driving and suicide kind of thing.  To this day, you cannot convince my family, you know, like my grandmomma, and all those kind of folk that it was not the result of somebody doing something to him because he was dating that, dating that girl.  And you talking about another low point in my life--that was something I could not understand.  I mean I--
Speaker 2: So, he had to have been a teenager around that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah, he had to be.  And when I say teenager, he might have been--I don't know why I want make him in whatever age it is where you can just start driving, like--
Speaker 2: Like fifteen or sixteen or seventeen?
Speaker 1: Well, see, but back then, I even drove when I was down in Lakeland [Georgia].  I mean, you know, I mean license, and all that kind of stuff.  It would--me, you, you--
Speaker 2: It was different then because--
Speaker 1: --you had, you had to drive to work.  I mean, you know what I'm talking about?  And so, he had to work on the farm, and it was nothing to be, you know, driving, you know, driving, you know, the trucks and stuff around.  So, I, I would, I would put him at like, maybe fifteen or sixteen years old.  I don't--I mean, I don't know.  And he was, he was probably three or maybe four years older than me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was older than I was.  And, and so, you know, I would put around that, but understanding that, and just, you know, the devastation of my family, and the accusations and, you know, all this.  And, you know, the white people did this to him and, you know, there's no way he would have done, you know, run himself off a bridge, and all that kind of stuff.  To, to this day, they believe one thing.  And, to this day, it's still ruled, and it couldn't--wasn't drunk driving 'cause he didn't have alcohol on him.  I mean, it wasn't, it didn't, it couldn't have been--
Speaker 2: It couldn't have been that.
Speaker 1: --it couldn't have been that.  So, it, but whatever it was, it went down in the books as like an accident or something, as opposed to--
Speaker 2: Right.  And this was during the time when racial tensions were pretty high.
Speaker 1: They were real, they were, they were--
Speaker 2: Right.  This was after King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --assassinated.  And a lot of schools, universities--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and were all in racial riots.
Speaker 1: Racial--
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 2: --and the like.  I make--you might have heard the song, 'Ode to Billie Joe' song about Billie Joe McAllister who jumped off the Tallahatchie Bridge in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, but that, that brings back--
Speaker 1: It does, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that to memory, but instead of being driven--well, driving off a bridge, he jumped off a bridge with that Billie Joe McAllister
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But your cousin's name was Billy Joe--
Speaker 1: Billy Joe, all I know is his Rooster, Rooster Agust--
Speaker 2: Rooster Agust--
Speaker 1: --and it's Augustus' son.
Speaker 2: --(unclear), it was Jenkins then, you know, Billie Joe, Jr.
Speaker 1: Well, he would, he would have been a Jenkins.  That's right, 'cause everybody's a Jenkins, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's, that's interesting, even though they weren't--the, the two stories are totally different.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they--
Speaker 2: You know, the circumstances, but still, it's like--
Speaker 1: The circumstances are the same.  And it's just--
Speaker 2: You had an 'Ode to Billie Joe' 'cause that was--
Speaker 1: Billie Joe, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that really affected you.
Speaker 1: And, and what's amazing is, and we, we talked about, you know, history and that kind of thing.  I could remember a point in time that stayed on my mind for a long period of time.  And it wasn't until we just started having this conversation that, that came back to me.  You know, I mean, and it was just, I mean, and I can remember just the impact--not just on my momma and my grandmomma, and all that, but my not being able to under-, you know, understand, however it happened--how could this be?  You know, and then, here it is in, in 2006, you know, as it kinda gotten back, you know, back to my memory bank 'cause it was, in my opinion, a testimony that in my lifetime of how things worked.
Speaker 2: Right and--
Speaker 1: You know, because that part, I do remember.  I can clearly remember those people, you know, as much as they let me come in the store, and I guess 'cause I was in my place.  I was okay, you know, that was permitted, and all that kind of stuff.  But the minute, he started going with that girl, I mean, it was a whole--that was a big no, no.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was so many years after Emmett Till also (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And maybe they were close to the same age--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --when he actually caught, when his accident occurred--
Speaker 1: Occurred--
Speaker 2: --or whatever happened to him.
Speaker 1: --whatever, whatever happened, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, that was a low period.  Did you have to go to his funeral or--
Speaker 1: He--
Speaker 2: --or you don't--
Speaker 1: --I don't remember it. --there.
Speaker 2: I mean, because I was--I mean, I don't remember that part of it.
Story_ID: 290328
Speaker 1: How did this sit with you?  How did you--did this form any kind of memories that would either motivate you or inspire you to do something different as it related to race and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--
Speaker 1: --ethnicity, or how did it affect you in what way?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean what it did for me and is--it was in my face--well, not reminder--wake-up call--that just because I'm down here, and playing baseball in Fort Valley [Georgia] on an all-, you know, white team.  And they let me do, you know, they allowed me to do that.  And some of the things that you just think things are just totally okay.  It was an in-my-face reminder that, you know, we still have some issues.  I mean, you know, as you know, in terms of race and race relations.  And, you, you never know what correlation and connection that, you know, things that happen in your life, in terms of what you're doing today.  But I do know that, you know, today, one of the biggest parts of my life is, is the museum, the Tubman Museum [Tubman African American Museum, Macon, Georgia].  And, and by profession, I'm an attorney.  I know, in my heart and, and anybody asks me, you know, how did you end up at a museum?  And I know, my answer always has been, never waiver it because in my heart, I feel it, is that I saw that museum as an opportunity for us, as African Americans, to tell our story of achievement, you know, just all the things we've done, in spite of, and that by telling that story, and sharing that story with others, that, in of itself, brings a certain degree of understanding that bridges that racial divide.  You know, a lot of times, the things that we're scared of are the things we don't know, or the things that we're not familiar with, or the things we think is one way, but it's really another 'cause we hadn't taken the time, you know, to open ourselves up to, to actually, to learn and, and that kind of thing.  And so, you know, while my other colleagues at the museum are there because of, you know, they didn't have this great love for art history, and they have this great love for, you know, the, the pieces that are on the wall, I will--we've designed our museum in a way where our mission is broad enough that it, it encompasses, you know, the race, race relations piece, and the understanding, and the bridge-building and, and that kind of thing.  And it is totally the reason that I'm there.  And you never know whether, you know, the relationship that Billy Joe [Jenkins] had, or that, that piece, or any, any of those kinds of things that happened in your life, is the reason you feel that way, you just know that this is who you are, and this, this is where you are.  And this is something that you think is important.
Story_ID: 290329
Speaker 1: We talked about your grandfather [Teroma Jenkins] on your mother's [Margie Jenkins Ponder] side, and your great-grandfather and grandmother on both of the--your grandparents' sides.  On your [maternal] grandmother's [Rosa Jenkins] side, were there a--was there a racial mix, or was she--both parents, African American, or, you know, of African origin?
Speaker 2: One, one was African American.  Well, I don't know what the percentage is, but, you know, her heritage is Indian [Native American] and black.  And now that she's gotten older, you see the Indian almost more than you see the black, you know what I mean?  And so, I, but I don't know very much about, you know, other, other than the, the combination.  And you can look at--you see the real distinct, distinct, distinct Indian in my great-grandmother, who was my grandmother's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Momma.
Speaker 2: --my grandmother's mom, and then, of course, you know, my Grand-, Bull--
Speaker 1: Great-grandma.
Speaker 2: --was definitely African American (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You can see that, but, and so, on that side, you had, you know, a clear Indian heritage.
Speaker 1: All right.  But on your--let's talk about your father [Clifford Ponder] and his side.  Now, you knew your grandmother [Estelle Ponder] on your father's  side and you were very close to her.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you said that your father didn't know who his father was?
Speaker 2: He didn't, didn't know who his father was.  And if it, you know, if he does, to this day, we still don't, you know, we don't know.  We will probably leave this, this earth--him being raised by his grand-, his, his mom and, and the two sisters.  And as far as his side of the family is concerned, you know, that, that's all I know.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that's all anybody knows.  And, and that family is very big, but they're all on my grandmother's side.  I mean, all those different relatives he would go travel to see--I mean, those were all relatives of my, of, of my grandmom's, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandmama's brother, grandmama's this, and that kind of thing.  But in terms of another half of the family, another side of the story, so to speak, it's--
Speaker 1: It's all--
Speaker 2: --it's, it's un-, it's unknown.
Story_ID: 290330
Speaker 1: But you know what?  I, I think that whole--and this is just me.  Well, I, I--it's me and my mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder], too.  I think it has made him the great daddy [Clifford Ponder] that he is now.  I think that he--you--I mean, you hear a lot of stuff about, you know, mothers and fathers, and broken homes, and all that.  My parents have been married, you know, forty-six, forty-seven years.  And my Dad just naturally is, you know, just goes over and beyond-and it's not 'cause he's trying to overdo it.  I think that having being raised by those three women and, and then having three daughters (laughter), and a wife (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He's just surrounded by women.
Speaker 1: I mean, he I mean, you know, to--I mean, I'm, I'm forty-four years old.  And my Dad--when my birthday rolls around, my Dad will still come, and make sure I put that little sticker, that, that tag on my car, you know, the little thing, 'cause he knows how I'm just running all the time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He will check and make sure.  He also makes sure that our insurances on our cars, even though we're paying our own insurance.  I mean, all the things that he's always done--
Speaker 2: Now, he's--
Speaker 1: --he's always, and he's always instilled in us that, you know, how to be self-sufficient, and how to take--because he knows women.  My [paternal] grandmom [Estelle Ponder] wasn't married.  Those--neither one, neither one of the sisters were married.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and so, what he knows is strong, black women who have, you know, raised him, you know, who were educators, you know, who were very successful during their time, you know--would that in terms of what they did.
Speaker 2: Now, all three of the sisters were school teachers?
Speaker 1: One was a school teacher, one was like a nurses' assistant--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and one was the cake lady [Geneva Ponder (ph.)].
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, we got the cake lady.
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying, one--
Speaker 2: So, that was her occupation?
Speaker 1: That was her occupa-, that, that was--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  It wasn't a side profession, a side job.  It was her main job.
Speaker 1: And if she had another one, I, you know, if she had another one, I don't know.  The only thing I know is the cakes.  And she did really, really well with the cakes.  But I say all that to say is that experience, you can tell, has poured over into his life and his family life.  And that, from day one, he's instilled in us that, you know, education, you have to--I mean, there's no question.  You got, you know, you have to continue your education.  And, you know, we didn't have a choice in that, and that you do that because you can take care of yourself.  You know, even though he still checks tags and insurance, and all that kind of stuff, where he, he trying to take care of us, you know.  But I think that has a lot to do with how, how he was raised.  And so, while some, you know, some stories stray away when you talk about not having a dad, his turned out to be positive, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is, what was his profession?
Speaker 1: He was the comptroller of, of Fort Valley State University [Fort Valley, Georgia] for thirty-eight years.
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight years.
Speaker 1: So, he retired as the comptroller, and my mom retired as an administrator.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, your, your father did go to school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Where did he go?
Speaker 1: My dad went to Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for undergrad.  And then, at that time, it was Atlanta University, afterwards.  And then my Mom, of course, is a graduate of Fort Valley State [College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And my mom was a student at Fort Valley State when she met my dad.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, they married out of college?
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she was in college, and she was in her senior year of college.  He was in his first year of work--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at Fort Valley State as an accountant.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and that's how they met.
Story_ID: 290331
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about his [Ponder's father, Clifford Ponder] grandmother, his mother's mother, 'cause you said that they lived in the house that the grandmother--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I know you--
Speaker 1: That's, that's Stella, right, that's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's Estelle [Ponder]--
Speaker 1: Estelle--
Speaker 2: --Um-hm, Estelle is, is, is her real name--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --is, is my grandmom.  Her mom was named Lillian, and I guess Lillian Ponder.  I don't know, you know, 'cause, and while I know, we called her grandmamma in the bed.  And we called her grandmamma in the bed because from the time I've known--all the memories I have of her, she had diabetes.  And one of her legs had been amputated and so, she spent a lot of time in the bed.  And so, we called her grandmother, grandmother in the bed.  But in terms of who she was married to, and her history and all that kind of stuff, I can't say that I know.  But she, she stayed in that same house for probably twenty years of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: You know, and so--
Speaker 1: --up until she passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, up until she passed, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you didn't hear any stores of her mother?
Speaker 2: Of--
Speaker 1: The--Estelle's mother, Estelle.
Speaker 2: Estelle, yeah, Estelle's mother is Lillian, which is, which is my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but in terms of who Lillian was married to--my great-grandfather, I don't know, I don't--
Speaker 1: That's what you didn't, okay.
Speaker 2: --I don't.  Obviously--
Speaker 1: So, Lillian is the one that was always in the bed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's still grandmomma.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And it was because she was an amputee.
Speaker 1: She was an amputee and she had diabetes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 290332
Speaker 1: Did your [paternal] grandmother, Estella [sic. Estelle Ponder], the one that you were close to, did she share any stories with you that you can remember because you all were very close?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, and I hate to say, this is bad.  But I, I can't remem-, all I can remember is, you know, hanging out with my grandmomma, you know, going to--there's a place downtown called--was it W.S. Banks [ph.], you know, like being--going to the different stores with her, and sitting at the counter.  They had one of those, like I used to see these on TV and the history, like those Woolworth counters?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, and going with, you know, going with her, sitting there having one of those, like float, you know, float drinks and, you know, that, you know, that kind of thing.  But in terms of like, stories, so to speak, I, you know, I don't, I don't remember any of them.  My, my relationship, like I said, with my grandparents, is, was, you know, that immediate time living it, and not really a whole bunch of reflection.
Speaker 1: Now, where was this store located again?
Speaker 2: In Forsyth.
Speaker 1: In Forsyth, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Forsyth, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that town pretty much looks the same.
Speaker 1: It hasn't changed that much?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  They still have--I mean, you know, the bank store is not there, and there's some other store.  But in terms of visually, you know, and it's one of those towns that has the courthouse in the center--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --and everything is a square.
Speaker 1: --and then everything, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, of course, the courthouse is still there and up and running as we speak.  And then, you know, all of the storefronts are exactly the same.  The business itself might have changed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?  And so, you know, where it might have been a five and dime at one point, it might now be a restaurant.  But, you know, for me, just visually looking at it--
Speaker 1: It was, it was all that.
Speaker 2: --and it, it's the same.
Speaker 1: Now, so your, your grandmother's house, Lillian's house, where Estella lived, was close to the downtown area of Forsyth?
Speaker 2: It's very close.  And, and Forsyth is very small, and so, you know, it's all really close.  But it really was in walking distance.  And I--I know one thing I remember, you know, I like old cars.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can never--my grandmomma always kept a beautiful car.
Speaker 1: And this was a new car, or she just kept them up really well?
Speaker 2: It was a new, it, it, um-hm, it was a new car, and, you know, back then, it was just a car.  But when I look at photographs and stuff now, and can see like that 1961 [Chevrolet] Impala.  She had a 1961 Impala to die for (laughter).  I mean, you know, I hate to, to--you talking about history--to, to die for.  And, but I can't even remember ever seeing my grandmother drive.  You know, I'm just thinking that they had one of those wood-like barn, wood-like garage things on the side.
Speaker 1: Oh, the attached garage?
Speaker 2: It was a detached thing--
Speaker 1: Detached or a--
Speaker 2: --detached.  And I can remember the car being parked under the garage, but I can't ever remember instances, and I'm sure we got around.  But I can't even remember her, her driving.  I don't know if she got--
Speaker 1: And do you remember someone drove for her, like they--she would have a driver?
Speaker 2: I've seen my Daddy [Clifford Ponder], I've seen my daddy drive her cars.
Speaker 1: He would chauffeur her around when he went to town?
Speaker 2: But I've never--I can't say I can ever remember her driving, but she would keep a pretty shiny car (laughter) which is interesting--I mean, just a, oh, some nice cars.  Anyway, but it's just the era.  I'm sorry to drift like that (laughter).  I can't help it, you know, I like old stuff, huh?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 290333
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Margie Jenkins Ponder] and father [Clifford Ponder] share any stories about how they met?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, my, my dad started off as an accountant at Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] at that time.  It's a university now.  And my mom was a senior at the time at the school.  And whatever my dad's position was, when it was time to go to the window to pay for your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --pay for school, my dad was one of the people that took the money.  And through my mom coming and, you know, and taking care of her fees, or whatever at school, you know, they got to know each other--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and name, and that's where they met.
Speaker 1: And they met.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting, huh?
Speaker 1: That is--I mean, that's, that is, that is interesting, very interesting, I think.  Now, they settled in Fort Valley [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: --after they, after they got married?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And your mom was an administrator--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with the school.
Story_ID: 290334
Speaker 1: Now, when you came along, what are some of your earliest childhood memories--yourself as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my--I had, well, I have several.  But one of the things is, is that where we--our first house was, was almost backed up to the campus, to, to the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And I could remember being one of the few people my age that was actually in school on the college campus.  Like, okay, like you have your elementary schools and your middle schools, and you have, you know, your high school, a detached school over, off in the neighborhood somewhere--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --whatever program my parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] put me in, which I assume was part of the public school system, I don't know, was actually housed on Fort Valley State's campus.  And so, whereas every--when I, when I started off, whereas everybody else went to school starting off at one of the regular schools, it--I was in a program--did every day, I would go to school on Fort Valley State's campus in the education (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they have a lab school, like for the--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --teachers, the professors, and the--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --administrators?
Speaker 2: --I really do think it was like, I think the, the gifted program, you know, how we had gifted programs in, in schools now.  I think that the gifted program in Fort Valley [Georgia], at the time, was pulled out of the school.  I, I think it was part of the public school--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but I just don't, because it wasn't necessarily just professors' and administrators' children that was in, that was in there.  I think it had something to do, if I remember, 'cause I know it was a gifted program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was housed there.  And so, you actually did some of your science stuff up in the education building at, on, on the college campus.
Speaker 1: At--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 290335
Speaker 1: Approximately how old were you when you attended the talented and gifted program at the school [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I think I was, you know, somewhere in the vicinity of, you know, six, seven, eight years old.  I can't say I, you know, I truly remember.  But, you know, back during that time, we didn't live in the--what I call a litigious society that we do now.  And that it was okay for me to, you know, go to my parents' [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] office on campus, and hang around the campus, and so forth and so on.  So, I spent a lot of time like, you know, in the education building they had, like an art department, where they had these big kilns, where you could actually mold stuff with clay and make, you know, make things.  You know, Professor Dallas [ph.], at the time, who was the--over the art department, he would let me sit in on, on classes, and do stuff with the students while, you know, I was there, as I waited for my parents to get off of work.
Speaker 1: Oh, this was after school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is, this is after school.  That's why I'm saying is--
Speaker 1: That after that--
Speaker 2: --is that, it, it's all so continuous from coming, you know, finishing, after the gifted program at 2 or 3:00, whatever time you get out of school, and then staying on campus, and waiting for my parents to (unclear), go up to the science building, you know, of course, the jars with all the different stuff in it.  And the science teachers up there explain it to me, you know, what that's all about.  Then, going down to the gym which is right, you know, you know, two or three buildings down.  And at a certain time, they would always wait for me to teach me how to play tennis.  You know, I ended up going to school on a tennis scholarship, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And so, from this, you know, age, you know, I'm out on the tennis court.  And they're teaching me how to play tennis while I wait for my mom, you know, and dad to get, to get off school.  And then, to take that even further, they'll take--teach me swimming.  By the time I was twelve, I was a lifeguard.  I--they allowed me to be a lifeguard at, at--I mean, and I was an excellent swimmer.  And all of this--it's about exposure, you know.  That's, that's the point I'm trying to make is that, you know, you know, books are one thing.  And I think they're extremely important and, you know, that the lessons that you learn in, in classes, and that kind of thing.  But I think that a lot of my success was based on exposure to a whole bunch of, you know, different things.  You know, those teachers at that college taking the time, you know, letting me, extra, have hands-on, in the science department, and hands-on down in the biology thing, hands-on in the art, whatever, and then, taking the time to say, you know, this is how you hold a racquet.  And this is, you know, this is how you do this, and then taking you, and then, and it, and it paid off 'cause in the end, between basketball and tennis, you know, and academic--those three things, basketball, tennis, and academics, you know, that began, that became my ticket to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] (laughter), and--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, and this was all--I mean, you could do this all the while that you were a youngster.  This was at a very early age.
Speaker 2: An early age, you couldn't do, you couldn't do now because everybody's worried about liability, you know what I'm saying?  You know, back then, you, you know, it was like, you know, it was, it was, it was just okay.  And you never really had to worry because you knew that, you know, Dr. Dixon down in the biology department, is going to watch out for me, and their children, too.  I mean, it was a lot of little of us running around there.  You--we knew that Coach [James E.] Hawkins was going to watch me at the gym.  We knew that Dr. Dallas was going, you know, it was--we knew I could go in the student center, order my food there.  That's where my dad would pick me up.  And then I, you know, he'd pay for whatever it was that I decided to eat after school.  And I kind of--and it was just a known thing.  And it was okay 'cause nobody was worried about whether I slid and fall, you know, fell while I was on the tennis court, or nobody was worried about, you know, it was, it was the thing to do.  But, now, if you were to try to do that, you know, you know, the gates to--I'd go to the Fort Valley State now.  The gates to the tennis courts are locked.  I can remember a time that anybody could--you just go on the courts and play, you know, or try to teach themselves how to play, you know.  And so, now everybody's worried about, you know, being sued.  And that was just not the case, you know, that was just not the case when I was growing up.  And so, you know, again, I think that, you know, I owe a great deal to, you know, all those folks on that campus, and in that town who would take, you know, take the time.
Speaker 1: Take the time to--
Speaker 2: You know, it was just not my, just my parents, you know, it was that whole town.
Story_ID: 290336
Speaker 1: Can you describe what family life was like at home for you like holidays and special events and just daily life?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was, you know, we never had anybody that we could relate to on TV to even explain what family life was like at the time.  But, you know, but I can say that I knew kinda what a Cosby life was like before the Cosby's ['The Cosby Show'] came out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I mean, and I mean that, you know, you had, you know, had parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] who, you know, we had the great fortune of being able to, you know, to go, and do things, always take a family vacation, always take trips here, take trips there.  You know, we always had, whatever we did, always included my grandmother and my grand-, both grandmothers [Rosa Jenkins and Estelle Ponder] and grandfather [Teroma Jenkins].  I mean, like if it was a Thanksgiving, it was a question if we were going to be at my grandparents' house, even my other grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your father's--
Speaker 2: We'll be at that--
Speaker 1: --Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My father would go and, and whether we were going to do in Lakeland [Georgia], are we going to do in Forsyth [Georgia], or we're going to do in Fort Valley [Georgia]?  But you know, you always had the, the entire body, so to speak--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --together.  We talk about exposure.  My, my parents made sure that whatever it is I, I wanted to do, or they thought that they wanted me to do, like the piano lessons didn't work out.  You know, they had me in piano for the longest--they bought this big, pretty piano.  And they just wanted me to play the piano and, you know, one day that teacher hit my knuckles one, too many times.  Well, you know, with that thing, and I said, I'm just not going to do this.  I walked off that job, and I ain't see a piano since.  And I mean, I can go to mom's house today and she'll say, that piano--none of my children ever learned how to play (laughter), how to play that, that piano.  But I, I say that to say, you know, I went through the piano, and I went through ballet, and, you know, them taking me to all my softball games, my basketball games, and always being able to look up and see both of my parents there.  I mean, everything I did, whether I was successful or not, you know, they were always, you know, there supporting that effort.  And that's really, you know, that's really all I, all I know in terms of, you know, in terms of my childhood.  And, and so I can understand.  I know how important that is, so I can understand when I deal with some of my constituents now how the absence of that, what difference that probably makes, 'cause I can't imagine it not being like that.  And so, you take, you know, if I were to put myself in some of my constituents' shoes and say, erase this from the equation, you know, a broken home, you know, a single parent, you know, all this kind of thing is--it automatically in my mind becomes a difficult situation.  And, and I have great admiration for the many single parents who, you know, have children much more successful than me, or raising children, you know, and, and that knowing that they've gone that extra mile over and beyond, doing it by, by them, by themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, or those parents who want to get their children involved in the things, but, you know, how important it is for us as a government, to make sure that, you know, just because they might not have the fees to play softball, or the fees to whatever, that those children can still be exposed to it.
Speaker 1: They could.
Speaker 2: You know, and so, I've been able to, to flip the life that I've had, and then erase it, you know, erase it and say, what if I didn't have this, you know, and, and, and make me understand how, and admire, so many people who didn't, didn't have--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: --exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, your mother worked and your father worked?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, all and still, you weren't a latch-key kid?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, they, they both, they both worked.  I had a, a babysitter, who lived on the same street I lived on, named Ms. Smith [ph.].  Ms. Smith became like, you know, my, my second momma.  And during those times that I didn't stay after school on campus [of Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], I would go to Ms. Smith's house.  But it was only for about two hours because my parents got off at five, and they lived two blocks away from the college.  And Ms. Smith lived two doors down from where we lived.  So, it was--I mean, you know, it was just like, but, yeah, I had a baby-, a babysitter.  And, you know, and Ms. Smith even became my sisters' [Keisha Ponder-Green and Celeste Ponder] babysitter, so Ms. Smith has always claimed us as her children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: "Yeah, that's my baby."
Speaker 1: Is she still alive (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, may--she, she just, she passed away about three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and--
Speaker 1: She just kinda--
Speaker 2: --but, but, yeah, but she's been around long enough to see the direction of lives that her babies, so to speak, took.
Speaker 1: That, that--did she have any children of her own?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did, she did, she did have children.  In fact, one of her children now is on the county commission in Fort Valley, you know.  And so, yeah--
Speaker 1: So she's, she did--
Speaker 2: --it's such a small world.  Yeah, she got a lot to be proud of.
Speaker 1: --okay, she had quite a few children then.
Story_ID: 290337
Speaker 1: Please give your siblings' names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --and spell those for us.
Speaker 2: I have--one sister who's named, Keisha Ponder-Green, K-E-I-S-H-A, P-O-N-D-E-R, G-R-E-E-N.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: I just know she's eight years away from me.
Speaker 1: Away from you, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and then, I have another sister, Celeste Ponder, which is C-E-L-E-S-T-E, P-O-N-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's ten years away from me, so it's two years between them, then eight years between me and Keisha, and then ten years between Celeste and I.
Speaker 1: So, it was--you were there for a while by yourself?
Speaker 2: I was--so, all that time I'm talking about running around the campus [of Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], and having to go down into that farm [in Lakeland, Georgia].  Now, all these different things, you know, I had about eight years--
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: --by my, yeah, yeah, eight years by myself.
Story_ID: 290338
Speaker 1: What street did you live on?
Speaker 2: I started off on Emory Street, okay.  And Emory Street is the, is the street that I told you--it was very near the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And then, they started to develop this community.  It, it was in the talks called the Ponderosa [Fort Valley, Georgia].  And, you know, it was, who going to be able to move to the Ponderosa.  Well, anyway, my parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] were the first to build a house out in the Ponderosa which now is on Wood Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and from--those are the only two places I've ever lived is Emory Street, and then when the house got finished that we built from the ground up that's now on Wood Street, that's still the house that they live in now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was life like on Emory when you were growing up?  Describe the block or, you know, the area that you lived in, and what was the community like?
Speaker 2: Well, Emory Street, you know, and looking back, is an interesting street in that, you know, Emory Street was full of--you had some of the college professors that lived on that street.  You had some school teachers that lived on that street.  All of them had kids.  And so, you know, I, and the street was our playground.  I mean, that's where you played kick ball.  That's where you, you know, everybody running from my dog.  I always kept the German shepherd, and, you know, I remember, I got, I have pictures where, you know, I'm here, my German shepherd up here.  So, I always kept me a German shepherd.  Anyway, so, running from my dog, all that kind of stuff.  It, it, the street was the playground.  But then, on the next street was the projects.  So, all we so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Behind you or in--
Speaker 2: So, so, Emory Street was bordered on one side by the projects--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then Emory Street, then Lamar Street, then the college.  You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you had, you had, you know, had one kind of segment of people that was on Lamar and Emory, and then the college.  Then, you go on the other side, and you had, you know, had the projects.  And, and so, you, and, and, economically, I, I have to say, you could really kinda tell the difference.  I mean, you know, you knew the projects were the projects, and all that kind of stuff.  But what I loved about it is that--I think even then, I could appreciate that it was the best of all worlds.  I mean, you know, I learned so much from my friends over there (laughter), you know--
Speaker 1: In the project?
Speaker 2: --in the project.  Oh, yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --I mean I learned just--
Speaker 1: --you played with the friends in the projects?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, I was different from a lot of, a lot of my friends.  I loved to go over there.  I learned just as much from my friends in the projects as I did up in that science lab over--and the thing, and I think that when you put them together, you got Anita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder].
Speaker 1: Now, did your parents know that you were visiting the project?  They--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If I had friends, and then, you know, and they checked out their parents, and all that kind of stuff, they were, they were okay.  I mean, you know, and, and that's what I meant earlier when we talked about, you know, my mom and my dad not being that judgmental is that, you know, social economics really shouldn't separate the character of a person.  And I, you could tell that they under-, they understood all the, all the things that people put up as barriers and obstacles, and separate all that kind of stuff.  They could see through all that and say, you know, that, that doesn't make a person.  And so, whereas some of my friends' parents would be, you know, stay out of those projects.
Speaker 1: They--your parents--
Speaker 2: Don't be over there in those projects.  My parents would say, well, you know, I, I know Ms. Lula [ph.], and I know, you know, she's a hardworking woman.  And the kid is a good kid, and all that kind of stuff, and that's all that mattered to them, you know.  And so--
Speaker 1: And this was an all-black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: All black, yeah.  It was, it was all, you know, we, we like, many communities back then, and kinda still now--Fort Valley [Georgia] separated by railroad tracks.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You know, you know, you have Fort Valley State.  And you have Fort Valley State and, you know, all those communities on this, this side of the track, which is the black side.  And then, you have the predominantly white side on the other side of the track.  And I mean I, you know, I was floored the first time I ever saw a white student on Fort Valley State's campus.  You know what I mean which--
Speaker 1: And what year do you think it was--after the '70s [1970s] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It had to be, you know, it was, it was--I was old enough to, to notice.  So, it had to be, you know, it had to be probably sometimes in the '70s [1970s].  And now, you go to the campus and it's very, very mixed.  And, you know, and, and it's no longer taboo, I don't think, in the white community that, you know, I'll go over to Fort Valley State, you know.  And so, it has, you know, it's become okay.  You have white, you know, white administrators, white professors, white--none of that was there when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is Emory Street still there?
Speaker 2: Emory Street is there, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And now, what is the mix in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: It's, it's still black.  And, and really, I can't think of anybody other than--yeah, I can't think anybody other than us who've moved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, like, all, all, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, the families are still there that was there before you--
Speaker 2: All, all the families that were there are still there--
Speaker 1: Are still there.
Speaker 2: --except for us and, and I think there was a lot down at the end of the street that now has a house on it, so that family was not there because that house was not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, everybody else is, is still intact.
Story_ID: 290339
Speaker 1: You said some of your neighbors were professors, and some of them were school administrators.  They were people who worked at the, at the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Some were at the college, and a lot of them, most of them were in the public school system though, you know, like you had, you know--I think one, you know, one or two who worked at the college, two that lived on that street, other than my, my parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder].  And then everybody else were like, worked in, you know--school teachers, and that kind of stuff or principals, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And, and, all right.  Now, what did you, who did you normally play with?  This is when you were away from the college.  I know you said you played with the children in the projects and the street was actually the playground.  What games did y'all play?
Speaker 2: I mean, we, we, I mean--
Speaker 1: What times of day did you play them?
Speaker 2: I mean, we, I mean we played until--I mean we played until nightfall.  We, and we played all kinds of--and typical games, you know, hide-and-go-seek, and, you know, kick ball and, you know, roll--I mean, just, you know, just the normal stuff--hopscotch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, you, oh, and that cement was the best cement to draw those hopscotches on, when they, they came up so clear (laughter), you know what I mean and you--
Speaker 1: So, it was blacktop?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was blacktop.  I mean, you know, and now I can appreciate this is a nice hopscotch thing, so, you know, we, we would do that.  And, and, and, and I was a little, you know, a little bit different, you know.  I, I could play those games for a minute, but then, I was much more intrigued.  At the end of the street, you could see the college's farm where they had, like these goats.  And, you know, 'cause it was a resear- it's an agricultural college.  And so, they did a lot of things with research and goats.  And they had, you know, chickens and cows with tags on their ears doing all kinds of research, and all that kind.  It was nothing for me to stray away after a minute--when I'm tired of all that hopscotch--hop that fence.  And Champ [ph.], my German shepherd, would hop it with me (laughter).  We'd hop over there, and go over there to see what's going on with these goats.  What are they doing down here on this thing and, you know?  My momma find out--if you jump that fence one more time (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you stay on this side of the fence (laughter).  No, but, you know, and but I, you know, was just inquisitive, inquisitive.
Speaker 1: And what did you find out?
Speaker 2: But all I knew--I mean, the only thing I ever found out is that the reason they had the tags and stuff on their ears is that they were part of some kind of scientific project.  The agri-, agricultural department was, you know, doing, because for the life of me, I couldn't understand why that had all the stuff on them that we didn't have on our cows and stuff at the farm in Lakeland [Georgia].  You know, why are doing that to those cows, you know?  And so, it's just a, yeah, so (laughter).  And then, and then, and then, in terms of who did I play with?  You know, that's Emory Street [Fort Valley, Georgia].
Story_ID: 290340
Speaker 1: But I was very, you know, interested in, you know, sports.  And so, most of my, most of my friends that I hung with on Emory Street were not.  I mean, they were interested in, you know, dolls, and all that kind of stuff.  And they couldn't understand why, you know, I want to be fooling around with a baseball, and all that kind of stuff.  Well, the only leagues we had, or, you know, chances to play team sports were on the other side of the tracks, you know, and so, you know, of, of the school.
Speaker 2: Now, were you saying that these were white leagues (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were, they were all--
Speaker 2: The blacks didn't have a league?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh, they were--
Speaker 2: Not even the college, didn't have a league?
Speaker 1: Not for children.
Speaker 2: Not for children, okay.
Speaker 1: Not for children.  And then, not only that, it really, it was a white league 'cause that's what we called it.  You know, anybody could really sign up, but black people just didn't, really, you know what I mean?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And so, so it wasn't, like say, we are a white league.  This is, this is the, the children's softball league for Fort Valley [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.  And then, be-, because it was in the fields and stuff over there, we usually just didn't go.  But, anyway, of course, at some point, I signed up.  And, and, and you find out--and this is another thing--you find out that I don't really think it really mattered to any of us 'cause we were children (laughter), you know what I mean?  I mean, all this time, we hesitating about going over there, and all that kind of thing.  I think, you know, that kind of fear--not that fear or reluctance came from older people who made you feel like that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But then, when you get on that team, all them girls cared about was, can she catch (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Can she hit a ball?  And, and I, and then, it became, where everybody in that league when they played, you know, year after year, you might have the Citizens Bank team one year, another team, another year, and you have these several teams.  It was always the concern--whose team the Kim McCant [ph.], the, the McCant twins were going to be on, and whose team Anita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder] was going to be on.  I mean, you know, nobody was thinking about race.  You know, who's going to get Anita, and who's going to get the McCant.  The McCant twins could hit.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: They could catch--I mean, those girls were good.  I wonder what they're doing now.  But, anyway, so that was another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you could catch?
Speaker 1: And I could, I could catch, and I, and I could--I was pretty good, an all-away around player.
Speaker 2: And a good hit-, hitter, too?
Speaker 1: But that was a whole 'nother circle of friends.
Speaker 2: Now, that's interesting because in a lot of black neighborhoods, predominantly black neighborhoods, the neighborhoods had their own teams, you know.  You just didn't play with the, the white leagues, but that, that had changed, or whether that Fort Valley, the black community was so small.
Speaker 1: I, I think that might be it because, you know, for some reason, the, the number nine thousand stick in my mind.  And I really think that when I was growing up, it might have been nine thousand people in the whole town.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, and, and, and even I know we didn't have--I mean, and a lot of, of any of the team sports, other than if you played for the school now--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, like for Peach County High [School, Fort Valley, Georgia], or the middle school team, Varsity A, Varsity B, and all that kind of stuff, but the extracurricular outside of school was all--and I can't say for white people because really, it's for everybody.  It's just that none of us would sign up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: You know, but now, it's, it's a different thing.  And then, you know, after I signed up, then, you know, a few other people signed up.  And then, before you know it, it was, it was, what it was meant to be, and nobody really skipped a beat.  You know what I mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you had a complete team, you had a complete team.
Story_ID: 290341
Speaker 1: When you moved to Ponderosa [Fort Valley, Georgia], you all built a house.  How old were you then when you moved from Emory [Street], you think?  Approximately how old do you think you were?
Speaker 2: Probably about eight, you know, somewhere like that, maybe, if that old.
Speaker 1: Now, did you say Ponderosa was on the same side of the tracts as a black community?
Speaker 2: It's on--it was on the same side of the tracks, but, you know, it was considered even just--I mean, even now, if you say you live off of Willow Lake Road and all that kind of stuff, it's considered the middle class black.  I mean, it's a different kind, you know, and versus, you know, but it's still on the black side of the track, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was, you know, it was, it would, it became the area that was known, hmm, you, so you live in, you live in Ponderosa, you live on, you know, Willow Lake, and all that kind of stuff because when you think about it, Fort Valley [Georgia] was so small, you know, everything was kind of small.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so that when people that started building something that was different from the only thing that's ever been in Fort Valley, it seemed like something.  But really, you know, it was just because it was different from the house.  You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, the, the neighborhood, the Ponderosa neighborhood, how different was it from Emory Street?
Speaker 2: To me, not very much different because--the only thing is that I didn't have my friends that were at the project.
Speaker 1: That would, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but, you know, in terms of the makeup of the street, you still had--I mean, 'cause your biggest industry was the college in Blueberg [ph.], you know.  And so, you know, if you were making any kind of money, you probably worked at the college.  So, the people on the street was still the college--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then my minister, the church [Trinity Baptist Church, Fort Valley, Georgia] that I grew up in, but he worked at the college, too.  He lived next door.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: So, in the part of Ponderosa, he lived next door, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He, he, he lived next door and so, you--and then everybody over there still had children.  We still had a black top street we can draw on (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was all--it was pretty much the same.
Speaker 1: So that community, the--what was the name of the community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Ponderosa.
Speaker 1: The Ponderosa was that--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: --and you lived on Wood--what is it?
Speaker 2: On Wood Street, um-hm.
Speaker 1: On Wood Street, okay.  Now, most of the people there were professionals--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause those are the ones who could afford--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to actually, to actually build?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 290342
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of growing up that you would like to share with us?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, all, you know, all my memories really, you know, stem from, you know, my you know, being able to be on, on, on campus [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  One of the things that my team sports allowed me to, to do is to develop relationships with, you know.  I, I had friends over in Ponderosa [Fort Valley, Georgia] and over on Emory Street, where, you know, of course, you know, as friends do, you go over and eat, and you hang out in the room and play and, you know, do what children do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I could remember the first time when I went over to Laurie Altman's [ph.] house who was the optometrist's daughter's house which white girl--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --blonde white girl, and all that kind of stuff.  And think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About how old do you think you are?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, (unclear), maybe twelve.  Eleven, twelve, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she--we were on the same baseball team.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And Mary Hart Humble [ph.] was her best friend.  We were all on the same baseball team.  And the, the first time they invited me over to their house, you know, I can remember having this, you know, this--I don't, I, even know what the word is, you know--like disbelief kind of thing but, you know, my parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] knew their parents (laughter).  So it was, you know, they said, fine.  And, you know, again, you get over there and, you know, you do the same things--you eat, you play (laughter), you know.  I mean, it's just, but it's just amazing, like the stuff that we just put in our heads.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's my point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My point is, is that I learned at an early age.  So, when I got in the real, you know, in the real world, you know, I already had this thing about, you know, having, you know, the ability to think for myself, and know that, you know, we put a lot of stuff in our heads.  But at the same time, I, from date, I've always, as an adult, had an appreciation of understanding that, you know, while you were able to enjoy some things, I had a real awareness of, like slavery, you know.  And I don't know how.  And it must be from hanging on that campus.  But I mean, I'm talking about, you know, there are not many people who were in high school, and, and know everything about--well, I can't say everything, 'cause they didn't really teach it in the schools.  But I'm talking about even in high school [Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia], I was very distinctly aware of slavery, and that whole history, and very distinctly aware of Harriet Tubman--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and very--the things that you didn't teach in, in schools.  And so, you know, I, I started my adult life of having a real keen awareness of how important it was to remember those things--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --even if it was not the life that you necessarily lived, and that, but the life that you're living, was a result of that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I've always been able to see the connectivity, and I think that, that's a blessing and--
Speaker 1: Do you think it was because your parents instilled this within you?  Do you think it would--this is, you might have picked it up at the college, but your parents might have told you some of the history also or by reading?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I think, I think that it's reading.  I think it's my parents.  Somewhere in the, in the, in the back of my mind, I think my [paternal] grandmomma Estelle [Ponder], even though I can't distinctly remember in it, you know, the, the stories exactly.  I mean, I think that kind of stuff and that kind of awareness came from her.
Speaker 1: From her, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you know, and I can't say, I remember we were sitting now talking at the table, and she told me this, you know.  But I can say that, I can say that I do, you know, as I think about those things, if I had to attach it to somebody, I automatically attach it--
Speaker 1: To her.
Speaker 2: --to, to, to her, and knowing the importance of that, and because anything she did in her life in terms of trying to teach me something, it was why education is important.  But education is important because all these things happened for you to be able to get an education, you know (laughter), and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you think maybe she even gave you, like a history of the Civil Rights Movement and she was definitely alive during---
Speaker 2: Did we, oh, she gave me a history.  Oh, yeah, oh--
Speaker 1: --the sit-ins and Rosa Parks.
Speaker 2: --I, I know that, I know that everything that has happened in the history of black people, you know.  I'm talking about, and that whole, you know, the whole trials and tribulations that we went though.  While I can't remember the stories exactly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I know for her, there was a real pour-over connection that, okay, you can go get your education.  And so, you need to make the best of it because, you know, this is what happened for you to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, I've always had an awareness.  But then, at the same time, (background noise) she was also the kind of person where, you know, she wouldn't, she was not very, very judgmental either.  So, I could separate that there are good people and bad people of all races, you know.  And then, you know, a lot of times you grow up and, you know, you people think that, you know, all people of this race are bad, or all people of that race is bad.
Speaker 1: That's right, um-hm, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was fortunate enough that they've taught me how to separate the two and see things for what they are--
Story_ID: 290343
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend after you left the talented and gifted program at the school [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Everything in Fort Valley [Georgia] was Peach County--Peach County Elementary [School], and Peach County High School, Peach County Elementary, Peach County Middle School, and Peach County High School.  And the reason it's called Peach County is 'cause our neighboring little town, which is Byron, Georgia, was part of Peach County [Georgia].  And so, all the students from Fort Valley and Byron attended those schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any teachers that influenced you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: My biggest influence, in terms of--I had a lot of great teachers, but I think, you know, if I had to pick a teacher that really influenced me, it was in middle school.  And, and, and her name was Virginia Dixon, and who is now, I think, a principal at one of the schools, or she might be like an assistant superintendent or something up in Fort Valley.  But she, she was a biology teacher.  The first thing is she made me get biology, you know, you know, you mix that with--and, and she was the wife of Dr. Dixon who let me play in the lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, there's a connection.  And so, between the two of them, I was able to get, you know, biology.  But I think that, you know, how you, you admire, you know, strong, black women, or somebody that you just admire?  Well, she was a teacher, but she was also the person in town who caught--taught the karate school, at the karate school.  She was also the head of this youth program that, you know, where she was over the whole swimming piece.  She was a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] and, you know, at that time, I just admired Deltas.  My mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder] is a Zeta [Phi Beta Sorority]--but, you know, I did.  And my dad [Clifford Ponder] was a Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], and yes, our house is blue and white in one of the rooms.  But, and I admired Deltas, and so, to me, she was the epitome of like, you know, all that I wanted to be (laughter).  And, and so, I think she had a big influence on my life, and not only from, you know, being a teacher, but all the other things that, you know, wow, you can do this, and you can do this, this, and this.  You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You didn't identify her with just being just a great biology teacher.  You identified her with athletics, you know, you--now, and, and she was a momma, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: So, she was--
Speaker 1: --she had children?
Speaker 2: --you know, she had, she had children, too.  And, and so, she wasn't like most of the mommas you know because she'd be down there teaching karate.  She wasn't like most of the mommas, you know, 'cause she was always, you know, and so she was--I said okay, okay, I can, I can do that (laughter).  And so--
Speaker 1: And her husband taught at the college, and she taught at the school?
Speaker 2: And her husband--and she taught at the school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any other teachers who influenced you or who made an impression?
Speaker 2: Well, well, yeah, I, you know, I had several.  Like I said, like Ms. Hawkins [ph.], who I think, and I, I always get confused with, say, elementary was middle school, but I think she was an elementary school teacher.  But I had the great pleasure of having Ms. Hawkins live across the street from me, too.
Speaker 1: This was on Emory Street?
Speaker 2: No, this is on Wood Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so, I can't remember if it's elementary or middle, but my point being is, is that, you know, you can get school at school, and school at home (laughter), whether you wanted it or not (laughter), you know.  And Ms. Hawkins was like a, in my mind, like a grandmotherly kind of teacher, but, but could, could put everything in layman terms and make you, you know, and then, and then not just the education part, but was just always there for you.  You know, I heard you did good in your basketball, you keep it up, baby.
Speaker 1: Encouraging and--
Speaker 2: You know, you know, just encouraging, and that kind of thing.  And it was probably what, two weeks ago today, that Ms. Hawkins decided to go live with her son in another town.  I mean, her house is still across the street from my parents on Wood Street.  Ms. Hawkins even is, is agile enough that she comes up, and she's developed a relationship with my [maternal] grandmother [Rosa Jenkins], 'cause they're around the same age.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: I mean, they're both old.  She's developed a relationship with my grandmother, so she walks up and she sits with my grandmomma on a, on a regular basis, and has ever since she's been living in Fort Valley with us.  And, you know, the dynamics of the two of those women talking is just always just, you know, interesting, even though, you know, my grandmother doesn't have a clue of what's going on 'cause of the short-term, term memory, but missed the patience of Ms. Hawkins that, you know, is the same patience she had, you know, when she was in school.
Speaker 1: Right, and yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, it was almost like, you know, the town almost did, like a going-away thing, for her to go live with her son 'cause, you know, everybody in that town knows Ms. Hawkins.  And they know Ms. Hawkins on that corner in that house.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so, but, yeah, and so she's another teacher that had a great impact on me.
Story_ID: 290344
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Would it be wrong to say that I was a good student (laughter)?  I'm, but I really was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was, I was a--
Speaker 1: Were you well-mannered and--?
Speaker 2: I was well-mannered, but very curious, and so and very active, you know.  I'm, I'm the child that probably, in my childhood, spent more time in the emergency room because of trying to ride the bicycle with my eyes closed and, and running into the house, and splitting my head, you know, this way, or playing with a rusty wheel with somebody rolling.  And it jumps up and, you know, having to go get the tetanus shot, trying to play with a dog that I shouldn't play with, and getting all the bite marks, trying to build a turtle farm, and trying to break a brick in half, and my finger getting stuck in between, and going to my momma [Margie Jenkins Ponder] and it's just hanging off.  You know, you know, so I'm the, you know, I was acting.  But grade-wise, you know, I did very well, very active in extracurricular stuff and, and, you know, you know, just real competitive, and that as, as well, but the, you know, just curious.  And so, my, my heartaches were not from being bad.  It was just being--I, I don't like to call it clumsy, but, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, (laughter).  Would you say you were rambunctious?
Speaker 2: To say the least--I'll give you that.
Speaker 1: You might have read about that story when Ray Charles decided he wanted to drive one of his cars.  He was blind--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he decided that he wanted to drive--
Speaker 2: --so he wanted to drive, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and he did drive.  He tore it up--
Speaker 2: Then--and tore it up, okay.
Speaker 1: And what is, what he did.
Speaker 2: That, what it--
Speaker 1: I think his son tell that story so--
Speaker 2: --but that was.  And it's the exact thing--only I wasn't blind, but at the--
Speaker 1: But you wanted to see what?
Speaker 2: What would somebody to think--okay, why would you want to ride the bicycle down the street with your eyes closed?  I mean, why (laughter)?  I just don't know--why?  And then, this is the thing, and I know this is branching off.  Okay, I can feel blood gushing everywhere.  Well, you know, I told you, Emory Street is right here.  The college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] is right there.  Instead of going down and telling Ms. Smith [ph.], like I'm supposed to, I knew it would upset my momma, and I would get all kinds of attention.  Instead, I walked down the path.  I went to my momma's office, drenched in blood (laughter).  Let's do--let her tell that story.  I, you know, I guess that's the thing--the worms that my momma just (laughter).  Boy, that was so glad for me--
Speaker 1: Your mother must have been--you, you said she always was kind of, not emotional, but she would always react.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she would, she would always, she would always react and, you know, her baby this, and her baby that.  But I tell you what, she was glad when her baby went off to college.  Ohh, I'm ready for this one to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: Gave her a break.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 290345
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations at an early age?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And during these times?
Speaker 2: I did.  I mean, I think, I for as long as I can remember, I always wanted to be an attorney, and I wanted to be a lawyer.  The funny thing is that I didn't want to be a lawyer to be a lawyer.  When I used to take these trips, these school trips down to the state capitol [Atlanta, Georgia], and they would take us to the state legislature where the state representatives were--you'd see that horseshoe.  I don't know whether anybody ever told me this, or I just immediately felt this, but I thought all of those folk were lawyers.  I thought most of the people in the [Georgia] House of Representatives were lawyers.  I knew I wanted to do what they were doing.  I knew--see, and so what I really knew is that I wanted to be in politics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I wanted to be in some form of government doing what those people in that horseshoe doing.  Well, how do you get there?  Well, one of the things is you got be a lawyer.  So, I grew up, always thinking that those folk were lawyers, and back then, a lot of them were.  You know, now, you have just a diverse group of people who are in the House, but a lot of times they were lawyers.  And so, the, the aspiration to be a lawyer at an early age really stemmed from my aspiration to be a politician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and so, I went to law school as a stepping stone to, to, to, to try and get into politics.
Speaker 1: And it's a guess where you are.
Speaker 2: And, you know, it wasn't until I finished law school [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas] now, then, must, a lot of those people are housewives (laughter).  You don't have to go through all of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, that is so true.  Now, the, the county seat where all of the court buildings and all this located, how far away was it from, from where you were in Fort Valley [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was right downtown.
Speaker 1: Oh, this was--is, is Fort Valley the county seat for--
Speaker 2: For, for Peach County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: For Peach County, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And so like Byron [Georgia], the smaller town had to come in and do all their business in Fort Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, yeah, it is the, yeah, it, it was, it was the county seat.  And so, your courthouse, you know, both municipal and state and, you know, all your government businesses are right downtown.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the, the way things, you know, evolved and was, you know, interesting, you talk about childhood.  That whole scene, so to speak, you know, judges, the ways, and all that kind of stuff--very white when I was growing up, you know.  So, and to come back in the early '90s [1990s], and replace a judge that was a judge when you were little was--I mean, that was, I mean, it--the same judge that was the judge when I was a child, was a judge when I was a practicing lawyer, had been practicing many, many, many years.  And then, I come back and get appointed as judge to, to his seat is just a real, not eerie, but just a funny something about that, and that it took that long to get to that.
Speaker 1: And that is, that is an accomplishment to--
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: --yeah, that is an accomplishment, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: And then, during the time that you were growing up, there were a lot of black lawyers on the screen with civil rights cases.  And then, you, you saw a lot of politicians who were kind of fighting civil rights.  And they were attorneys--
Speaker 2: Attorneys as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and yeah, and they were attorneys--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and judges and, you know, some type of governmental official--
Speaker 2: --yeah, the Thurgoods [Thurgood Marshall] --
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and all those folk were people that I, you know, that I--I mean, just in, in history, even though, even the older age admired.  I mean, you know, and, and it was those, you know, it was those attorneys who were about, you know, a lot of times you think of attorneys, and you think of the courtroom--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, you know, just, you know, defense, prosecution, and all that kind of stuff.  It was those attorneys who were about something that was bigger--this, you know what I mean--that, and to this day, you know, I, I don't practice law now.  And I realize that the thing that's always been impressive to me has been the bigger picture (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and not really, you know, and not really to being a lawyer is what they stood for in terms of trying to take care, and help, and contribute, and make the bigger picture better, you know.  And at that time, when you talk about it, it being civil rights, in this time and a lot of times, it's civil rights, you know what I mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly (laughter), that's true, that's true.
Speaker 2: And so, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 290346
Speaker 1: Now, did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did--and my minister lived next door to us (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I grew up in one church [Trinity Baptist Church, Fort Valley, Georgia], still a member of that church, yeah, to this day, that is in Fort Valley [Georgia].  For most of my life up until, you know, probably about five years ago, the same Reverend Simmons [Reverend Julius C. Simmons], who lived next door, was the minister.  And it was just, you know, he passed away about five years ago.  And we're now on our second minister.  So, it was a church that was real stable, you know, the same.  You not only have the same people, who are members of that church today, but now you've seen their children, and their children's children--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, in that church.  And so, while it, it has expanded to be, you know, a, you know a family church, and so, just different generations now.
Speaker 1: All right.  And were you active in any of the church's activities?
Speaker 2: All of it, and now, with that question is--well, I'm--not question, I know, I didn't have a choice.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I mean, I was (laughter), I was, I was, I mean, you know, Vacation Bible School, teach, you know, Sunday school, go to Sunday school, choir lessons, and all that kind of stuff, every--I mean, you know, my entire childhood, you know.  And so, I'm going to be honest, when I went off to college, I took me about a year break from all of that, you know what I mean (laughter).  I was like, hey, I woke up, like I don't have to go to church today if I don't want to.  And I am not--I am in control.  And then, of course, my momma [Margie Jenkins Ponder] would say, did you go to church today?  You know, you call, she checking on me at college--did you go to church?  Girl, you better go to church (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Now, was this a Baptist, Methodist--
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: It was a Baptist church?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baptist church.
Story_ID: 290347
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?  We said everything was Peach--
Speaker 2: Peach, Peach County Middle School [Fort Valley, Georgia]--well, our middle school went up to eighth grade, okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then high school [Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia] was ninth through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Ninth through twelfth, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that wasn't a true junior high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was middle school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, you say you had elementary, middle, and then high school was a four-year school, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So elementary was from first to fifth or--
Speaker 2: I want to say ele- was first to fifth or sixth.
Speaker 1: And then, okay.
Speaker 2: Then, yeah, I think sixth, seventh, and eighth was middle school, and then ninth, tenth, eleventh, yeah--
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: --was high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your friends at middle school now--at the middle school?
Speaker 2: Act-, actually, my friends, my core friends pretty much stayed the same throughout every, you know.  You know, I had my friends from the neighborhood who, even the Emory Street, as well as the ones that, on Ponderosa [Fort Valley, Georgia] remained all my good friends throughout schools.  And then, my friends like Laurie [Altman (ph.)] and Mary Hart [Humble (ph.)], some of the folk that I met during--playing baseball--younger, remained my friends.  And we all became friends because once you got to middle school and high school, you all were in the same, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --some, some of the same classes, and that kind of thing.  So, my core friends pretty much stayed the same (background noise).  And, and many of them, I'm still in touch with--I mean, you know, I think about, you know, one of my friends now is one of the clerks at the post office here in Macon [Georgia].  I mean, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of them is a teacher, you know, here, and one in [Warner] Robins [Georgia] --I mean, so all of my friends that were then, are still around (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are still around--
Story_ID: 290348
Speaker 1: Anita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder], when did you start playing the, the softball, and getting involved in tennis?  What--about what age was that?
Speaker 2: I probably picked up my first tennis racket around six or seven.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, again, remember, that was on campus [of Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then, same with basketball, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around that time?
Speaker 2: --that had a gym.  Same, around the same time and, and basketball, swimming, and tennis--all that same time, timeframe--just different coaches working with me in, in all those areas.  Softball probably came, you know, two or three years later--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --because that was, you know, with a, with an actual team, so, so to speak, other than the pickup softball and baseball that we would do around the neighborhood, but you know, in team sports.  So, I started at, you know, early on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you participate--well, I know in playing, you had different games, and there were different titles that you were trying to get--win this, this title, and that title.  What kind of competitions were you in for the different sports?
Speaker 2: Well, in basketball, I think that if you look at now, historically, look at the, the, you know, our team during that period, and you go through the gym now, that's when you see all the state champion banners (laughter).  And you know, and I don't want to say nothing about that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: But, and then, in tennis, I think I ended up being in my class--when I say class, you had A, double A, and that kind of stuff--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that you know, that school range, I want to say, I made it to, like third in the state, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of, in, in terms of tennis.  And then, again, both of them, you know, I did okay enough that both of them allowed me, you know, helped me out in terms of college.
Speaker 1: Basketball and--
Speaker 2: Basketball, basketball and tennis--
Speaker 1: --and tennis.
Speaker 2: --and, and I played both at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] until they reorganized the season, I think, in my junior year, where there was an overlap between tennis and basketball season.  And I had to choose between the two, and I chose the tennis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you said your parents [Margie Jenkins Ponder and Clifford Ponder] dropped you off for, or they were there for all the games and the practices and, and the like.
Speaker 2: Every--
Speaker 1: So, you had a, a very busy schedule before junior high school [Peach Country Middle School, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause (laughter), and, and you did have time to play, but a lot of that was practice and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and play--
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: --and then, of course, you know, within all that, I couldn't do any of it, you know.  That might have been the motivation in keeping my grades up.  You know, you had to always study, and that kind of thing.  And so, I could very well see that if, you know, I didn't do what I was supposed to do on the academic side, I knew that it would affect the athletic side, you know, because, you know--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: --those, those were all about education.  So, you know, that was all they really thought.  The other was probably a reward (laughter), so to speak, for doing, doing well, you know, doing well in school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, in junior high, you still continued to play tennis and basketball?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I did that, I did that all my life.  I mean, I still, in these old forty-four years, I still go out (laughter), I still go out and play ball.  I mean, I do, I play with, you know, some of the leagues around town.  And I go pick up and play pick-up ball at the [U.S.] Air Force base.  And so, basketball and tennis are something that I still do now.
Story_ID: 290349
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you said you played softball, we know you went to the other side of the track?  So, that was--you integrated the softball team until, you know, the other of your peers decided to, to follow suit.  Now, what was the makeup of race on the basketball team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The bask--
Speaker 1: --and with your tennis?
Speaker 2: Tennis--we'll start with basketball.  Basketball was probably predominantly black, but it was mixed, you know, because, you know, I was school, you know, by the time I went to school, the schools were inter-, integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, by the time I got to, you know, where you play team sports, high school, and stuff, it was integrated.  And so, you know, you had a mixture, but it was predominantly, predominantly a black team.  But, tennis was a predominantly white team, but your number one spots in the men's and the women, you know, your top season--both were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so your, so in other words, your top, your top tennis players in, in both women's and men's, were black, even though the team was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what type of competitions did you enter and, and to tennis when you were playing in, like junior high school [Peach County Middle School, Fort Valley, Georgia]?  Were they in, like region or within (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, just depending, just like basketball, depending on how far you go, you know, like you competed against other schools.  And, you know, of course, you're trying to get the region title.  And if you do that, then you go to the state.  I mean, it's the same levels as you did in basketball, but only it was tennis.  And, you know, and, and the thing that I, and I, I guess you could just feel it more with tennis.  But I guess it was the same, but basketball, you know, basketball and, and tennis, that means that you went to a lot of different places to play.  And I'm sure with basketball, went to a lot of places, but all I can see in my mind is a gym.  But in tennis, I can say that we went to some, you know, fabulous courts all over (laughter), you know what I mean, you know, and all over the place.  And it gave you a chance just to see stuff, you know, than in Fort Valley [Georgia], which, you know, you know, I thought that was good, too.  And it really didn't even, I really didn't even, I don't even think I've ever realized that 'til right now, that, you know, in playing tennis.  I mean, you're at, you know, different clubs here and there.  And depending on how far you went, we had a pretty good team, you know, you'd go to Florida and play, you know.  And so, it--the, the region was drawn a little bit different than just playing just the neighborhood counties, like you do in basketball, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you go out of state, too, a lot?
Speaker 2: If you made it a certain, to a certain point.
Speaker 1: And you all made those, made--always made that?
Speaker 2: We --I don't know if we always made it, but we did make it a couple of times during my, you know, during my tenure that I was there, 'cause I got a chance to experience it, you know.  And so, and then got a chance to see some--some high schools didn't have courts themselves.  They played on the courts of the college that was in that town.  So, you got the chance to go to some of the schools, you know what I mean, and, and, you know, see the schools as well.  So, you know, it you know, outside of tennis, it allowed you, and exposed you to, to some other places and colleges, and that kind of thing, too.
Story_ID: 290350
Speaker 1: Now who were--was your coach?
Speaker 2: Coach Barnes [ph.] was both my tennis and my basketball coach.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, you're in a small town [Fort Valley, Georgia].  And so you had, you know, dual roles.  You know, what does a basketball coach do when it's not basketball season?  Okay, we put him over there and play tennis (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and so, you know, I had the same coach for both sports.  And I tell you, he had the demeanor, you know.  You know, I don't know if he would go down in history, and as a great coach, I think he just had the, the luck of having some, some good players on both teams.  But he will go down a great coach 'cause he had the right demeanor to motivate you.  He was just a fun guy, you know what I mean, and not to, you know, some coaches, that I, that I've had, you know, they take it so seriously that it's not fun.  You know, you know what I mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: And, but he--I mean, he, you know, he was fun, you know.  And he wanted to make it fun, and it was never, okay, you've got to go do this, and you gotta go do that.  It was just about, you know, this is a chance for you to parti-, participate in team sports.  And then, you're here to have a good time, you know, have your friends, and all that kind of stuff, and just go out and have fun with it, you know.  So, all that fighting on court with the other teams, and all that kind of stuff--much as you want to do here, pull you to the side--no, don't do, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: He was quite a, quite a guy.  Did he have any stories that he wanted to tell because a lot of times--well the age that he was, he might have aspired to be a professional basketball player, or a tennis pro, or whatever, but did he share any stories as to why he ended up not teaching, as opposed to actually competing?
Speaker 2: Competing--well, I, I don't know if you call it a story, but it was known, and he would tell you that, you know, this gives him a chance to do all the things that he couldn't do.  I--it's not 'cause--the only thing he ever even competed with basketball, so in other words, some people compete, and they never make it to the, the level that they want to, to make it.  I don't think he ever had the athletic skills to do any of those things, but they were things that he wanted to do, but didn't really have the skills to do it.  And so, and how, but how he ended up getting the, you know, a coaching position, I don't know.  He probably majored in something, but really can't play and can't do, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --but he was a good coach.
Story_ID: 290351
Speaker 1: What influenced you as a young person, and can you describe some experiences?  Say, for example, did Arthur Ashe influence you with tennis, or were there any particular judges, like a Constance Motley Baker [sic. Constance Baker Motley], or a, you know, was there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Role model influences--
Speaker 1: --that influences--
Speaker 2: --yeah, tennis-wise, my influences didn't come, you know, I, I had a great admiration for Arthur Ashe.  I mean, you know, because I just thought, yeah, I mean, I thought he was great, you know.  And so, he was somebody that I totally admire, but, you know, my, my influence was really from, you know, Coach Hawkins [ph.], and the folk who, on, on the campus [of Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], who would, you know, who would just take the time, you know, take the time to help me.  In terms of judges and stuff, I never really--my mind never went to the, all the way to the judge point.  I had a great admiration for Thurgood Marshall, you know, I thought, I mean, I, you know, again, like him, I thought he was the greatest, who later became a judge.  But, you know, at the, at the time that I began to follow him, and I think about--he was, he wasn't a judge yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so, he, he's another person that was in the legal realm that, you know, that I admired.  And then, unfortunately, my other folk that I've seen, in terms of law, and the kind of thing, is the same people that--the only thing that was on TV were just your, you know, Perry Mason ['Perry Mason'], and that kind of a thing, you know, that kind of thing.  That was the only thing I knew.
Speaker 1: And [Ben] Matlock ['Matlock'].
Speaker 2: In term--and Mat-, yeah, yeah, that kind of, but, you know, Matlock came a little bit later.  You know, Perry Mason was back--
Speaker 1: Was first, right, he was first.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  And so, you know, and, and that's kind of one of the things that I remember, in terms of the legal field.  But, again, I never looked at it from your perspective, you know, my perspective was the [Georgia] House of Representatives.
Story_ID: 290352
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school--at another Peach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Peach County High [School], which is, again, in, in Fort Valley [Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, did, you know, all four of my years there and, again, played all sports there, and concentrated heavily, making sure that I tried to do really good all four years in--I tried to do good in science because for a minute, I, you know, I said, just in case, I decided to go to medical school, even though I really don't want to--
Speaker 1: Go to medical school?
Speaker 2: I would, you know, like I was, I was one of those folks that my aspiration is always to be a lawyer, and all that kind of stuff.  But in my mind, I said, okay, I'm going to be, I'm going to try to do good in the sciences, and I'm going to try to do good in English.  And you say, why, English?  Well, Homer [ph.], which is a lawyer in Macon [Georgia], said to me that when you go to law school (laughter), when you go to law school, the, the key thing is the ability to write.  You know, if you can, if you can write well and articulate the stuff.  But you can know all it is in the world, but what you're going to be tested on from one point to another is what you put on paper, and being able, being able to write.  And so, that was the reason I not only tried to focus on English, and then sciences as a backup in high school, but that's the reason I went into journalism in college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  I went in journalism in college as, as a background.  He said, don't do political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody do that (laughter), and so, I focused on that in terms of writing.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of your teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: I had Mrs. [Virginia] Dixon again, you know, Mrs. Dixon, who was the, the biology teacher had, by that time, moved over to the, the high school, you know, because you, you know, I guess you progressively move up, or you try out for different positions or whatever.  She ended up there.  I had Ms. Duncan [ph.], who was another, you know, a, another teacher that had an impact on, on my life, and another teacher who lived in my neighborhood--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't live on my same street, but lived in my neighborhood.  And now, you know, her children live in, in the neighborhood as well.  She's passed away.  And then, of course, during high school, I spent a lot of times with Coach Barnes [ph.], because who is the coach that we talked about earlier, who taught physical education, and all the different things in terms of P.E., and all that kind of stuff.  And so, I, I mean I had, you know, several teachers, but Duncan and Dixon were the ones that stood out.
Speaker 1: Now, what most influenced you while in high school, or who most influenced you--who or, or what mostly influenced you?
Speaker 2: I mean, it--well, two things influenced me.  I mean, and, and it seems redundant, but it's true.  You know, in, in terms of going to the next level and doing better and all that kind of stuff, that was always Ms. Dixon.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know what I'm talking about?  And, and you can see that she was, always played the part 'cause she was in middle school [Peach County Middle School, Fort Valley, Georgia], and then, again, in, you know, again, in, in high school, you know, even to the point that, you know, that's who you can go and talk about--what about this college?
Story_ID: 290353
Speaker 1: How did you spend your time in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, a, a piece of extracurricular activities, I didn't tell you about.  We talked--we went back--how I did not exceed on the piano, but what I was a very good, musically, was a drummer.  And I was the first female drummer at Peach County High [School, Fort Valley, Georgia] (laughter).  Now, let me tell you--
Speaker 1: Were you in the band?
Speaker 2: I was in the band.  One hundred percent, I was in the band.  And, and then, Coach Lindsay [ph.], who is the--oh, I love him--who was the band director, you know, he was relatively new to Fort Valley [Georgia].  So, he would have brought some good moves and some movement to the band--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --something that we hadn't had, you know, in our history, you know, and, and really encouraged the female drummer because, you know, the guys didn't too much care about a female being on, on the drum line.  And when you go now--I ran into Coach Lindsay right before the Christmas holidays in the music store.  And he said that, to this day, up on the wall, when I first started, my drum, my drum thing that he still has that, you know, to encourage those folk, but, you know, you can do it--see that, you know, because, 'cause, and, oh, I used to have fun.  And I think, in my best memories of being in the band, and I, you know, my best memories of being in the band was the fact that I knew it aggravated so many others (laughter), you know.  And so--
Speaker 1: And what grade were, were you then?  What, what year in high school?
Speaker 2: I started my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I played all three years because that was the only season I had free because, you know, I played basketball and tennis.  But then, in football season, I was free.  And so, that's when the band plays is during, during the games.
Speaker 1: Right, during the games.
Speaker 2: And so, okay, I can fit this in.  And, and, and I had, had a drum set prior to that, that I played up until--I mean, I probably got my first drum set when I was, like twelve.  I didn't play the piano, but I told my mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder] that I liked the drums.  And, you know, so they bought me the drum set.  And they endured all that, and I, you know, played in a lot of little garage bands and stuff around the neighborhood.  And when my dad [Clifford Ponder] have his fraternity meetings, you know, he was a Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], and all that kind of stuff, they would indulge, and let my little band be the entertainment.  And then, you know, go down--they heard, heard you played down there for the Sigmas, you know, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], we're having our little tea over at the thing.  Y'all wanna to come down there (laughter)? Me and my group wouldn't go down there and then--
Speaker 1: About how many was in your group?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  Let me see, we had, the guitar, the drums, the singer--four of us.  All neighborhood kids and I questioned, I questioned--well, I just questioned whether it was really a band.  But, you know, we knew a few songs and, you know, we, you know, did okay.  I mean, the only people who could appreciate is--I think, the neighborhood little meetings, and all that kind of stuff that, you know, they get the neighborhood children.  But anyway, then it, that evolved into my playing the drums in high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have any particular reason for choosing the drums--
Speaker 2: Just a--
Speaker 1: --out of all the other instruments?
Speaker 2: Well, I just liked them, you know.  You're asking me about, you know, I don't know, because my biggest musical influence during that time, during that era, during my younger years, was Jimi Hendrix.  And he was a guitar player, you know.  And so, and I, when I say, he was an influence, and you said, what was my life like in early years at, during high school?  My room was purple.  They let me paint it purple 'cause, you remember, his little 'Purple Haze' thing.  I had blue lights going on.  My grades were good, so they let me do all this.  So, purple room, the blue lights flashing, you know, Jimi Hendrix, '[All Along] the Watchtower' going (laughter).  My momma was talking about, what's going on with her (laughter) as if, what is wrong with her, you know, and all kind of--so my, my musical influence was a left-handed guitar player versus a drummer.  So, I don't know where I got that from--never wanted to play the guitar until my older years.  And now I take bass lessons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're playing now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I play, I play--well, let's just say, I take bass lessons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you playing in a band now?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, my--
Speaker 1: No performances?
Speaker 2: No, no performances yet.  But I, I do plan to unveil something at some point, I'm sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 290354
Speaker 1: A little bit of history, in 1975, I think there was a big tornado that struck Fort Valley [Georgia].  Do you remember that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do very much so--
Speaker 1: Is that--
Speaker 2: --very much so.  And I can, I can remember, you know, not only do I remember just the, the, the noise, and the stuff going everywhere that tornados bring.  But what I remember the most is going downtown, and it being floored.  I mean, you know, I, you know, it's just, you know, to see, you know, something that was there yesterday, and then to know that something can come through, and I mean, just totally, just floored.  I mean, you know, I mean, to the ground--a, a lot of our downtown.  So, yeah, I, I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because it's, it's amazing for those people who haven't been involved in tornados or disasters, like that you see on the news, and you get an aerial view of what's going on, but when you actually can walk in the midst of it and see it.
Speaker 2: Walk in the midst of it is, it's horrific.  And I said, it's a different, you know, you're so not in control.  I mean, you know, like, if you're in a fire, you maybe have a little chance to get some water or something, a fire extinguisher, and try to put some-, something out.  You know, if there, there's some things that you have a little bit of, of control.  Something, like a tornado--my first day in Houston [Texas] when I went to law school, was Hurricane Alicia.  You know, and to be in the middle of that, you know, it's one of those feelings that you can't even really articulate, you know.  And, but, but you do know that it's, it's, it's--what makes it even more scarier is that you really have no control whatsoever.  And then, if you've been in one, and it's had a devastating, devastating effect in terms of, you know, how I did on Fort Valley, you know, you automatically think the worst when you're in the next one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?  And so, that, as an extra layer of, of fear, but, yeah, I remember the tornado.
Speaker 1: Do you know--how, how, what were your feelings at that particular time?  Were you afraid, or how did you feel about that type of natural disaster?
Speaker 2: I mean, I just--the only thing I could remember feeling is thinking, it was unbelievable that--I know it was called a tornado, but for me, it was like a big gust of wind (laughter), you know, something like that could do this, you know.  And then, you know, what are we going to do, you know?  And what, you know, Cory's [ph.], a lot of our main stores, all that stuff is down, you know, what are we going to do now to this, you know?  But, you know, I don't know exactly what we did, but, you know, we got through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they rebuild immediately or do you, did they wait--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they rebuild immediately and--
Speaker 1: So, did you get a new downtown or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we, yeah, we did, we did because if, if I remember correctly, there might be one or two buildings down there that, that survived, you know, like, you know.  And the rest of them are, you know, the '75 [1975] era, you know, in terms of building, as I remember.
Speaker 1: So, it took away a lot of historical buildings then?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that it did because I can't say I remember what buildings were in that place.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I just remember everything just laying there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?  So I can't, but, but I do know, if you look at our downtown now--on the corner is this beautiful, historic building that you can clearly tell it's historic, which is, obviously, the building that survived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, when you compare it to the other ones, you can tell the architectural difference clearly, you know.  But between, between it, and the rest of them, so I would assume that every--if everything else was like that building that's on the corner, yeah, it was a lot of historic buildings.
Speaker 1: Do you remember if the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] was damaged at all, or your neighborhood, was it damaged at all?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  I, I don't think that my neighborhood was, and I don't remember the col-, I, I can't say I personally remember the college being damaged, even though I think it was.  You know, I'm pretty--if I'm not mistaken, just in, in my readings, I think that it was.  It's downtown that I can clearly visualize, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Visualize, yeah, 'cause I think most of the damage was.  But I'm sure that some of the outlying areas might or, or might not have been affected.
Story_ID: 290355
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you wanted to be--your--at this particular time?  You still had dreams of being a lawyer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm--
Speaker 1: --always that was.
Speaker 2: --always.  That never really wavered.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I always knew I was gonna go to law school.  And, and, and, you know, I went to college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] because it was a prerequisite to get in law school.  So, everything for me was because, you know what I mean (laughter)?  And so, yeah, that never wavered.
Speaker 1: That never--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You didn't think of maybe changing and becoming a professional tennis player or--
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: I don't think basketball--
Speaker 2: Women basketball--
Speaker 1: --for women, basketball wasn't popular--
Speaker 2: --uh-uh.
Speaker 1: --at that particular time?
Speaker 2: It was not popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and which is amazing, though, because, you know, I'm back now in, in, you know, the area that I grew up in.  And then you have people who have been around, that's been here, that's still here that was here back during my basketball high school days [at Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia], and that kinda, and/or my basketball college days, and who kept up and all that kind of stuff.  And when women's professional basketball came out, people would always say, man, if this was a few years earlier, then that would be you, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they, in, in this area, you know, some people still say with me being the [Macon] City Council president, some of them remember me from being the girl from--who could really play basketball from Peach County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, yes.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, which is interesting, you know, peoples.  And, you know, I think, I think some of my votes may have come from--that's the girl playing basketball (laughter)--you know, what her politics about (laughter).
Story_ID: 290356
Speaker 1: Well, since everything was Peach County in Fort Valley [Georgia], did the college [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] actually have any activities centered around the Peach--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that was there?  Did they have a Peach Bowl associated with sports, or what was their activity?
Speaker 2: They had, and it wasn't--it, it was not the college as much as the town.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I, I think my mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder], whatever the little Peach Blossom Queen--
Speaker 1: That's--okay.
Speaker 2: --is or whatever.  You know, my mom, during her college days, was that person.  I mean, you know, she was the Peach Blossom, you know, Queen.  And I think that, that was something that stemmed--and it was a partnership between the college and the town--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that, that thing.  But now, we have, like a Peach Festival [Georgia Peach Festival] that goes on for, you know, it's like a week-long thing.  And I'm surprised you have not seen in the Guinness World book ['Guinness World Records'] that the biggest peach cobbler is made in Peach County at the Peach Festival.  And when I say big, it's as big as this room (laughter)--I mean, I mean it's huge.
Speaker 1: How many people get together to do that?
Speaker 2: And I'm talking every--I, I don't know how they do it, but just imagine a peach cobbler that you like.  Okay, it looks like a dome or something (laughter).  You know, and, you know, people come from all over to see the biggest peach cobbler that it was ever, you know--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --that was ever made.  And so, you know, won't be a Peach Festival without that big peach cobbler sitting in the middle of downtown.
Speaker 1: Well, do they use it afterwards, or is it's just there as a--
Speaker 2: No--yeah, they eat it.  I mean, you know, you can--it's an actual peach cobbler, you know, you, they got somebody there who, you know.
Speaker 1: Just cuts it up and divvies it out.
Speaker 2: Then, then, after a while, you got to climb in and get--I'm just kidding, and I'm just kidding.  But, you know, that Peach Festival, you had to do a whole host of things with, you know, with, with peaches.  And then, peach run, and peach mascots, and peach, you know, they've, and, and they've gotten better, in my opinion, than none of them older.  I know the importance of branding.  They've gotten better about learning how to do everything you possibly can in terms of branding the, the town as Peach County, and, you know, the peach candies, and the peach candy factory, and all that kind of stuff that they didn't have, and turn into an industry, you know.  And I'm, I'm glad to see that, you know.  I may live, and my home is in Macon [Georgia] now, but we all in such close proximity that, you know, I want to see all the little towns survive, you know, because it has a direct correlation on all of us.  And they are doing a good job of realizing the peach niche is their niche.  You can go to Fort Valley in Peach County and, you know, everywhere you see peach trees, but they have this place now called the Lanes with a big family in Peach County and--
Speaker 1: The Lanes, L-A-N-E-S?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, L-A-N-E-S.  They were the big peach people, you know, they owned most of the peach farms and, you know, all that kind of stuff.  We--they were the, you know, the heir, the peach whatever.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Now, this is a white family?
Speaker 2: This is a white family, but, you know, high school kids and, you know, where you're looking for a summer job, and all that kind of stuff, the place that you go work is Lane Packing House [Fort Valley, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, to pack peaches.  And so, that was a big thing.  That's where you were going to work during, during the summer.  And so, now the Lanes have owned Interstate 75, have this huge factory [Lane Southern Orchards, Fort Valley, Georgia] where--I mean, people get off of 75 all over.  I mean, they make it a destination place to get off on 75, I think, to go to their place where you can watch, you know, peach stuff being made.  It's like a factory.  They got peach ice cream.  It's just like a whole Peach Land (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --and, you know, got rocking, beautiful rocking chairs on the front.  And then, it's surrounded by peach fields.  And when you, oh, and, and anybody who goes to this place feels like, okay, this is really worth the stop, or really worth going.  And, and it's, it's all centered around peaches, make a killing.  And now, when people go to Florida, you know, and, and you look in places, and you look at people who picked up brochures, the Lane little factory centered around those peaches is one of the big things that people go to now, you know.
Speaker 1: So, they've got a, niche for tourists and--
Speaker 2: Tourists, and tourism, and tourists, and that kind of thing.  And I think that's a, you know, you know, just like you said, you know, what kind of businesses stem from the farm?  You know, you know, finding the niche, you know, and, you know, making it work and marketing and turning it into a business is what's it's all about.  And they, they've gone beyond just picking the peaches 'cause California do a lot of peaches now, too, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know (laughter).  And so, they've gone beyond, and got us, got us a little tourist thing that brings people into Fort Valley.
Story_ID: 290357
Speaker 1: Did you know what college you wanted to attend when, when you were in high school [Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia]?  Had you decided?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  The only thing I did was elimination.  And I knew it would not be Fort Valley State [College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] (laughter).  I can't say, I, I knew it wouldn't be Fort Valley State.  I knew I didn't want go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I knew I didn't want to go to Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--that's where my dad [Clifford Ponder] went.  So, I did a lot of eliminations, didn't know, and I, I knew that if I could, if I could swing it, and when I swing it, swing it in my parents' mind, it would be outside of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, and so, I looked at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I looked at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  And then several schools--I mean, that weren't historically black schools [HBCUs], and, and Florida A&M.  When the offers start coming, you know, for scholarships, and all that kind of thing, and then I looked at Florida A&M, and I looked at their offer in terms of--'cause I was looking at--from schools I didn't even really think scholarships.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I should have been, and I'm sure my parents were thinking scholarships, but I, I, you know, I was thinking about where I want to be physically.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But then, when I went down to Florida A&M, and then the fact that it was Florida, and, to me, at that time, when I compared it to Fort Valley [Georgia], for some reason, Tallahassee [Florida] looked huge, even though it doesn't look as huge as now.  But, you know, it looked like it--oh, wow, if I go to this big city.  And then, I had it all figured out because I could go down this back road, and end up at my [maternal] grandparents' [Rosa Jenkins and Teroma Jenkins] house just in case I got hungry (laughter), and be over at Lakeland [Georgia] (laughter), you know, and Lakeland because Tallahassee and Lakeland are real close.
Speaker 1: About like, thirty, forty, an hour?
Speaker 2: Hmm, maybe an hour at the most--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, you go, you know, Lakeland, you go through Thomasville [Georgia], and you, and I mean, you go Tallahassee, Thomasville, then you're in Lakeland.
Speaker 1: In Lakeland, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I said, okay, this is where I can, you know, this is where, where I can go.  I can see how I can work this and (laughter), and so, I ended up at Florida A&M.  Okay, but I do want you to know that at end of four years--and he really meant this with all sincerity--I said my dad's a good dad, and he is.  He said he would never send another child to FAMU, and he thinks it's the best, one of the best schools out there, but he said that he claims that I partied a lot in school, but I don't think that I did (laughter).  My grades reflect otherwise (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So your grades dropped?
Speaker 2: No, that's what I'm saying--my grades reflect otherwise.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: How could I be partying, and have those kinds of grades?
Speaker 1: And you had excellent grades?
Speaker 2: I had excellent grades, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you participate in sports?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: While you were there, you played only with--you had the tennis scholarship?
Speaker 2: I had the tennis scholarship, a basketball scholarship, and an academic.  So, collectively, in some kind of way, they did a package and, you know, and, and it's interesting, that package was worked out by--there was, there was this woman who was the, the woman's basketball coach at Fort Valley State--Coach Brown [ph.].  Some kind of way, she had her hands in working out that package.  You know, she wanted to see, she knew they had a good basketball team and a good tennis team and all, and that kind of stuff.  And some kind of way, she knew the folk up there, and without us even asking her or whatever, I think she called--I don't know if she was a graduate of FAMU or what, but she worked out a, a package where, with the three of them, it helped me significantly, you know, with the three scholarships, collectively, helped me significantly with school, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.
Speaker 2: And then, and, and Coach Brown, maybe a year after I started college, was coming back from one of her basketball games, and had a head-on collision.  And so, she never really got to see me finish, finish college, even though she was the instrument who (unclear) my going there.
Speaker 1: And this was Coach Brown?
Speaker 2: Coach Brown, Jean, Jean Brown.
Speaker 1: This was in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: She started--
Speaker 2: --well, well, she, she was the college's coach.  She was influential in me going to FAMU--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and working out the package.  She was still living, the coach, during my first year in college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, while I was in college, she was in a, in a--
Speaker 1: In an accident.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, an accident.
Story_ID: 290358
Speaker 1: What happened after college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?  What did you do then?
Speaker 2: I had three days between finishing college and starting law school.  And so, I, I finished college, you know, one day in Tallahassee [Florida]--had to report for orientation three days later in Houston [Texas] for, you know, for, for law school.  And, again, law school was one of those things in terms of deciding, you know, where I wanted to be, and who had the, you know, were making the best offers in terms of scholarships, and that kind of thing as well, but I ended up in Houston.  And I started off at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] which was, of course, a black law school there, and had an opportunity, you know, to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, some other schools as well, but chose Texas Southern 'cause I wanted to be in Houston.  Well, there was a school downtown called South Texas College of Law [Houston, Houston, Texas] that, you know, once I got in Texas, realized that that was one of the most influential schools, not only in Houston, and in Texas.  But around the country, they were known for turning out trial lawyers, but they were having a little problem with the--I can't remember if it was the federal government, or whoever mandates that you need to get your population of minorities up in schools.  Well, what, what--the way that they did that is they went and got the highest-ranked students in some of the black schools, and offered them the world.  And I was one of those students in, like whatever I took it.  And so, I spent maybe, I spent my first semester at, at Texas Southern, and then I transferred to South Texas, which is a school where I started off with probably six or seven of us black in the school of, like twenty-two hundred folk, you know.  But my motivation for going to this school was two-fold--one, well, actually, three-fold.  One, I was, you know, I was adult enough to understand that I had gone to a historically black college [HBCU] already in undergrad, and wanted to, you know, balance it off with a different experience.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Secondly, it was the only college in the country that was connected to a court.  And so, like the, the school was here, you walked through this door right here, and you're in the court of appeals.  And so, a lot of your classes were in the court of appeals, and you had, you know, direct relationships to judges, and all that kind of stuff--again, exposure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all of those kids over there at Texas Southern weren't getting that kind of exposure.  And, you know, you know, they didn't have those--it's about relationships, the relationships to make sure you get a clerkship with this judge or, you know, you know, that, that judge.  And then, thirdly, its ranking in, amongst law schools, was so high that, you know, I thought that was important depending, you know, on what I did with my next life in terms of the legal profession.  So, for those three reasons, I decided to transfer, and so, I, I graduated from South Texas.
Story_ID: 290359
Speaker 1: Now let's just back up, what did you major in at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: I majored in journalism, communications.  And, again, I talked to you a little about, you know, that thing that was instilled in me about some of my teachers about writing, you know.  And, you know, being--the ability to write and put things on paper, and put your thoughts there and that kind of thing, so I continued that trend into college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was my major.  I was a ghost writer during my college time for Architectural Digest, the Florida region.  I did my internship there, one of my internships there, and did some stuff with the Tallahassee Democrat which is the local paper there.  And I even wrote for out-of-town paper when I was younger, you know.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: [The] Leader-Tribune, I was--the paper in Fort Valley [Georgia], you know, so I always did stuff with newspapers.  I would write little stuff for Mr. Walton [ph.].  He was the one who owned the little town newspaper, and I would, like write the stuff for them as well so.
Story_ID: 290360
Speaker 1: Most of your life, you've attended all black schools and now, after leaving Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], you're in predominantly white environment in school.  Was that--how, how do you feel about that change, and what effect did that have on you?
Speaker 2: It, it was interesting and, and, and remember now, my high school [Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia] and all that is--was integrated, so it wasn't, it was not all black.  And so, I'd already had the experience of, you know, you know, different cultures and that and, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, a historically black college [HBCU] versus a school like South Texas [College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas] is like--I mean, it's like, it's like night and day in, in a lot of ways.  I mean, just in terms of, like just procedures, in terms of administration, in terms of, you know, just a whole lot of things are different.  And then, and, and I think, law school--and it might have been in my mind--was the first time I ever let what I call, I'd like to call, I'd--well, I don't know how to define it other than prejudice creep into my, creep into my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I began to, you know, I never ever look at racial stuff holistically.  I look at people as individuals, but it was the first time that I allowed for a minute, for me to just say, you know, everybody here is racist (laughter).  You know what I mean?  And you know, I finally got back on track but, and, and I don't, I can't think of any particular incident, incidents that made me feel that.  I think it was just, you know, being in, you know, most of the people that were affluent white kids--I mean, 'cause it was a real expensive law school, you know.  And, you know, the six and seven of us at--you're clustering together, whether I don't know if it was 'cause we did it, or 'cause we had to.  You know, it just made, it was just the first, you know, semester or whatever.  And a lot of it, I think, was in my mind, you know, I don't know, and some of it, I think was real.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, because I think a lot of, a lot of those, even professors, I think, thought that, you know, we are this school.  We have the cream of the crop, and who is this federal government, or whoever making us take something below our standards, you know.  And as far as I'm concerned, really, if you compare apples to apples, you know, most of us did even better than some of these folk who got in here.  We don't have as much money but, you know, academically--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --we did.  But you could feel that some of them felt like, okay, I'm doing this 'cause I have to do it, you know.  And I think it's the only period in my, in my life that I can say that I can, for a minute there, felt what I thought was racist, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, all the professors were white?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, the only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people who weren't, were the, the students--
Speaker 2: Those six or seven who I--
Speaker 1: --that had been selected by the school, right.
Speaker 2: --and I felt like them little, you know, those pictures you see when the seven students, or with, or like [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, and them trying to go over to the university in Georgia [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], so where, you know--
Speaker 1: Like you were breaking the color line (laughter).
Speaker 2: --we're (unclear), like, okay, what is this?  I mean, you know, in this day and time, I mean, we're in the '80s [1980s], you know.  I mean, why I shouldn't feel like this, but, you know.  Yeah, they, they were all white, and then, but before I graduated, I did, we did get one black or mixed professor, and I think she went down, you know, a black professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I get my materials now from the school, you know, as an alumni, I think they might have two now.
Speaker 1: Okay, that were, that were there?
Speaker 2: You know, and I, but it's there, but when I, when I flip the pages of that book, I mean--
Speaker 1: But still--
Speaker 2: And it's, you know, you can see it's getting a little better, but I mean, for it to be 2006, it's just interesting to me.  So, but maybe they're just not in the book.  Maybe they're in the school--it's just not in the book.  We're just going to assume that's the case.  Okay?
Story_ID: 290361
Speaker 1: Now, what type of law did you actually train in, in law school [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well, the school I went to is a trial school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, so they, they, they turned out trial lawyers.  I started off my clerkship with a judge, okay, you know, so I, I started with a federal judge, and this is still in law school, which means that you get all sides of the, of the spectrum.  Then, I went with the prosecution, and clerked with them on the prosecutor's side.  Then I clerked with this defense attorney, and for some reason, you know, I'm all for the underdog.  I'm all for the one that they claim did something that I truly believed didn't (laughter).  So, I like the defense side.  And so, once I graduated, I took a position with that law firm, the defense firm that I had clerked for--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and became a defense trial lawyer, and did some personal injury stuff as well.  And after I got out there and, you know, realized that, you know, the judges were sending me the cases, and the people were calling me, and when, really calling, you know, all those other folk.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can do this by myself.  So, I joined with one of my colleagues from law school, a white woman who went to law school with me some years later.  We got together and we opened a firm in, in downtown Houston [Texas] where her focus was mainly family law, and her set of lawyers did, you know, family law, and, you know, tax law, and that kind of stuff.  And, and me and, you know, my team focused on criminal and personal injury.  And, and by that time, most of my criminal cases, or a lot of my criminal cases were at the federal level, you know, which was--I had gotten a license to move out of state court, and did a lot of federal work.
Story_ID: 290425
Speaker 1: Now while you were in law school [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas], are there any memories that you have that you would like to share with us?
Speaker 2: You know, actually, law school is what people visualize it to be, and I mean it's pretty much all I did.  I mean, you know, they have--it was the, a period in my life, unlike college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], where I really didn't have a life other than, you know, other than law school.  And then, for some reason, it, it--something within me looking at, you know, the makeup of that school, wanted to really excel.  And, you know, you know, college, high school [Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia], and all that kind of stuff--I didn't really try, you know.  It, you know, it just all worked out grade-wise.  In law school, because I had this feeling of, you know, some people thinking that we were inferior (laughter), whether they thought it or not, I felt that, that's what they thought.  It was important to me to, to, you know, to, to try to excel in law school.  And so, it, you know, law school is hard.  And so, it, it took a lot, especially, you know, your first year to--it, it took a lot of work and study to--to do that.  Made it on law review [South Texas Law Review], first black ever to--you know.  Law review in law school is a huge deal, regardless of what school it is.  That's why even when you see your TV shows, you know, that still goes on your resume, that: was on law review, you know.  I didn't really know what that meant, but I knew they thought it was a big deal.  And it came to being that writing was important because, you know, Law Review was all about writing.  And so, you know, you know, things, you know, turn out the way they did.  And I had put such a focus on writing, and that kind, and that kind of thing.  It was good enough to get on, on law review, and later became one of the editors--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of, of law review, which was historic in of it, you know, in of itself.  And I think at least in that arena, you know, I had professors who really just look- they looked at the body of work, for the body of work and, you know, what you could do.  And they, you know, didn't, didn't really see race I felt, you know--I was beginning to feel anyway.  And then, I kind of got an easiness to know that, okay, just because I know that's what he feels--that particular professor, 'cause I noticed that he feel- he feels that I'm inferior.  I shouldn't blame the school for that, you know.  And so, it kind of helped me getting accepted.  The law review kind of helped me get back balance--that, you know, all people are not--you know I came to law school, thinking all people are not a certain kind of way--look at them individually.  I got there for a minute, and started grouping everybody together, like we so often do, got accepted on law review, and that was kind of like a crosswords, crossroads for me, in that it, it reminded me that, okay, don't let me get this one mixed up with this one, and that one mixed with that one, you know.  And so, in terms of that whole thing, got back on, you know, back on track.  And, you know, finished, and started making my first paycheck 'cause you remember, I've been in school all my life by that time.
Story_ID: 290426
Speaker 1: Some of the people who were in your classes [at South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas], do any of them stand out with--for you right now?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the person that stands out the most for me that was in my class was Olivia [Jordan].  And, and she was a, you know, she was a white law student who, you know, not only just had just a real great insight on life.  I always admired her because she was a parachutist, you know, she, you know, was a parachutist.  And during law school, she landed on her, you know, on her arm and so, lost the complete use of her arm, but came back, and still continued to parachute.  You know, I, and I just thought that, that was a--all right, and I just thought that, that was, you know, whatever.  And, and she didn't--you could tell that she was from a bigger place--did, had been places, and seen things, and, you know, all that kind of stuff in terms of race, and the whole host of thing.  Anyway, that relation came back in evol- you know, as it evolved, came back, because that's the lady that I ended up joining in terms of our partnership, in terms of a law office, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and that was in Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: And that was in Houston, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we, yeah, we opened up our office, and it's, it's downtown Houston.  I can't even remember the street, but our firm was Ponder and Jordan.  And, like I said, because we had different interests, that worked out real well because, you know, we would, you know, make sure we could serve our family law clients because that's what her interest was and, and that tedious tax stuff.  That's where her interests were--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I had no expertise in that, but I loved being in the courtroom, you know.  And so, I could continue to do my court work with criminal law.  And I've always done personal injury because, you know, a lot of times, your clients on the criminal side of things, you know.  It, it's hard to make a living just on criminal law 'cause a lot of times, they can't pay the retainer fees.  But then, you know, we always said that personal injury pays the bills, you know.  And so, that's always, you know, it's one of those things that, you know, everybody in personal has to have an attorney, and it, it's kind of easy if you're organized enough to do the paperwork, it's easy, it's easy work.  But my heart, in terms of the legal professionals in the courtroom.  And I was known for not letting money be, you know, if I believed in the case, I would take it, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, and not, it not being the thing that keep you from getting, you know, a, a good attorney.
Story_ID: 290427
Speaker 1: Were there any cases that actually stand out with you that you handled (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had, I had a series of cases that stood out.  I was a--once I made it to the federal level, at the federal level when you have big federal cases, particularly in this case--I don't know if you know [Pablo] Escobar.  Are, are you familiar with Escobar cartel, the Columbian drug lords, and all that kind of thing?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, one of my biggest, and when I say appointments, you don't have a choice when a judge tells you, you have to take a case--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was part of the Escobar cartel.  And so, you know, I ended up being, in many instances for a while, a huge drug lawyer.  You know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of representing a, a lot of the Columbian cartel folk that had this huge bust for, you know, more kilos of cocaine than we can ever, ever, ever imagine.  It was also inspiration to get out of law.  I mean, you know, it was very, very, very lucrative.  But it was very, very scary in that, you know, those people expect you to win their case, even if all the evidence shows that, you know, it is what it is.  And you can't say no to the judge that you don't want to take these cases.  And then, I think I won one by some kind of technical whatever.  And then, I started getting all of the cartel cases.  And then I, you know, start becoming, you know, I don't, you know.  So, the money was great, but the peace of mind was not there.  And so it was really kind of the turning point, and motivation for me, and realization that it never has been, but it was a realization that money is not everything.  And, you know, you're at a point in your life--you've been out here practicing now, you've been in Houston [Texas] ten years now, and is, and this was not your plan.  I mean, my plan was to come to Houston, go to law school, come back home, and do something in Georgia.  I mean, that was the plan.  That's been the plan from day one--go off, you know, get my feet wet, have fun in Florida, have fun over here, but eventually, I'm coming back home.  Ten years of my life is in Houston, all because I had never had a paycheck (laughter).  And so, when they offered me all these jobs when I got out of law school [at South Texas College of Law, Houston, Texas], I took it.  You know, I took it, and I said, okay, this is too--I mean, I, I never seen this much money in my life.  I took it, you know, and so then, I became, you know, you know, I'm real competitive.  And so, I like to be good at whatever I do, and I just practiced being a good lawyer.  I mean, you know, I want to win, and I will win, and I win.  And then, before you know it, I'm getting all these drug cartel cases.  And before you know it, I'm scared that, you know, the one that I--the two that I lost, they're over my back.  And they're going to get me, you know, and all this kind of stuff 'cause those people have more money than God, you know, they have all kinds of resources.  And they can be locked up, and still can, you know, and you would hear all these scary stories, you know, and all this kind of thing.  And I said, girl, you know, you better get your--you figure out what you want to do.  And so, I sat, and had a talk with Olivia [Jordan].  And the, and pretty much explained to her--that was my partner--that, you know, I'm off track.  And for the first time, I've realized, I'm off track--I don't really want to be a lawyer (laughter).  And if I do, I don't want to be one here.  I want to be one in Georgia where I'm, you know, and, and from--I want to open a practice in Georgia.  And, of course, she didn't want to go to Georgia.  She want, you know, her roots in Texas.  And so, it all--that part all worked out.  So, for about six months, I spent two weeks in Houston, and two weeks in Georgia 'cause, you know, when you have that many clients, you can't just up and go.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, I--the judges worked with me where they would set all my court dates within that two-week period, and then my next one is in the next two-week period--
Speaker 1: Two-week period.
Speaker 2: --that, that I'm supposed to be in there, so I can wing off and finish all my cases.  And that took me about, probably about six or seven months to do.
Story_ID: 290428
Speaker 1: But, meanwhile, it was during a period that they hadn't offered the, you know, you had some months away before they would offer the Georgia bar.  And for me, it was the attorneys' exam because you had reciprocity and so, you only had to take a, a portion of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A portion of it, okay.
Speaker 1: --of the Georgia, of Georgia, 'cause you were already a licensed attorney, up in Texas.  Well, what am I going to do with my little two-week time that I'm here, you know, study for the bar, what can I do?  And I stumbled in the museum, you know.  I said, I heard about this museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] and I like museums, and I go and, you know, I read about what it's all about.  And I talk to the guy who was the director.  And we just talking, you know--I mean, I said, that sounds absolutely wonderful.  But now, he, too, had been other places--the director.  You know, and he knew what museums should look like--that's why they hired him because of his background.  He had his, you know, art history, had done some stuff in London [England] and, you know, all this kind of stuff and, you know, and we got to talking.  And he's a white guy, you know, African American museum--white guy.  And, you know, we got to, you know, brainstorm about race relations and, you know, what this museum can do, and all this kind of stuff.  I said, I'm going to come down here and volunteer and help you out 'cause it was just him and, like a secretary that might have been still in high school, you know--some better, you know, they come in after hours, and all this kind of stuff.  He says, oh, it's so much we could do with this, right.  And so, before you know it, we're tearing down walls in there, and we building walls, and calling people we know, and begging them for art.  And then, we're doing this exhibit over here, you know, calling my friends in Houston [Texas]--him calling his friends in London.  We're trying to start this museum.  Can you loan some, you know, all this kind of stuff?  And, you know, that went on.  And then, okay, well, let's do another exhibit.  And before you know it, twelve years later, I'm, you know, I'm still there (laughter), you know, because it grew.  I mean, you know, before you know it, we, we, we were hovering around three thousand to five thousand visitors.  We got all the way up to, like sixty-five thousand to seventy thousand visits, you know, budget it like thirty thousand dollars now, budget, like a million and a half.  I mean, you know, so, you know, the museum grew.  Its prominence grew, you know, in the African American community, and in the museum community.  And then, we got to the point where we were outgrowing ourselves to get the, you know, to get the loans from some of the bigger museums, and all that kind of stuff.  You have to have a certain kind of facility.  And we had started off as a warehouse that we had converted into a museum.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, that's when we started a capital campaign to--for the building that we're building now.  But I say all that to say is that it was from the drug cartel (laughter), and that the, that the slap in the face, and I think it was even on a case, a successful case, but the slap in the face.  I cannot live like this and, and, secondly, and the reason I came is not really the fear as much as just to know what I'm supposed to be doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But then, when I got to that museum, and just even got back, and I, I know this sounds corny, but just in Georgia--all of a sudden, it was like, okay.  This feels right, you know, this is what--I, I mean, I don't know exactly what it is I'm supposed to be doing, but this is where I'm supposed to be.
Story_ID: 290429
Speaker 1: When you left Houston [Texas], did you come to Macon [Georgia], or did you go back to Fort Valley [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: For my--I went to Fort Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went, I went back to Fort Valley.  But you know, Fort Valley is small, and so when, you know, I'm riding around looking at what I want to do today.  Well, I'm going to ride down to Macon and see this--what this Harriet Tubman Cultural Center [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] is all about.  I think that is what it is named right then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was just one of my visits to Macon that had me stumble into, you know, in, into the museum.
Speaker 1: Then, then, now when you went from Houston to the law firm [Ponder and Jackson] in Houston, to Macon--I'm sorry, to Fort Valley, and you did the commute back and forth--Houston, Fort Valley--what were you doing in Fort Valley?  Had you set up your own practice, or were you working?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, 'cause I hadn't, I hadn't taken the bar yet.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, like you, you had to--
Speaker 1: --right, 'cause you said you had to--
Speaker 2: --you had months before, you know, you had--
Speaker 1: So, in between--
Speaker 2: --the next bar, you had months.  And so, the only thing I was really doing was, on my two weeks off, there were two weeks off where I study for the bar, go, you know, look at the museum, do that--
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: --'cause the two weeks on, I'm back in Houston.
Speaker 1: --okay, you're back in Houston.
Speaker 2: You know, right, so I'm really working.  My job is really in Houston still--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: --even though I'm physically--
Speaker 1: --so even though you're physically located in Macon, okay.
Speaker 2: --physically in, um-hm.  And, and then, Evelyn [Pounds], I was probably back a year and a half maybe, if that long, when the mayor of the county seat appointed me as judge.  You know, they had me, keeping up with everything I'd been doing in Houston.  And we're a small town and, you know, you know, one of your folk go off, and they do, you know, okay, and all that kind of--they keep up with them.  And plus, my church [Trinity Baptist Church, Fort Valley, Georgia], they see, not only did they, through my whole time in college [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and law school [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas], did they send me the church bulletin.  So, I got the church bulletin every week from the church.  And then, the church has their own little thing where they let everybody in the town know what you're doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, in terms of the bulletin, so they, they were very aware of, of my practice and my, you know, my experience up in Houston.  And so, that judge, when that mayor won his seat as mayor, he came to me and asked me, would I, would I consider serving as the judge for that area, and the surrounding counties?  And, you know, of course, my momma [Margie Jenkins Ponder] and them, like yeah, she will (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) She volunteered you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, um-hm, yeah, there's no question, and she will, and did that for about four and a half years, in conjunction with being at the museum--did both of those.  Okay, so I was a judge, and then, you know, the way in those small towns, you know, you can, you're on the bench for like a part of the day, and then you have free time.  And that free time, I would do my stuff at the museum.  So, I was going back and forth between the museum and my bench at city hall in Fort Valley, but then realized, just like that cartel slap, realized, this is not what I want to be doing.  I mean, I don't, I mean, I'm a judge for everybody else but me.  I mean, I--you talk about history, and you talk about how lives can take different paths--when you're in a small town like that, Evelyn, the people who come before you, are either folk you went to school with, or they are people who are friends of your parents.  And you look, and you can remember maybe, you know, them being the ones that was on the street, next to Emory Street, or being even in my neighborhood, and look at where, how two roads--I mean, how, you know, you've just taken two totally different roads in terms of life and, you know.  And then, their fate of whether, you know, they go to prison, or go to jail, or go wherever, is on me.  I didn't, you know, I didn't like that.  And I realized I'm a judge because it sounds good, and it's the right thing to do, but I want to be in politics.  So, I resigned to run for this--city, for [Macon] City Council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and that's kind of how, and you know, I've known from day one, you know, politics is where I'm supposed to be and, and as bad, the good, bad, and the ugly as it gets, and those get ugly--mostly ugly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's still where I'm supposed to be, you know what I mean?  And I know it's where I'm supposed to be.  And so, I'm at peace, you know, and just, you know, this is what--
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: --you know, this is what I'm supposed to be doing.
Story_ID: 290430
Speaker 1: Let me ask now, and correct me if I'm wrong but in some cities and some states, judges actually ran--run for their offices.
Speaker 2: They do.
Speaker 1: Is that, but is that Georgia only, or is that the county in Georgia--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --that they appoint the judges or--
Speaker 2: It's different levels of, you know, some judges, even in Georgia, and in, you know, like your--some of your municipal, your county, and at one of the federal levels, are appointed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of your state judges actually have to run for office, so it's, even in Georgia, so it depends on what level of a judge you are.  And I can't accept, you know, just separate them all, but some of them are appointed, and some of them are elected, even within the State of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, but this particular level judge is, is appointed.  And then, I think federal judges are appointed, and then, your state judges are elected.
Speaker 1: Are elected, okay, all right.  And you're still now at this, at that particular time when you left Fort Valley [Georgia] as a judge, you're still volunteering with the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia], or have you taken on a permanent position with the museum?
Speaker 2: I've taken it at some point during the judgeship, a permanent part-time position.  I think I took on a position of, where, I mean, I call it like a seven, eight thousand dollar position, something, it was like, more like a stipend, you know, but, but it was a position, nevertheless, and so, I was doing that.  And then, and, and the judgeship at the same time, but I was at the museum part-time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then, once I left, left the judgeship and ran for office, I became full-time at the museum, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And this is around, this is '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --like the mid-, to late '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: --I, I, yeah, I was on, I was, I've been at the museum since 1993.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And my judgeship was somewhere in that same area.  I think it was like nine--I, all I know is I resigned back in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know, '96 [1996], '97 [1997], um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that's when you decided to run for [Macon] City Council?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the reason you ran for City Council was to fulfill your desire to get actively involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.  And, and I knew the timing was right because the seat that I'm in now the, the woman who held it at the time--her husband decided that he wanted to retire and move back to wherever their home place was.  And so, she resigned in the middle of a term.  And so, you didn't have an incumbent in, in place.  And so, I said, I'd much rather, if I'm going to do it, now is the time to do it while it's not an incumbent.  And, and it's just an open seat and, you know, several people ran for the seat, but that was kind of my motivation to do it right now because I said, if you're going to do it, this, this is when, when you should and, of course, it worked out.
Speaker 1: And you had it for the president alone--not for a council member position?  You went straight for the president?
Speaker 2: No, our structure here in Macon [Georgia] is, is that you get elected to council, and then the council members decide who the president will be.  So, you, you're elected amongst the council members.  So, whereas in Atlanta [Georgia], for example--I'll use that for example--you have to run as the president citywide, but here, you have to run citywide, you have to be one of the citywide seats, but the council has to choose what person that's in one of their citywide seats, to be the president.
Story_ID: 290431
Speaker 1: And when you were elected to [Macon City] Council, how long did you serve as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Member?
Speaker 1: --Council member?
Speaker 2: I served as a member for those two years, finishing off her term--
Speaker 1: That--her term.
Speaker 2: --'cause they all, 'cause they had already a president.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And then, when the next term start, I became the president, and I filled that whole four years as president.  And now, I'm in my second term, and then, I was elected president again.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, as a council member, what were some of your responsibilities as a member?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you--we, we are--a committee-run council.  And so, depending on which committees you served on will determine what your duties were.  Mine was very heavily focused on housing and substandard housing, and, you know, working with the county government and constituents in terms of putting plans in place to, to redevelop neighborhoods.  That was, that was my primary focuses as a council member.  And since I was a citywide council member, my focus was not just in my ward, but, you know, throughout the city in terms of, you know, in terms of housing and economic development.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any experiences or accomplishments that you would like to share with us that you obtained while a member?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I think, probably one of the biggest accomplishments in, in my, and actually we all attained it, is that one of the things that we noticed and, and I particularly wanted to be a part of, is that what we were doing in Macon [Georgia] was spot housing, you know, fix a house here, fix a house there.  And so, in those two years as a member, one of the things that we were able to do under, under my committee was to get together with, you know, all your chamber folk and your city folk, and your county folk, and put together a comprehensive plan for redevelop-, so doing it neighborhoods at a time, so that when you walk away, you see the entire neighborhood done, and not a HOPE VI house here and a HOPE III house here, and a Habitat for Humanity house over on the next street, where you can't really feel that it's been revitalized.  So, we put a plan together that would, if implemented, would redevelop all, all the neighborhoods in Macon, comprehensively.  Well, it took two years as a member to put the plan together.  And so, it was just the plan.
Story_ID: 290432
Speaker 1: Beautiful part of it is on December 31st of this year [2006] is that the neighborhood that we--the first neighborhood we focused on, is completed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know what I mean?  And I'm talking about, we got a, we got a $20 million HOPE VI grant to get us started that leveraged another $100 million.  I mean, and so when you go over there where you once saw a public housing development, you now have something very--we used East Lake [Atlanta, Georgia] as our model--a very mixed development community where, you know, somebody living in that two, three hundred thousand dollar townhouse or a house, can be living next door to somebody who's on, in an income-based place.  And you don't know who's renting, who's owning, who's whatever, and they absolutely--the area is absolutely gorgeous.  And it stemmed from, you know, putting together a comprehensive plan back during, you know, that period, and then allowing it to develop the way it's supposed, you know, a lot of times, you have to let stuff go.  You know, you put it together and then, you know, another group comes along, 'cause I became president, I had to kinda let that go.  And I said, well, this is good, this is a good start, what you're doing, but we need to get some professional people in here to perfect it, which is good.  They get--got in here, they perfected it, and it--they package it in a way where it was saleable to get a HOPE VI, and get the grants, and get the funding, and all that kind of stuff.  But, in the end, it accomplished what we were trying to do, and get our neighborhoods comprehensively redeveloped.
Speaker 2: And about what square mile radius?  I don't mean, how many streets, or just kind of give us a little glimpse of what that neighborhood encompasses?
Speaker 1: Well, that neighborhood probably--and I wish I had the whole parcel layout (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but just--
Speaker 1: --but it's probably, you know, if I had to guess, it probably encompasses twenty, twenty-five streets.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a pretty big neighborhood.
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying?  And, and it's a whole, it's a historic neighborhood that the bulk of the housing stock was public housing.  And then, mixed in there, though, you had some--it's in an historic district.  So, you had some, you know, some smaller older houses that's now owned by senior citizens that you don't want to displace.  So, you know, you have to have the programs in place that if they don't have the finances to, to renovate their pieces, how do we renovate that? Which we did.  You work with the roads program, which is the penny tax to improve, you know, roads and stuff, and put the infrastructure in over there, which we did.  And so, you now, you had everything that makes things happen.  You're bordered on one side of that community by Mercer University [Macon, Georgia], and then you, you know, they saw the value of having a renovated community to, to them.  And so, they offered stipends to their faculty and, you know, people who worked for them that if you move in this community, we'll pay the down payment, and all that kind of stuff.  And so, we worked out stuff.  They brought money to the table, and so, you have this true public-private partnership to come together to actually redo an entire, you know, entire community.
Speaker 2: An entire neighborhood.  What racial mix is this particular neighborhood?
Speaker 1: It, it is predominantly black--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and it's predominantly because the City of Macon [Georgia] is predominantly black, you know.  We're not talking about the county of Bibb [Bibb County, Georgia], but the City of Macon that we govern is, is predominantly black.  It's probably--now, it's probably like fifty-five, forty-five, something like that, but in the core neighborhoods--I'm not talking about the city, the stuff that's touching downtown is definitely predominantly black.
Speaker 2: Has this always been, or is this a new trend for, or you like, did this happen like during the '60s [1960s] or the '70s [1970s], you know, was there white flight (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was white flight.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then the--
Speaker 1: I mean, yeah, yeah.  It, it, it was white flight.  But then now, it's all, in terms of like the city county, it's almost getting to be 50/50 because, you know, you're having such growth in terms of the black population, even in the county, so it's pretty much all the same.  But I say that to say that, so either chances of most neighborhoods within the city limits are probably going to be mostly black, but predominantly black.  But it is now becoming a mixed neighborhood, and the great thing is that the way we designed the program, is that those people who were in the public housing, got first dibs once we finished.  You know, so if they decided they want to come back to this community, and this is where they want to live, you know, it was all about them getting the places, you know, first.  And we would, you know, work out the, you know, work out the details of it.  And so, you know, you don't--that whole gentrification thing, we want to make sure that we didn't fall in that piece.  A lot of them loved where they were moved to (laughter), you know.  And so, you know, that was fine--
Speaker 2: They don't, they want to stay.
Speaker 1: --so, yeah.
Speaker 2: And aside from the public housing, the rest are single family dwellings or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, single family dwellings, and then, one piece of this that we did is that a lot of the people in that public housing were senior citizens.  And so, before we even started on that neighborhood part, we got an area that we built these gorgeous, with big columns and all this kind of stuff, five--I don't even know how to describe them, but it's almost like a little college campus for senior citizens.  We finished that first and made sure that we have a place for all those seniors to go.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then, and then started on that twenty-five street radius.  So, it was like a part one, and part two project, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 290362
Speaker 1: --Explain to us how that whole process came about, and how you--
Speaker 2: Well, we, we have fifteen [Macon City] Council members, and of those fifteen, three council members represent one of the five wards.  So, we have five wards in Macon [Georgia], three council members per ward.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: One person in each one of those wards has to run citywide.  And the whole idea is, is that whoever is the president is, if something should happen to the mayor, or the mayor resigns or whatever under our charter, that person automatically becomes the mayor.  So, you want that to be a person who is elected by all the citizens of Macon versus somebody who was elected by a ward.  And so, that's the reason for the president having to be a citywide person.  Of those five people, who are citywide seats, the fifteen council members decide from that, those five, who they want to serve as president.  And yet, once I started my second term, I was elected--I mean, my first term, my first full term, I was elected as president.  And now, I am in my second term and, again, I was elected, you know, elected president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are some of the duties of the president of that office?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, you, you know, appoint committees, which is a real political thing, you know, part of the appointment process to determine who's, you know, who's on what committees, and that kind of thing.  And that's, you know, that's a huge deal preside (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are these committees for the council or for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for the council--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the council.  So, you know, of course, who's the appropriations chair is a big one.  Who gets to be on appropriations?  That's a big one.  You know, who gets to be on--I mean, those, those are huge deals because they, they make decisions about, you know, the real heart of what we do here in, in the city.  And then, of course, I preside over all of our meetings.  Just by virtue of, of my position, I serve on a lot of different boards as the city's representative.  I mean, even though on the books, it's a part-time job, I mean, it's constant.  I mean, because and whatever, whatever the mayor can't do, we have to divide our responsibilities.  If he, if he's over here cutting a ribbon, and kissing a baby over here, I might be over here announcing that we just got a new addition to our airport, or if he's over here doing whatever, I'm over here.  So, you know, it's, it's splitting those duties 'cause, you know, you can't do it, you know, you can't do it all.  Working with a lot of--I work with, particularly one of our downtown organizations, NewTown Macon [Macon, Georgia], in terms of revitalizing downtown.  And that means, you know, retail, the tourism piece, the museums, the Douglass Theatre [Macon, Georgia] is a part of one of the things that, you know, that we've, we've worked on or renovated.
Story_ID: 290363
Speaker 1: When you say the museum, is that the Harriet Tubman [African American] Museum [Harriet Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia], or is there another museum that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we have, in fact, as you come into Macon [Georgia], one of the things you will see is as you soon come into downtown Macon, there are banners everywhere saying the museum district.  So, we have the Georgia Music Hall of Fame [Macon, Georgia], we have the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame [Macon, Georgia], we have the Georgia Children's Museum [Macon, Georgia], we have the Tubman African American Museum, we have the Douglass Theatre [Macon, Georgia] which is a theatre slash museum, and all of those.  You park your car--you can walk right into all of them.  Okay, so they--
Speaker 1: Okay, so they're centrally located?
Speaker 2: They're all centrally located downtown.  And, you know, as, as you know, one of the things that we talked about the Georgia Music Hall of Fame.  One of the reasons that the state decided to put it here is because of the rich music history that we have here in Macon in terms of, you know, the many folk who have come across Macon and came from Macon musically, and the impact that had on Georgia, and we wanted to make sure it was a direct partnership in having that Hall of Fame in the Douglass Theatre, which is directly across the street.
Story_ID: 290364
Speaker 1: The Douglass [Theatre, Macon, Georgia], you know, like many cities, you know, how people, you know, they leave downtowns, and they just left it in disarray.  Well, the Douglass Theatre was a victim of that.  And, you know, it was a place where, you know, back during its heyday, you know, all--it was the only place that blacks could perform.  So, when you talk about music giants like Otis Redding, when you talk about Little Richard, when you talk about, you know, Ma Rainey, when you talk about--I mean, just any of the black, James Brown--the only places they could play, if you came to, came to Macon [Georgia] was the Douglass Theatre was, so that was the hot spot, you know.
Speaker 2: So this is where James Brown did record 'Please, Please [Please]' in the '50s [1950s] (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--absolutely--
Speaker 2: Oh, this was all right.
Speaker 1: --yeah, absolutely.  And it is a rich history.  Right, right across the street, you'll find a renovated restaurant called the Tic Toc [Room, Macon, Georgia].  Well, the Tic Toc is the [Miss] Ann's Tic Toc [Macon, Georgia] where Little Richard was the, was the main band that played for that club, okay.  And then, a business person has come in, and renovated it into a restaurant, but he kept the name, Tic Toc, you know, and, and that's directly across the street.
Speaker 2: And that was Little Richard Penniman.
Speaker 1: That was Little Richard Penniman, yeah, that's just a little, all, yeah, absolutely right.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: And, and then, what's so interesting about that is that their white managers couldn't come in.  They would have to stay on the top, so it was a reversal.
Speaker 2: This was a reversal, yes, totally reversal for what the blacks had to endure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  And so, you know, once the doors were open where those musicians could perform--other places before you know it, the Douglass just kind of dwindled away, and sat there in disarray for many, many, many years.  And, and, then, we went in and restored--I mean, almost just like it was almost restored it back to its original grandeur with the absence of the hotel.  One of the things--Charles [Henry] Douglass, who it was named afterwards, was just a shrewd businessman.  I mean, you know, he owned the Douglass Theatre, and attached to it, he had a hotel that was there as, as well and, you know, a lot of different businesses.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, this was a black man?
Speaker 1: This was a black man.
Speaker 2: He was originally from Macon?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was originally from Macon.  And, and when we restored it, the hotel couldn't be, you know, the, the hotel couldn't be restored.  And so, the hotel is no longer there.  But the Douglass Theatre--I mean, to the, just fabulous molding, everything is, is still intact.  I mean, and, and they, they've done a great job of bringing it back to its original grandeur.
Speaker 2: So, what is it used for now?
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: I mean, it's just a museum?
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: I mean, no activities?
Speaker 1: --no, no, no.  It's a, it's more of a performing arts place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, so it's a small venue.  It only has 315 seats.  And so, you know, it's a place where you can go and see a play on one day.  You can go see a small musical act on another day.  It also, that they added an IMAX to it, so you can go in there and see IMAX movie.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then, of course, you can go over into the annex portion of it where they actually use it.  It's like a space where you have like, different artists feature their works, and you can see the original, a projector from back during the day, you know, some of that older equipment that was used when the Douglass was--
Speaker 2: Was--
Speaker 1: --up and run-, you know, up and running.
Speaker 2: We said Lena Horne was from--well, she lived here off and on in Georgia.  And Macon was one of the cities that she did come to when her mother was dropping her off (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely--
Speaker 2: --on her way to Cuba.
Speaker 1: --Um-hm, absolutely, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, so what have you all done for--has, has the city done anything regarding the homes where Lena lived, or the home where she lived?  So, what is--
Speaker 1: No, they still, they, they're still in private, you know, all, all of the homes with the exception, was still private, like Otis' widow [Zelma Atwood Redding] and children are still here.  And so, and, and if you, and follow the history of Otis, you know that he built the Big O Ranch, which is right outside of, you know, like in the outskirts of Macon.  And so, the family still lives on that, on that, on that ranch.  And, of course, in fact, his widow, as well as his daughter, has two real thriving businesses downtown.  One is like a shoe boutique that has the most awesome shoes, you know, they come from everywhere.  And then, the other one has a business called Dreams that sell the most fabulous clothes.  And so, they, you know, they're businesswomen here, too.  Then, his son, Otis Redding III, he's real big in the music industry, but he does a lot of stuff behind the scenes in terms of producing, and that kind of stuff.  His music studio is right over here still on the outside of, out-, you know, on downtown, on, on Walnut Street, which is the same street, the museum, the Tubman [African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] is on.  And, and so, you still have that presence here.  But in terms of the homes that, you know, Lena once lived in, or the home that Little Richard Penniman lived in, they're all in, in, you know, private homes now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 290365
Speaker 1: What are some of the boards that you serve on as being president of the [Macon] City Council?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I serve on NewTown Macon [Macon, Georgia] which is an economic development organization.  I serve on the Macon roads improvement board, which is political, 'cause you decide what happens to that one cent.  You know, how people are about that one cent tax and the roads, and why didn't you pave the road over here versus down here, you know, that kind of thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's worse than hitting a pothole.
Speaker 2: That's one, one, yeah.  And so, I'm one of the five members of that board who decides how, you know, those millions and millions of dollars are spent.  Of course, the [Macon] Chamber of Commerce, I'm a member of that board.  I'm on the Board of Trustees at Macon State College [Middle Georgia State University, Macon, Georgia], which is one of the colleges here.  Georgia Women, Georgia Black Women of, Georgia Coalition of Black Women--I don't know if you're familiar with them who--their founder's out of Atlanta [Georgia] on that, on that board.  I mean, I mean, several (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, just, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know--
Speaker 1: --several boards.  Like you said, it's a part-time position, but it takes up a lot of, it's a lot of hours--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it takes up--I mean, a lot of hours, yeah.
Speaker 1: --involved in.  Now, so you're saying, this is part-time.  So, you're splitting your time here and at the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 290366
Speaker 1: I meant to, you know, really, the Tubman [African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] is my full-time job, so to speak.  And the great thing about being president of the [Macon City] Council, you can kind of set your meetings according to your schedule, and everybody else kind of adapt--I mean, you know.  And a lot of what I do is, you know, we're trying to build a new convention hotel right now.  And so, that requires a lot of meetings with developers and that kind of thing.  And so, I can set that around my museum schedule.  But what, what I do full-time is, you know, educate people about the, the museum.  And I head up all the education programming in terms of not, not just the museum, and the art that's in the museum, but just about African American history in, in general.  And what that entails is, you know, not only putting together the curriculum of what you see and you're getting the stories that are told inside the museum when you visit it, but also putting together curriculums that, you know, your school systems and your colleges can use, that they coincide with what they're trying to do.  If you're an African American women's studies department, and you need a curriculum, I try to put that--help you put that together, and incorporate the museum in that.  If have an interdisciplinary studies department, and I'm trying to work with the colleges and that.  And it's, it's a way that, you know, you can get our young people, whether they are, you know, K [kindergarten] through 12 versus, you know, and your higher education involved in the museum, and using it as a vehicle to get arts, and all those different institutions.  That's what I do on a full, full-time basis.  And then, and I, and, and with the hopes that, as we tell these stories, and as we share these stories with a broad range of people, in the end what we're doing is, is building that understanding and, you know, we talked about earlier.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, do you get any--let's--outside requests, outside of the City of Macon [Georgia] for the museum's services, you know, like do you service other cities--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and counties in Georgia?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, we're all over.  I mean, we're all over Georgia, Alabama.  With a large--we're the largest museum, even in this current facility in the southeast that's for African American art, history, and culture.  So, it's the, you know, and so, we service like all our, you know, a lot of our surrounding states, we go there and do stuff.  A lot of our tours are from out of state.  And our biggest audience, in terms of tours and schools, is Atlanta [Georgia].  You know, we almost have more schools who come to the museum from Atlanta than we do Bibb County [Georgia], you know.  And when I say Atlanta, I use the whole metro, you know, whether you're from, where you, Conyers [Georgia] or wherever, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Alpharetta [Georgia], whatever.  But that whole, that whole area, we service all those, all those different schools.  And so, it's a regional resource, more so than just a local resource.  One of the things that we found is that when you look at Georgia music or Georgia sports, it's real focused.  I mean, you either have to like Georgia music, or you either have to like Georgia sports, and it's real focused.  What this community has done, is they said, whether one thing--the two things that we know that are of most interest to all people of cultural stuff, and so, they're really focused on getting people off the Interstate [75].  And by using the museum and the Indian [Native American] mounds, you know, those two tend to be the two attractors because it has such a wide scope in terms of what it, you know, what it has to offer.
Speaker 2: Now, the Indian mounds are located where--outside the city, or inside the city?
Speaker 1: Inside the city.  It's like a, you know, you turn, you come one way to go into downtown, you take a left, and it takes you to the mounds.  And so, it's, it's in the downtown vicinity--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Very close to downtown.
Speaker 2: So, are there, are there museum-like facilities set up at the Indian mounds to--
Speaker 1: It's a, it's a museum-like facility that, of course, you know, which is the building itself.  But the beautiful part, of course, are the mounds of the lands, and all the different mounds that are out there, even the kind of mounds that you can actually go in, you know, and the streams and the water that's out there, and being able to go to the top of one of the mounds to see the whole city.  And so, it's a, you know, it's a beautiful, it's a beautiful space.
Story_ID: 290367
Speaker 1: What are some of the exhibitions that you might have at the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] now, or because you're building, do you have, you know, are you actively with the exhibitions?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  I mean we have fourteen galleries in the, in the current museum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and we change our exhibits probably, you know, on an average of every three months, so that when you come, you don't always see the same thing.  The exhibit that we have currently is called 'Pictures from Home[: Six African American Studio Photographers in the South, 1900-1950]' and it's a fabulous exhibit.  It is an exhibit of six studio photographers, black studio photographers from the, like the 1950s era, the Harlem era.  And it was curated for us by Ellen Fleurov, who used to be the cur-, curator photographer for the High Museum [of Art, Atlanta, Georgia].  And what Ellen did was she went and got the best photographs all over the country that fit--from these six photographers, and curated it into a show that actually took up probably our entire downstairs.  It was huge.  I mean, it was one that people came from all over to see because they hadn't seen these six photographers in, in, you know, in one setting.  In fact, one of the, you know, a set of the photographs that were being used got caught up in [Hurricane] Katrina because the photographer was up there.  And so, we had to make shift, but I say that to say that, you know, the, the exhibits that we have at the Tubman, you would turn around and see them at the Whitney [Museum of American Art] in New York [New York].  You'll see them at the museum in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean, one, one of our missions is to bring the best that you possibly can in African American art to, to this part of the country.  And so, you know, it's, it's very common for an exhibit to leave us, and maybe go to, you know, one of your New York museums, or vice-versa for us to get.  And, and we consciously do that to make sure that, you know, this region of the country gets to see the best of the best.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the other duties that you might have at, at the museum?  I know you're the director of education, and you've explained what all you do there.  Any other duties that you do, other than what is actually outlined on paper?
Speaker 2: Outlined on paper.  You know, to be honest with you, right now, when you're in the middle of a capital campaign, it's all about, you know, contacts, and it's all about relationships, and that kind of thing.  So, I spend a great deal of time helping raise money for the capital campaign.  We know, we started off with a fifteen million dollar campaign and, and, but we've raised fourteen of the fifteen, and facility is under construction.  But when we got to the last phase of this campaign, and did re-, you know, recosting, and doing the revalue engineering, is what they call how much of the price is steel now, and how much is the price of materials.  Now, that we're about to start this phase, it, coupled with a whole lot of other things, has driven the campaign from a fifteen million dollar campaign to, like a twenty-one, twenty-two million dollar campaign.  And so, we're still in the fundraising stage.  And, and we're such a small institution, staff-wise, that it takes, you know, all of us did--to do what you can do in terms of the capital campaign.  But that, that takes up a lot of my time, time as well.  And then, of course, you know, I like to call it education.  Some of them at the museum call it marketing and PR, and that kind of thing.  But I'm often, you know, the face of the museum in terms of getting out there and seeing, you know, this, this is a resource.  You need to take advantage of, you know, you have it available to you, you know, a lot of people.  If you're a Bibb County [Georgia] student, whether it's college or wherever, free of charge.  I mean, you just can come in and so, you know, take advantage of it for a whole lot, a whole lot of reasons.  And so, you know, your, your job title is one thing, you know, what you do is dependent on what is needed (laughter).
Story_ID: 290368
Speaker 1: Tell us something about how the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] got started?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was founded back in 1981 by a white Catholic priest by the name of Richard Keil who had been, you know, real active in the Civil Rights Movement and other places, like Alabama and Mississippi, and some of your other southern states.  And he became a priest here at one of the Catholic churches.  And as he looked around Macon [Georgia], he saw, you know, while there were, the Museum of Arts and Sciences [Macon, Georgia], and a lot of things going on in Macon, there was no real place to hear or tell the stories of, of African Americans.  And so, he decided--I want to put together this--at that time, he called it a cultural center, and had a hard time getting the support, and the loans to get a building to do so.  And so, you know, he had just, you know, a few willing friends to, to join him in starting the center.  Finally, he found a warehouse that you know, he could afford to just outright buy, and, and, and the funny thing is it's a warehouse where the inventory at one time was guarded by dogs.  I mean, you know, so you had--I mean, it took a lot to get it up to what it needed to be.  He purchased it, you know, had a vision to get it to a place that was even, you know, made for people--it took from '81 [1981] to almost '85 [1985] for them to turn it into the--even the center that they wanted.  And, you know, you've gone from there, from, you know, three to five thousand visitors to sixty-five thousand visitors and, you know, a thirty thousand dollar budget to a $1.5 million budget.  And so, you know, his vision is alive and well; and and, and he's the kind of leader that he founded the museum, knew it wasn't his expertise, and say, you know, this is something that I just wanted, you know--no ownership in it, no whatever, and turned it over to the, you know, the people.  And it's governed by a board and, you know, and the staff of the museum.  He has no--other than being an active participant in the programs that come, and come in to visit us, and bringing us little notes and candies, and all that kind of stuff.  That's all he does.  You know, he knew, you know, for it to grow, he needed to let it go.  And then--and he did.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you say one of his current projects is, and how that he has the African American museum up and running?
Speaker 2: Right, right now, he's been working real close with the Hispanic community.  The Hispanic community is just like it is all over the country--has really, the population is really growing in, in Macon and Bibb County [Georgia].   And as a result of the, you know, the ability--the lack of ability to communicate, you know, the focus, Spanish speaking, and that kind of thing, he sees where there's a real need to, to make sure that they're not taking advantage of, and that kind of thing.  And so, he's formed a group that he's really turned over to the Hispanic community, but just helped them get it started where, you know they have resources to--you know, all the kinds of things that helped them make sure that, you know, they're not getting taking advantage of in their housing, and language barriers, and making sure they can get to school, and that they're needing that, that kind of thing.  And so, that's kind of been one of his focuses now.
Story_ID: 290369
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories that you would like to share with us, or anything that I might have missed that you would like to share?
Speaker 2: I think (laughter), I think you've done a great job of covering, just covering everything.  I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we're going--these are some last items that I, we would just like to cover--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as it relates to your legacy.  Is there anything that I should not--should have asked that might not, you know, that I didn't ask?  All right.
Speaker 2: I don't think you covered?
Speaker 1: All right.  Why did you want to tell your story?
Speaker 2: You know, I think that it's important.  And, and we even do this to a small degree at, at the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia], is to, to capture the oral history of people before they, you know, before they leave this world because that, that is part of history.  And, you know, I, I find personally, and we find it at the museum, personally, that, you know, people so often, you know, take for granted the story that say Ozzie B. McKay had when she was part of the Civil Rights Movement in Macon [Georgia].  And then when she passed away, everybody trying to figure out, okay, was this part true or is this part true?  It's just, and, and, and, to me, what your organization is doing is allowing people to take first-hand, this is what it is, and this is what it was.  And that's what was going on during this period in my life anyway, and you kind of have an idea what's going on, you know, throughout the rest of the community.  And so, I think that preservation of history is, you know, what I'm in the business of at the museum anyway and so, you know, I think, I think it's extremely important.
Story_ID: 290370
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life, and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I feel good about it, I do.  I mean, and, and I'm where I think I should be right now in my mind anyway.  Yeah, you know, I think life is all, you know, once you put everything in perspective, you know, some people put it on the wrong stuff--money, material stuff, and all that kind of stuff.  For me, it's peace of mind.  And the peacefulness comes from knowing that you're trying to make a difference, and that you're in the right place doing it.  And you know, doing what you want to do, and you're happy doing it, and everything else will fall in place.  I'm at that point in my life where I have that peace of mind and, you know, and I truly feel that, you know, it takes all of us to make a true difference, you know, when I say, all of us, I'm talking about all my colleagues on, you know, this, this, community.  But, you know, I feel comfortable that I'm doing my part.
Story_ID: 290371
Speaker 1: Now, for those going into your field, law, politics, you know, and the like, what suggestions would you have for them?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, my biggest suggestion--I think, a lot of my personal success has been following my heart, and doing what it is that, you know, I want to do, and don't be motivated by outside forces--be motivated by your heart.  Let your heart carry you in terms of what it is you want to do in life.  There are a lot of things out there that sounds good, you know, the titles sound good, being a lawyer, being a doctor, but is there where your heart is?  And if it is, if you follow that, I think that's where you're going to find, you know, find true happiness.  And then once you've marked that this is what I want to do, then, you know, do a little research and do whatever and say, this is what it takes to get to this point, you know, figure out what it is.  And these are the steps that I need to take to get there, whether, you know, it's focusing my education in this area versus that area--making sure I surround myself with people who can help me in that particular field, being exposed to people in that arena, you know, you have to, you have to take some control of your destiny as well.  And, and once you decide what you want to do, you know, be part of controlling your destiny.
Story_ID: 290372
Speaker 1: What are your concerns, or what are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Probably one of my biggest hopes is for us to, you know, get to a point where we appreciate all that we've accomplished, you know, and, and when I say that, I'm talking as, as a people that, that we realize that oh man, you know--let's just look at the history of, of black people, African American people.  Who else could have endured this, and still turn around and be, you know, the, the secretary of state, you know?  And who else could have endured this and, and still, you know, be, you know, all these--astronaut that's gone to, you know, and all these different, different accomplishments?  And, and, you know, and take pride in that, you know, take, take pride in, in our history and, and use that as a motivation, to always try to exceed and excel and, you know, that kind of thing 'cause it, it took, it took a lot to get here (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and be appreciative of that.
Story_ID: 290373
Speaker 1: And how do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I mean, I don't know.  I, I, you know, (laughter), you know, I have no idea.  I, I think that when it's all said and done, if you look back and say, you know, that she tried, that she, you know, really cared, not in an office, just to be in an office, but she really cared about what she was doing, whether it was, you know, my position at the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia], whether it's me as a person, or this position here that, that is somebody who, whose heart was in the right place, you know.  And, you know, and to me, as long as you feel like my heart is in the right place, everything, you know, everything else is, is okay.
Story_ID: 290374
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, my legacy is two-fold, and one falls in the other.  I want my legacy--one, to be is that, you know, five years from now, you'll say, where is one of the top three African American museums in the country?  And they're going to say, Macon, Georgia, and knowing that you're a part, you know, you've been a part of making that happened.  And then, secondly, I want you to look back and say that during whatever period of time she had a chance of being a part of the administrations who were in leadership that, you know, we saw, you know, this neighborhood transformed.  We saw this downtown.  You could really visually see that something was left behind that'll be here fifty years from now.  You know, those two accomplishments kind of work hand in hand because the museum [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] is within the, in the city, but if we can say that, you know, you have the kind of legacies that are here, you know, long, long after Anita [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder] has gone, then, yeah, that's what I want my legacy to be.
Story_ID: 290375
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not quite sure of the year, but sometime in the '70s [1970s], and it was a picture of a local baseball team, softball team.  And I was one of the first blacks to actually play on the team.  You know, you have two folk who later on who became just really, really good friends for that team which is Mary Hart Humble [ph.], which is right there in the center and proud.  Her mom is the only other person that has a copy of this picture that's still in existence.  Everybody else threw theirs away.  And then, on the far, on the far end, who seems like she's not even paying attention to what's going on, is Laurie Altman [ph.] who also became a good friend of mine.  But this is like, a local softball league in one of my debuts as a tennis player--I mean, as a softball player.
Speaker 2: Okay, and she--and Laurie is to your left on the photo--to our right as we face it?
Speaker 1: It--that's correct, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then Citizens Bank is, is a--the team and the bank is still there today.  I mean, so that's always been the little local bank.  And that local bank is one of the few local banks that are still in existence, so, you know, most banks have merged in this day and time, but that bank is still there.
Speaker 2: And it's still sponsoring softball teams?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's still sponsoring all kinds of things, yeah.  Wow, that's--
Speaker 2: And this one?
Speaker 1: Well, this is, you know, Olan Mills [Portrait Studios] always came in, and took little school pictures.  And this had to have been sometimes, probably like ninth, you know, ninth or tenth grade [at Peach County High School, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And, of course, my mother [Margie Jenkins Ponder] looked forward to the picture-taking time, so that she could buy every one that they had, whether you like them or not.  And so (laughter), that was, you know, that was one of the school pictures.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Olan Mills, I believe, is headquartered out of Dallas, Texas, isn't it?  I, I know they have a big operation.
Speaker 1: In Dallas, okay, okay [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they do, so they maybe, and they may not be.
Speaker 1: Let me see that picture real quick.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Did we get that one?  Now, this is a newspaper clipping?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And would you tell us what's going on in this one?
Speaker 1: Well, one of the things I did in high school was I played tennis.  And Macon Telegraph [The Telegraph], which is one of our regional papers, would always name an All-Middle Georgia team.  And that's featuring the Peach County [High School, Fort Valley, Georgia] players who made it to Middle Georgia, the All-Middle Georgia team.  They usually select them from about, oh, anywhere from 11 to 13 different counties.  They put together their All-Georgia team, and the three of us from Peach County [Georgia] made that team.
Speaker 2: All right, and you are--I know it's very obvious, but tell us where you are in that one.
Speaker 1: I am, I am the first person to my left, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And Macon Telegraph was here today, and they're going to feature The HistoryMakers interview.
Speaker 1: View-, absolutely.
Speaker 2: So, starting from left to right, tell us who is in this photo.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a family photograph.  And actually, it's taken by Isaac Smith [ph.], who is a local photographer in, in Fort Valley [Georgia].  And, ironically, Isaac Smith is the son of my babysitter during the time Ms. Smith, who lived on Emory Street, when I was growing up.  But, nevertheless, and starting on the left, and in red, is my sister, Keisha, which is Keisha Ponder-Green now.  And then, in the white is my sister Celeste, Celeste Ponder.  In the middle is my mom, Margie [Jenkins] Ponder, my dad, Clifford Ponder, and then, of course, in the black and white, you will find me with the corsage.  And if I--I can't remember what the occasion was.  I think I was the Women's Day speaker at that time.  And that's the reason for the big corsage that's on there is because I was, I was the speaker for that occasion.
Speaker 2: And was this at your church in Fort Valley?
Speaker 1: This is the, yeah--I think this was at, at my church--yeah, I came back.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of the church?
Speaker 1: Trinity Baptist Church [Fort Valley, Georgia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And you can go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this one?
Speaker 2: Well, this is, obviously, an earlier picture.  This is my mom and dad.  And then, of course, me sitting on their lap and, you know, I don't even think I was a year old yet in that photograph.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was early--
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: --late, this is early '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: --early '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: --the early, early '60s [1960s], '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is around '61 [1961], '62 [1962], yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this photo, tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: My mom periodically makes us go to one of those portrait places, you know, to take pictures.  And this is the single picture out of a family picture that we did.  We actually did a family picture, but for some reason, she wanted me to take a single picture.  And here's one where I'm just sitting in the middle of the studio.  And, of course, you can tell by my legs that, you know, I've been playing a lot of ball, and not always staying on my feet obviously, using my knees as well.  But and, of course, another one of my mom's pleasures is going out and finding little outfits.  And I'm sure she was proud of that one (laughter).
Speaker 1: At approximately, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: Six, seven?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably about seven.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is a newspaper clipping, and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Well, the title is a play on words.  It's called "A Woman of Many Hats" because one of the things that I'm known for, really, all over Georgia, is my array of hats.  You know, I wear a lot of a lot of hats.  And so, they've taken a play off the fact that I wear a lot of hats, and that I am at the museum, and with the city, and collect cars, and play the bass, and, you know, the whole, the whole array of things that I do.  But, particularly, this is a Macon Telegraph article that's focusing on the idea that I may run for mayor of Macon [Georgia] in the next election.  And so, they used the, you know, for the photograph, they used the car, as well as a, you know, a photograph with a hat, and so forth to depict all that.
Speaker 1: Now, which car is this one that, that they have here on this photo?
Speaker 2: This is a 1966 convertible red [Ford] Mustang.  And, you know, ironically, this photo shoot--it happened like a year or two ago, is, as a result, they had these photos in their archives.  And when this Mustang was stolen a couple of weeks ago, they were able to run the photos of the car because I had it in the archives from this particular photo shoot for this newspaper article that I had done some years ago.
Speaker 1: All right, so this was in 2005 when it was stolen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, this was in 2005 when this picture was taken.  It was stolen two weeks ago in '06 [2006].
Speaker 1: In '06 [2006]?
Speaker 2: No--yeah, it was just stolen.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was recently stolen--
Speaker 2: It was stolen on Christmas Day--December 25th, 2005 was when it was stolen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But then, to run photographs of the car they were looking for, they already had in their archives because of this photo shoot.
Speaker 1: And you have several other cars that you collect?
Speaker 2: I do.  I have five, I have '64 [1964] and a half Dodge (laughter), slant nose, you know, I like to always say that, '56 [1956] Ford Fairlane, a '76 [1976] Stingray [Chevrolet Corvette Stingray], and a '88 [1988] convertible Jag [Jaguar], and then, of course, the Mustang.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you also do an antique show on the cars that you arrange?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, organize antique car shows, you know, you know, people who have antique cars know other people with antique cars.  And all people love to look at them.  And so, twice a year, I put together antique car show where it features classic cars from, you know, [Ford] Model Ts, all the way, you know, all, all the classics.  It, it reaches a wide range--muscle cars, trucks, you know, the whole, the whole spectrum.
Speaker 1: So, the caption is right, "A Woman of Many, Many Hats."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I like this one.  Tell us about this one, and what building this is--
Speaker 2: Well, as, as you know--
Speaker 1: Approximately when was maybe taken?
Speaker 2: --well, as you know, I'm with the, the Tubman Museum [Tubman African American Museum, Macon, Georgia].  And one of the, the big parts of my life for many years now has been, or trying to be a part, of building a new Tubman Museum.  And so, right now, the museum is under construction on, in downtown Macon.  And this is myself and Carey Pickard, who was the director at the time, as well as the project manager, in the back taking us up in the bucket to show us some things that's going on with the steel and the roof.  They were about to--they're trying to build the base to put the copper dome on.  And there were some questions about some of the bolting, or something that, something that happened and I don't know what they expected us to say 'cause we had no idea what we were looking at.  But we went up in the bucket anyway to see (laughter).
Speaker 1: And they gave you another hat.  They gave you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They gave me a hard hat now, (laughter), absolutely.
Story_ID: 290376
Speaker 1: Now, this is the history of the museum's [Tubman African American Museum; Tubman Museum, Macon, Georgia] housing or houses.  Could you just tell us a little bit about these two photos?
Speaker 2: Well, the top building is the--where the current facility is actually located.  And this depicts what it looks like when the founder, Richard Keil, actually purchased the building.  Of course, it was a warehouse at the time.  And that building now has turned into the southeast largest African American museum devoted to African American art, history, and culture.  So, it no longer looks like that, but that's, you know, that's what we started off with.  And then, we take you to the bottom photograph.  That's what you will see, if you were to drive downtown Macon [Georgia] now.  The new Tubman Museum is under construction, and the exterior of the building is totally finished.  And so, you see there, a building that is of Edo, Edo color from Africa with a, a copper headrest, a copper dome that's in the shape of an African headrest.
Speaker 1: Now, here's another article from the, or one of the papers on the Macon Telegraph [The Telegraph], one of the front pages.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: We're talk about it?
Speaker 2: We're ready to talk about this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a newspaper article after, the day after the Feast for All.  Anita Ponder and Friends Feast for All is something that we do every Christmas Day that actually feeds--and I don't want to say homeless people.  It's homeless people, hungry people, lonely people.  I mean, all kinds of people coming--have dinner with us.  It's a huge production that started with, you know, my sisters [Keisha Ponder-Green and Celeste Ponder] and I.  We put extra meals in a [Ford] Bronco nine years ago.  We would load up the Bronco, and my mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder] would cook some extra food.  And we started off delivering about thirty plates, you know, around Fort Valley [Georgia], to, you know, needy people.  And that started with thirty meals.  The next year, we did probably about fifty.  Then we moved to a senior citizen home, and did about a hundred.  Last year, in '05 [2005], we fed thirteen hundred people.  And it's grown from, not just a food program, but you can go, and we have two trees that have Santa Clauses giving out toys.  We have an area where the local cell phone companies let us have cell phones where people can call their family members free of charge, you know, who like, otherwise, wouldn't be able to do so.  So, it's grown to--we usually have about this, this last go-around, we had 203 volunteers to come out and help with it.  So, you know, it's become a real community event that, you know, I can just sit back and enjoy and, you know, everybody else kind of runs it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, is this still in Fort Valley, or is it Macon [Georgia] also?
Speaker 1: It, it's in Macon.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, you know, it, it started off with just my sisters and I.  Like I said--
Speaker 2: Is it--
Speaker 1: --going around delivering meals in Fort Valley.  But then, when I moved to Macon, I said, we said, okay, well, you know, let's, let's do it here in Macon.  And it's grown into what it is now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Let me see which magazine this is.  Do you know?
Speaker 2: What is it?  Is it a Macon magazine?
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.  And you know the year--this one is in 1995.  All right.  Now this is a magazine article, so will you tell us a little bit about this article, and what it's feature in, and approximately in the year 1995 is what it was dated.
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's called a Macon magazine.  And Macon magazine is a magazine that, you know, covers Macon and Central Georgia.  And in this particular issue, they did a profile on, on me that basically what, I guess, telling what I was doing in the community at that time.  This was back in '95 [1995].  And I'm sure it talked a, a lot about the museum and the judgeship and, and that kind of thing.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this is another--I was (unclear) going to ask you.  Let's see, wait a minutes.  This is 1999 Macon.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is Macon magazine again, so would you tell us about this article?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a Macon magazine article that was written in 1999.  And that photograph is taken at the museum next to one of the African artifacts at the museum, as well as some of the African artifacts in that background.  And by this time, I was not only at the museum, but I was on [Macon] City Council as, as well.  And the, the article primarily focuses on women who have had an impact on revitalizing downtown and trying to bring that people back downtown, and bringing life back down-, downtown.  Is that the McCant's [ph.] girls down at the bottom?  Oh, go on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering the same.  Wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Let's see.
Speaker 1: Is that them?  Do you want to see up close?
Speaker 2: No, go on, go on.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Go on (laughter).
Speaker 1: Leave it up there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this one, another news clipping, and tell us a little bit about this one.
Speaker 2: Well, this, again, is the softball team.  The Citizen Bank's team that I, I played on when I was younger. And this is showing that we won the championship.  And to the bottom of it, and you see me in the top picture.  But to the bottom, you'll see Keith [McCant (ph.)] and Kim McCant [ph.] who were the--other two girls did actually had to watch out for--I mean, they could really--both of them, really, really play softball.  And so, between myself and Keith and Kim, usually, you know, if you had to pull names of who was on your team, that's, that's who you wanted.  And they could, those girls were good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Are they twins or they're just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're twins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 290377
Speaker 1: What year do you think this was?  This is you and your daddy [Clifford Ponder] even though his head is cut off, but would you tell us a little bit about this one?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I can't really predict the year, but I had to probably be what, about four or five, maybe five--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, it looks to be like one of the many little Easter programs or something that, that my parents would dress me up for, you know.  I would, I always have to do, you know, like the Easter speech and the Easter cantata, and all the different Easter stuff around town, and this is one of them.  And, then, of course, we're in that blue living room that reflects those Sigma's [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] and Zeta's [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority], the two of them, and you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, here's another one.  That's, that's one of you by yourself, but which house was this one at 'cause there are blue curtains again.  It's like, it's the same room?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was this on the Ponde-, the Ponderosa with this--
Speaker 2: This is, yeah, this is the one on Wood Street in Ponderosa [Fort Valley, Georgia].  And that's the, the living room and looking at that ribbon thing, you know, often times, I was in, like the little debutante things, and the little Miss, the little Miss Red and White, and the Little Miss whatever, and all this, and so, this is one of those.  This is afterwards, or even before--probably afterwards since I got the ribbon already where we have to go back to the living room and take the, take the photographs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is in your, what, mid-'90s [1990s].  And I'm in Savannah [Georgia], right by the riverfront playing with one of the horses, like I always do.  You know, I love horses.  And so, not only am I playing with them, I guess I decided to take a pose there (laughter), take a photograph.  But that's in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you horseback ride?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I own two horses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did that come from being on the farm with--
Speaker 2: I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they have horses on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And they're seven more?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We got seven minutes.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's go through that one, right quick, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have a Sister City relationship, we have a Sister City relationship here in Macon [Georgia].  And those are the [Macon City] Council members, and the mayor from [Kurobe] Japan, which is our Sister City.  We also have a Sister City relationship with Elmina [Ghana] Africa.  And the middle person is one of the--the mayor from Elmina.  And the person next to him is Janice Marshall [ph.], who's the head of our Convention and Visitors Bureau [Macon-Bibb County Convention and Visitors Bureau].  This is the--to my right is the widow of Otis Redding, Zelma [Atwood] Redding.  And we unveiled a bronze statue of Otis down by the river, you know, reflecting 'Dock of the Bay' ['(Sittin' on) The Dock of the Bay'].  And this is me presenting the plaque that went with the bronze statue.  Every year, the Tubman Museum [Tubman African American Museum, Macon, Georgia] presents a Sheila Award to an African American woman of achievement.  And one of the first recipients, actually the first recipient of such award, many, many years ago was Johnnetta [B.] Cole, and this is Johnnetta and I.
Speaker 2: Did you get that one?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: One of my close friends and mentors is [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Joseph Lowery.  And he usually comes down and support just all different kinds of things that I do here in Macon.  And so, that's Dr. Lowery and I at one of our many events and outings.  We did, like a Hawks exhibition, Atlanta Hawks exhibition game, here in Macon.  And this is Dominique Wilkins and I, I, after the game.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Is Dr. Lowery from Macon?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Dr. Lowery.
Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Lowery, unh-uh.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a magazine called Me magazine for women.  And they did a feature on the First Ladies of Middle Georgia, the ladies who were first in a lot of things.  And this top picture is the cover where Lena Horne who has ties to, to Macon and Fort Valley, Georgia, is featured.  And then, at the bottom, is the feature on me, as city council president and my assistant director at the Tubman Museum.  And it's a picture of me in front of my 1966 [Ford] Mustang.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm down, yeah.  Tell us about this one, like what magazine this is, and what the article is about.
Speaker 1: Well, this is actually January 2006.  So, this is a recent newspaper called The 11th Hour.  And this has a huge circulation, actually around Georgia, and this is a cover photo that, that inside, it features a chat with myself and Mayor Ellis [C. Jack Ellis].  And it talks about our vision for the next year for the City of Macon.  And then, of course, it, it talks about the possibility of my running for mayor in 2007.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: It says the chat with Steven Horn [ph.] also.  Is he related to Lena in any way?
Speaker 2: No, he's a white, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: And I have to say--can I start talking?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 1: I have to say that this is mom [Margie Jenkins Ponder], momma's favorite.  She wanted to make sure this one was included.  But this is of me on the bench in Fort Valley where I served as judge, and this is back in 1994.  And this is, of course, myself talking to one of the police officers who's come up to the bench for some reason or another.  But the title to changing of the guard reflects the fact that, you know, we've had the same judge on that bench forever in Fort Valley.  And it's kind of a changing of the leadership in the judicial system and in that area, and then it also talks about some of the, the other things that I do, in, in addition to serving as judge.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: To this side, if we could.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now you talk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is me in, like the den of my parents' house with my dog, it, my Shep-, my Shepa at the time that I had.  That's, this is the dog that I had with me in Houston [Texas] and, and brought back to Middle Georgia with me.  And, of course, I'm dressed 'cause I just came from a speaking engagement on Fort Valley State College--University's [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is an early photograph at, at Tubman Museum, probably two or three years after I started.  I started there, and that's one of the paintings that was, you know, that was being shown at that time.
Speaker 1: One more?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That's one of the, this, this is one of those pictures where you can't tell me nothing.  Anyway, (laughter), yeah, I, obviously, I think I'm something, 'cause I, of course, here's my--I am adorned, the Afro puff, the Afro puff hairdo.  And then, of course, in my baseball style, so the fact that I'm flexing that bat, like that must mean I had a real good day at the game (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We'll take one more.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you're really smiling there.
Speaker 2: Ain't no reason I'm out there holding the bat like if I lost.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You are ahead and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your team is ahead and you're up at bat.
Speaker 2: Or somethin', yeah.
