Story_ID: 324594
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Jeannie Dorsey [Jeannie Dorsey-Pates].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates, H-A-R-O-L-D, P-A-T-E-S.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name or?
Speaker 2: No, not so fortunate.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 31, 1931, down in Macon, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said Macon, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Hey Jeannie, won't need the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] file.  All you've got to do is go to The HistoryMakers, they've got all the--go ahead (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  What is Macon near?
Speaker 2: Where is Macon?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's it near?
Speaker 2: Macon is in the northeast corner of Mississippi, it's about sixty miles [sic.] south of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's about a hundred miles or so, about a hundred miles, I think Clarksdale [Mississippi] is a little more southern, 'cause I spent time in Clarksdale, also in Memphis.  So Macon is here, Memphis is here, Clarksdale's here.
Speaker 1: Okay, now sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, retired--
Speaker 2: I was the president of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So you're a retired educator, basically?
Speaker 2: A retired educator, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: December 12, 19--no, December 12, 2005 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my house in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 324595
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they make us ask everybody as a warm-up.  But we're already warmed up, but I still have to ask them.  The first one is--and they just require a short answer.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potato pie, I guess, just respond to this stuff.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?  Black.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Palm Springs, California.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it comes from the ancestors, ain't nobody right but God.
Story_ID: 324596
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history, I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Squire Pates] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Amanda Pates [Amanda Beasley Pates].
Speaker 1: What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Amanda Beasley.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: A-M-A-N-D-A, P-A-T-E-S, and the maiden name was B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure about the place, I think it was around Noxubee County in Mississippi, I think she was born 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay, Noxubee, is that K-N-O-X?
Speaker 2: That's N-O-X-U-B-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them and--?
Speaker 2: I know essentially what she told me, it all depends in what area we want to have the discussion.  I think you'd have to kind of give me some direction with respect to where you would want me to go with that.
Speaker 1: Well did the things that she told you, do they go all the way back to slavery before, how far back can they, can she talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not my mother's side of the family, because she would not discuss that, as a matter of fact I think back in the 1970s I was doing a project in genealogy.  And she was very private about her side of the family; she told me, as a matter of fact, she didn't want me to get into that.  So most of the documented information regarding her side of the family that may have gone back into slavery I could not get to.  She did, however, tell me that my grandmother's father married a black African woman.  And that was pretty much where she left it.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what did--what was he then, if she was black African, was he, was she, that means that she was just come over from the continent, is that what that meant?
Speaker 2: Well, that's all she would say to me, I'm assuming that she was probably a product of having been enslaved.  And they, when we talk about marriage, in as much as we don't, on that side of the family I could not find no certification.  And I've never seen any certification, when we use the term marriage, I don't know exa- I don't know whether we're talking about having fathered children.  Because the family at that time would speak of fathers and mothers and you would assume that they were married.  Particularly in Mississippi a lot of times you'd find a conversation being somewhat like, "They stayed together for thirty years."  Or, "They stayed together for fifty years," but you would seldom hear that they were married and stayed together.  But you would hear, they stayed together for so many years.
Story_ID: 324597
Speaker 1: The background of my family has been pretty much in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  But I'm not too sure that, I'm not too sure that anyone ever produced, even for my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] or for my grandmother, any records of a baptism or anything like that.  So when--and a lot of times back in those days, I can remember even when I was a little boy, many of the preachers, many of the preachers could neither read nor write.  Although they considered themselves having been divinely called to preach the gospel, but my grandmother attended an A.M.E. church, a Methodist church.  And I think that's pretty much how I have to respond to that.  Because what we call marriage today, which has the certified documentation, even when you get into Catholic parishes in the South.  And you get into--I mean especially when you get into Catholic parishes, you have records of where the Catholic church may have kept records of baptisms and marriages.  Because you had a much stronger missionary, systemic missionary process, but when it came to itinerant preachers, who were very prominent in the South at the time.  Particularly my grandmother and my, they would come to her church and preach and move on to somewhere else.  Or come to somewhere else and preach and move to somewhere else, and they would say that, "Well, I'm an A.M.E. preacher," or something of that sort.
Speaker 2: Like it's a C.C. Rider, circuit country preacher, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.  So those are kinds of conversations that I heard relative to my mom, and like I say she was very private about the details of her family background.  I know that there was some white person up in there somewhere, because if you look at the complexion of my mother and my mother's sister, and my mother's sisters.  There were three of them, my mother, her sister--and her two sisters; all of them were extremely light complexioned people.  So there had to be some white man up in there somewhere, and certainly no white woman, because you know that kind of association was premature death, yeah, particularly in the South.
Story_ID: 324598
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's [Amanda Beasley Pates] side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side?  Oh yes, like I said, my grandmother, I was born by a midwife, and I lived with my grandmother for a short period of time, I guess about two or three years.  And then I came to Chicago [Illinois], and then I would go back.  My mother and father [Squire Pates] would send me back down south, so I would make that yearly trip back and forth down south.  Especially from the years of about six to twelve, the last trip I made when I was twelve years old, and I had almost an experience like Emmett Till.  And my grandmother said, "You can't come back anymore," and I guess we'll talk about that some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we'll get to it--
Speaker 2: In the period of chronology.
Speaker 1: But so, did your grandparents talk about growing up down there in--
Speaker 2: Growing up down south?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, my father, he wouldn't talk about growing up but he would also talk about how things were in the South.  And my mother was not--see my mother, somehow or another, when my mother graduated from the Bolivar County Training School [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] with my father, she wound up teaching at Okolona [Mississippi].  And also, she taught also at Tuskegee [Alabama], so somehow I think back in those days lightness of complexion was a vehicle through which many black people experienced convenience, particularly in the South.  Because southern white folks related to light skinned African Americans in a different way than they related to black African Americans.  And I think my mother was able to move--and also African women.  I think there was a greater license with respect to how conveniently they can move and socialize in the house of white people.  Because remember African American women took care of the children, washed the clothes, did everything in the household.  So then naturally they had free fluid movement in white folks' houses.  I can remember one of my extended family relatives; they would come and sit on the porch when I was a little boy.  And they would talk about--she worked for the white people and they paid her two and a half [dollars] a week.  She washed, she ironed, she took care of the children and she cleaned the house.  And she got two dollars, she got a half a dollar, no, yeah, she got two dollars and fifty cents a week for six days of work.  And the big argument on the front porch was always, "That woman did not wanna give me my two and a half, that woman did not wanna give me my two and a half."  We used to call her Sister Babe [ph.].  And Sister Babe would come sit on the porch and she would be fussing.  And my grandmother would say, "Why don't you quit up in there?"  She said, "Well where am I going?  When she finally decides to give me my two and a half, I need it, where am I going?"  Well Sister Babe subsequently, long time, came to Chicago, and I don't know where she went from there.  I think she started working in a laundry, but that was way up, I was a grown man then when I finally saw her in Chicago.  She was a young woman too, that's something important, because she was hardly, she was like a teenager who was being used by the white people to do everything.  And she stayed there until her early, I think probably her late twenties or early thirties, and then I think she came, I remember she came to Chicago.  Because I remember having seen her when I got older you know.  So that's one of the comments, or story kind of, that's one of the stories I remember from having sat on the porch.
Story_ID: 324599
Speaker 1: There's another thing about the conditions of the South when I was a little boy.  Now I'm talking about when I was about seven years old, because we were, me and my three cousins, my three cousins lived in Clarksdale [Mississippi].  I mean my two cousins lived in Clarksdale, me and my brother [Henry Pates] and my two cousins.  My two cousins would come from Clarksdale to Macon [Mississippi] to be with my [maternal] grandmother, and me and my brother would come from Chicago [Illinois] to Macon.  And incidentally we would go on the train and my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] would put a, she would write a note.  The Pullman porters would read the note, we'd be on the train, they would read the note, and they would transport us.  We would go to Memphis [Tennessee] and then we'd get on a Trailways [Trailways National Bus System] bus, and we would ride to Macon, where my grandmother would pick us up.  Or sometimes they would have a train that would come to Macon, and my grandmother would pick us up.  Usually be on some flat wagon with a couple of mules you know, and she would pick us up.  When we'd get to Cairo, Illinois, that's when you had to get off the train and get on the all-black coach, and I can remember as little boys, we'd be kind of scared.  'Cause that all black coach, see, contained all black people who were either going back to Mississippi, and they would have, they would eating there.  And everybody had lunches that had been prepared because remember now, even though they had lunch coaches and dining coaches on the train, where black people served, black people did the cooking.  Black people were not the conductors, but they were the porters.  They, we would be a little bit afraid because the black coach would turn into a real party, many of those going back into Mississippi, a lot of people who could not read, could not write.  Ex-sharecroppers, and they would always have whiskey because Mississippi was a dry state, and they would be drinking it or taking it back to their relatives.  And sometimes it was not unusual for someone to be sitting in the all-black coach and vomit right on the floor.  I can remember, I can remember when we were in the train going from here to Cairo, the seats were green and velvety.  And they could, you could let them back, you know, and that sort of thing, but when you got on the all-black coach, they were made of a kind of a straw, kind of a woven straw.  And sometimes I can remember we would, my brother and I would have to sit right on the same seat because they were not individuated seats.  And the floor had asphalt on it, so that, I guess you could just come with a hose and hose it down, there was no carpeting on the all-black coach floor.  Those are things that I remember from my childhood, and I'm talking about, that's when I was like about seven.  And of course when 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, my brother and I, we would go back because my father [Squire Pates] would say, "You can't stay in the city during the summertime.  You have to go back to your grandmother's house," which we would do.
Story_ID: 324600
Speaker 1: What was the reason for that do you think, I mean, you hear it all the time, people go back south, they send their kids back south for the summer.  Was there a reason why they did this?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, well our people were afraid of the city, most black people were afraid that the boys would get caught up into city life.  Because what they would find is the countrymen who would come to Chicago [Illinois], when they got to Chicago, they thought that there was a different style of life that they had to live.  And they started doing the various things that the churches would preach against, sinning, wine, women and song.  But it wasn't really wine, women, and song, it was whiskey, and what they call loose women, 'cause most of the people that I--and gambling, see?  So as a matter of fact, my aunt had a husband who never worked.  And they would gamble in his house, he lived on 43rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], I never shall forget that, my dad [Squire Pates] used to say, "I don't want the boy to go over there."  And I used to wonder why he didn't want me to go; well he didn't want me to go because both of them are dead now.  Mr. Jenkins [ph.] was my aunt's husband's name, they lived on the second floor, I don't remember the address, but I can see the building right now.  And because I had gone in there a number of times, they would be gambling in the house and drinking, and naturally cursing.  And any, my father, and my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] and father, my father came, my mother was down south, my father came here, then my father sent for my mother.  And then we got together as a family.  And of course, our father anticipating that there was a kind of, what they call, my father used to as sporting life.  The black community had a sporting life, and that sporting life was the thing that you would see a lot of country black men come to Chicago to enjoy.  And that's when the music was hot and the dancing was hot, and you know there was just a lot of (laughter) fun.  A lot of what they call sinful fun, where they would have a lot of fun during the week, and shout in church all day on Wednesday night.  'Cause you had Bible study on Wednesday, and Sunday, they'd be in church all day.  Eating and preaching and so forth you know.  So and that's one of the reasons I think that especially if you had boys.  You wanted the boys to go back down south where they would be out of trouble, but you had to know the laws of the South.  And that's something we'll talk about in a while.
Story_ID: 324601
Speaker 1: I want to get back to your mother's [Amanda Beasley Pates] story, so your mother went, she grew up in Macon [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: I would say in Noxubee County [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Noxubee County. And then she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah because somehow she, but you see she must've gone to school in Mound Bayou [Mississippi], which was Hinds County [sic. Bolivar County, Mississippi], because she graduated from the school where my father [Squire Pates] was.  Which was in Hinds County, which was Bolivar County Training School [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, so Bolivar Country Training School was near Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: Was in Mound Bayou yeah, and Mound Bayou is in Hinds County.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that, was that like a boarding school?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't a boarding school, well not to my knowledge, because I never heard my father talk about a boarding school.  And I would imagine at that time they would not let men and women board in the same school.
Speaker 1: I was thinking it may have been like Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi], I mean you know where you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like the Piney Woods?
Speaker 1: Separated.
Speaker 2: Separate facilities?
Speaker 1: Separate facilities, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they never talked about a boarding school experience.
Speaker 1: Okay all right so--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact they talked about, he was a part-time worker in a drugstore.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your mother went to school at Bolivar County, did she have relatives in Mound Bayou, or anybody to stay with I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I might be wrong about that, see my mother married my father, I think my father had relatives in Mound Bayou.  My mother's relatives were in Noxubee County.  And also in Memphis [Tennessee], Horn Lake, Horn Lake, Tennessee [sic. Horn Lake, Mississippi], Horn Lake, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: H-O-R-N, L-A-K-E, Horn Lake, right.  That was where one of my aunts had a farm.
Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about your mother's personality, what was she like and what did she like to do?
Speaker 2: My mother was the sweetest woman, I mean, that a little boy could have as a mother.  My impression of my mother was--it's in having in the relationship as they had as man and wife.  My, they were so compatible, I never heard them argue, never heard them fuss, there, the language, the roles was so clear that my mother took care of the house and my father worked.  My mother was also a seamstress, my mother was one of--from the reputation that she had, was one of the finest seamstresses most people knew.  And she taught a lot of people how to sew, but the interesting thing about my mother was that she would always, it seems to me even during these times, undercharge for her work.  People would buy material and they would ask my mother, "Well, Amanda, what do you charge?"  She said, "Oh give me a dollar and a half."  (Laughter) And I used to, as a matter of fact, I can remember one of her friends, her name was Minnie Mosley.  And I can remember she made a dress for her for fifty cents, and that kind of tickles me a little bit when I reflect back on it.  Because Minnie Mosley was one her very dearest friends.  My mother could really sew, and she taught my sister [Patricia Pates Eaton] how to sew, my mother could sew without patterns and with patterns.  And as a matter of fact when I was a young boy, my mother was left-handed, and the scissors for cutting were geared toward the right-handed person.  My mother would walk, she would spread her sewing on the dining room table, and she would ask me to cut the sewing out around the table.  Because she would walk around the table the wrong way, so I would cut out the patterns.  And I do think as a matter of fact she even tried to teach me how to sew, something that I should've learned.  But you know, naturally, and those were like on rainy days because I wouldn't stay in the house, but I would cut out the patterns.  She was also an excellent cook, and all of those things that you could imagine when she was healthy.  All of those things that you could imagine that a soft, warm person--oh, she was also very literary; she would always say poems to me, yeah.
Story_ID: 324602
Speaker 1: You were talking about how your mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] would read to you, and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my mother, she was an excellent cook, and she was also the kind of person who liked a lot of, well, I wouldn't say entertaining, but because she had a small coterie of friends.  And while she was healthy she always liked everything to be just right, and my dad [Squire Pates] used to laugh about that, 'cause as young people see we sat around the table and ate.  Our meals were around the table, my father, my mother at one end of the table, my father at another, me and my brother [Henry Pates] and my sister [Patricia Pates Eaton].  My brother and I clowning always at the table, my father was very strict about that, I mean we'd get knocked out of the room (laughter).  I mean but my mother was very--the communication between my mother and father was so automatic, it was so unstrained from where I sat as a young boy, it just seemed to me that my mother knew what to do and when to do it.  When my father would come home, he would go to work, come home, and then of course he taught me to read before I even went to school.  But things were very automatic, and he was a very responsible person.
Story_ID: 324603
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Squire, S-Q-U-I-R-E, Pates, P-A-T-E-S.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, junior, okay.  So his father's name was Squire?
Speaker 2: His father was named Squire Pates [Squire Pates, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Squire?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, other than as far as I know, they came to Mound Bayou [Mississippi] early from Alabama somewhere.  But I don't know much about that because he died, Squire, Sr. died I think in '32 [1932], and I was only one year old then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I recall they having said that he lived with us when I was a little boy, but I don't remember him.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My dad, according to one document 1884, I mean 1894.
Speaker 1: Now was he born in Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he was born in Mound Bayou, I think he was, but now that you ask the question, and I think that's where always said he was born.  But there's no document that I have in my possession or that any other person has in the family as to.  I know he wound up at a very early age in Mound Bayou.
Speaker 1: So he was raised there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: So what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well I know a great deal about those ancestors.  First I think those with whom I came in contact, I can remember were sharecroppers.  And I remember going to one of my aunt's houses that was in the midst of a cotton field.  And it was just--seems like it was a two-room house with an outhouse and what they used to call, I forgot what they called it.  When the door extends from the front to the back, they have a name for that that I can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shotgun?
Speaker 2: Shotgun, right, shotgun, right, that's exactly right.  You open the front door, well you didn't have to open the front door because in many of those houses you can look through the screen door and see straight out the back.  In the front, she would sweep the dirt, the porch was made out of, at that time, looked like two by six planks, because I can remember walking on the planks, but they looked well worn.
Story_ID: 324604
Speaker 1: And I remember when my dad [Squire Pates] and I went to, the last time I went to Mound Bayou [Mississippi], I think I was about twelve years old, about eleven or twelve, and I remember going to my, they used to call her Aunt Livi [ph.].  But her name, I think it was Aunt Olivia, but they would call her Aunt Livi.  There were no beds in the house, we slept on quilts, quilted pallets on the floor, my father and I, and she had a way, she was tall and slim and jet black.  Sort of like my father, and she wore a white apron with a long black dress, and when she would walk, it would kind of sway.  That's something I would remember as a little boy watching, how it would sway.  But she was a tall, very dark woman.  My father also had an aunt named--that we called Aunt Sarah [ph.], now Aunt Sarah was brought to Chicago [Illinois].  Aunt Sarah was an ex-slave; Aunt Sarah lived between 47th [Street] and 48th [Street] and Calumet [Avenue] in a big white building.  She lived in, I think it was a one-room apartment, because I remember as a young boy it was just one light hanging down from the ceiling with a bulb.  Aunt Sarah, when I would go by her house, and I'll tell you about that, I was always impressed by how dark the room was.  I didn't realize that Aunt Sarah was blind; she had cataracts over her eyes.  And I would think at that time she had to be probably in her eighties because she would always sit in, in the chair.  And she'd say, "I'm so happy to see you boys, I'm so happy to see you boys.  You're Squire's sons," and you know, she'd always give me a nickel because I belong to, when I was like six, seven years, six, seven years old, I belonged to the George Cleveland Hall Branch Library [Chicago Public Library, Chicago, Illinois] book club.  And I would walk from where we lived, which was at 46th [Street] and Evans [Avenue], me and my brother [Henry Pates] and one of my friends, and we would walk to the library.  Every place we went to we walked, and I can remember the time that in looking at my Aunt Sarah, I used to wonder why her eyes were so gray.  But she had two cataracts over her eyes, and she couldn't see, probably in today's technology she would've been able to see easily.  So but she also had two short fingers, the index fingers, and I used to ask her, I said, Aunt Sarah 'cause the first thing I'd do is feel her hands.  Because both of them were nubs here, and she said, "A white man cut my fingers off to keep me from learning to write."  And now of course at seven years old I didn't understand what, I didn't understand what she was saying.  So I'd come back and I'd ask my father, I said, "Daddy, Aunt Sarah says the white man cut her fingers off," or, "Who was he, what did he--," you know, 'cause I'm (laughter) thinking and he would say, "Yes, she talks about that all the time, she talks about it all the time."  But it was very interesting, they were cut off at the first knuckle here and they were very symmetrical because the healing process had left scar tissue right here on the nub.  And I'm wondering, where are the fingernails, as a little boy you know, where are the fingernails?  And how come these fingers, my fingers are longer than yours already, and your fingers are just here.  And she would explain that, and then she would give us a nickel, so my brother and I, I think we went by more for the nickel than we were to hear.  But she also talked about how happy the children, she'd always say children, how happy the children were when Grant [General Ulysses S. Grant] marched through Vicksburg [Mississippi].  She said all the children just ran out in the middle of the street and they just started jumping up and down so forth when Grant came through Vicksburg.  So I'm assuming that was Vicksburg, Mississippi, and that was right after, at the end of the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that would make her, now she remembers that well, and I would think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I would think that she might've been anywhere between seven and probably twelve years old at that time.  And so that might've been let's say 1865--
Speaker 2: Then she was born about 1850 maybe?
Speaker 1: Maybe about 1850 or something like that.
Speaker 2: About twelve years old when the Civil War was getting--
Speaker 1: That's about right, I would say that easily you know.  Because--
Speaker 2: That would make her in her eighties when you were--
Speaker 1: That's right about that time, that's right.
Speaker 2: It's so close, I mean that's so, that's not so long ago is it, when we think about it.
Story_ID: 324605
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's why what we do is so important, this is why when people talk about affirmative action and reparations, this is why these things have a kind of an inextricable connection.  Because you talk, here I am I'm talking to you in 2005, and we're talking about somebody who was talking to me, let's say I was twelve.  Let's see I was, let's see I was born in '31 [1931] so I was nine years old in '40 [1940].  See we're talking about '38 [1938], 1938 or so you know, so now we're talking about a good healthy black person, put two of them together and you back in the Civil War, almost, you know what I mean?  Because some of my parents died in '96 [1996] and all up in there, so and a lot of the old people did.  Because they didn't--the only stress was the white folk's bigotry and cruelty and atrocities that they perpetrated on our people.  So of course many of them in the South adapted to that, and you know I've got a story about that on my mother's [Amanda Beasley Pates] side of the family.  They adapted to that because, well I'll tell you that story now.
Speaker 2: Well tell, go on with that.
Speaker 1: Because I think they're interrelated.  See when I got to my [maternal] grandmother's house, the first thing my grandmother would do is sit me down me and my brother [Henry Pates] and say, "Boys, say yes ma'am and no ma'am to the white folks, and step off the streets for the white people."  Well that was no problem like when I was seven and eight, nine and ten, but when I got to be twelve, I said well how come I got to do that?  And my grandmother would try to explain, she would say, "Boys just do what I tell you, step off the street for the white folk."  And I'd say, "Well how come I gotta do that?"  And that's when she decided that I shouldn't come back down there anymore.  But related to that was, the last time I was there me and my brother and my two cousins; we went swimming in a creek called Cedar Creek.  Now all during the time that I would go, all during the time that I would go to Macon [Mississippi], it was so much fun because first thing I would do is walk barefoot.  And my grandmother milked cows for a living, and she would have us in the pasture, and we'd be walking barefooted, climbing trees, jumping fences, riding the cows, something that we shouldn't do, you know.  Because when you ride a cow it gives less milk, and my grandmother would get angry for us riding the cows.  But we were like and that's another thing, my parents used to say, "It's good for you kids to go down there so you can be loose," you know.  Well it's true, we were very loose, but every time it would rain we would go to the creek because the creek, the water would run down the creek into the river.  And we'd get on a tree and swing off the tree branch and dive into the river, and the river was a grayish water.  Because it was limestone under the river, and limestone is very slick when it gets wet.  So, and I learned that because I dove into the river one time and the water was rushing, I swam to the other side and I couldn't get out.  I reached for the side and my hands would slip off the limestone, and I almost panicked, but I can remember my swimming teacher long time ago.  I never really had a teacher the boys they used to say, "Hey man, the only thing about swimming is, don't panic," and I taught it to my grandkid.  Well I just let the current take me all the way down to a place in the river where some tree branches were growing out of the limestone.  I grabbed the tree branch and that's why I'm here today because I don't know where that river was going, where the stream was going, 'cause it might've gone to a fall, so and we never got to the end of that.
Story_ID: 324606
Speaker 1: But here's where I'm going with this one, I went into a store [in Macon, Mississippi], me and my brother [Henry Pates] and my two cousins.  And we had a country friend named they used to call Toot, they called him Tooooot, they, it was about like T-O-O-O-O-O-T you know.  But I called him Toot you know, but they would say Tooooot, you know, so they would get Toot, Toot lived on the creek.  And I remember going by his house one time and his father had, looked like to me about ten shotguns behind the door.  We went into a store that was on the creek, a little general store, now this store was run by a man, a white man named Connie [ph.].  And we went in there one day and I said, "I want a bottle of pop," well country people call pop soda water.  So I walked in I said, "I want a bottle of pop," so I put a nickel up on the meat block, Connie gave me the orange pop and it was warm, but he had opened it.  I took a swig of the orange pop, now I'm twelve years old and I spit it up on his floor, I said, "This is warm," and I put it back on his meat block.  And he looked, tall, lean, I suspect he wasn't any more than about eighteen years old himself you know.  Tall, lean cracker, he said, "Boy, you not from down here are you," and I said, "No, I'm," he said, "Where you from?"  My brother said, "We're from Chicago [Illinois]," he said, "Well down here we treat niggers just like we want to," and my brother was over here and I'm here.  And he's standing in the middle, I'm twelve, my brother's one year older, thirteen, and I looked at my brother and he looked at me and we smiled.  And I, one of us said, "Well this is one little nigger you ain't gonna treat like you wanna, I want my money back 'cause you, the pop is warm."  Well he started backing up, well at twelve years old, like I told you I graduated from elementary when I was twelve and I was one of the tallest boys in the class.  I was almost his height, but I was just twelve, so I don't know if we were gonna do anything, but we certainly were not talking to him as he customarily had been spoken to.  Well it was a shotgun up on two nails up over the door.  My brother said, "Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], that's a shotgun," and I saw it, so we ran out the door because he was backing up toward it.  Okay we ran out the door, and we're just laughing running on down the creek [Cedar Creek].  The next day we go back swimming in the creek and Toot, Toot had told my [maternal] grandmother.  And Toot said, "Hey, y'all swimming in the creek," now we were buck naked, "y'all swimming in the creek, Toot is looking for you.  He said he's gonna cut y'all's tongue out."  Well he had told that to my grandmother, and when we got back, my grandmother said, "Y'all got to go."  And I suspect our trunk was packed and we were out of there before nightfall of that day.
Story_ID: 324607
Speaker 1: Now there was one other little incident I can remember, we were with Toot, we were coming back from downtown, and I took my grandkids down to Macon [Mississippi].  I think that was either last year, year before, I'll tell you, Crowe [Larry Crowe], you do like this, it's good on your car.  Take your foot off the accelerator, you're all the way through what they call town.  Well we were accustomed to town being like downtown in Chicago [Illinois] so when they say go downtown; we were still looking for, where is town?  Okay we went in a store and a black woman was talking to the store manager or something. The store manager slapped her, and my brother and I couldn't digest that, so we come out of the store and I said, "Henry [Henry Pates], did you see that?"  And he said, "Yeah I saw it," and so we started talking back and forth about it as we walking down the street.  I said, "But he slapped her," you know, as though well we need to go back and handle him, you know.  But we kept walking down the street, now get this.  We kept walking down the street; we see some pennies on the sidewalk, so we start picking up the pennies off the sidewalk.  A little white boy comes out and he says, "Mommy, these niggers got my money," (laughter) now look me and my brother started running, you know.  'Cause we, all we could hear was my [maternal] grandmother saying, "Step off the street for the white folks."  So we started to run, when we got back home, we were talking about it, my grandmother heard it.  My grandmother said, "You better take those pennies back and put them right back on the sidewalk where you found them."  Well we old enough to know that if we running, we running to get away, we ain't about to go back and put the pennies on the sidewalk, you know.  So we're kind of caught betwixt and between, we did not take the pennies back, we walked out of the house as though we were going, but we didn't take them back.  But like I said, my grandmother got us out of there and she told us, she said, "Y'all, don't come back," and we didn't go back.  Except but when I went back to get her to bring her here to live with my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] and father [Squire Pates] when she was about somewhere between eighty or eighty-five years old, you know.
Speaker 2: So you were about, you said you were about twelve or thirteen?
Speaker 1: Yeah I was, yeah I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twelve?
Speaker 1: I had not entered high school, I think that was the summer between the time I was about to go into DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and had just graduated from Forrestville Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: This is about 1943 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], 1944, right--
Story_ID: 324608
Speaker 1: Well, back to your father's story, now your father's name is Squire Pates, Jr. [Squire Pates]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was raised in Mound Bayou [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now there's some, there's a lot of history around his, didn't he have some sort of relation with I.T. Montgomery [Isaiah T. Montgomery]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The founder.
Speaker 2: My father, I.T. Montgomery founded Mound Bayou, and my father's relationship with I.T. Montgomery, as he talked about it was, I.T. Montgomery, I.T. Montgomery himself was the son of an ex-slave.  And he came into what I'm sure at that time was a good deal of money, because he had--he was able to buy land.  And that land ultimately became Mound Bayou, the black town.
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], what is your interpretation of the founding of Mound Bayou?  I've heard different stories about it, but it had something to do with Jefferson Davis?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what's the story that you know?
Speaker 2: Jefferson Davis' son [sic. Davis' brother, Joseph Emory Davis], Jefferson Davis' son was the one who saw to it that I.T. Montgomery got the land, and my dad used to talk about that, because my dad was a friend of a man named Green [Ben A. Green].  And I think it was Green's drugstore in which my father worked, but I.T. Montgomery, he built this rather large house, as you know.  And like I say my father, much of what my father talked--you see many people assumed that our people moved into the black towns for self-defense.  Well that's partially true, it's also true that there was certain, that there was a common culture amongst us.  And that culture was fortified by the fact that when you stepped outside of that, you were in the midst of unpredictable hostility.  You never know, you never knew, now understand the State of Mississippi was one of the most popular Ku Klux Klan [KKK] states.  And as a matter of fact the senators, and I can remember my father talking about Bilbo, who was in Louisiana at that time.
Speaker 1: Theodore Bilbo [Theodore G. Bilbo] was a congressman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Rankin [John E. Rankin], I think it was Rankin, there were about three or four, and they were outstanding spokespersons for racial hostility.  I mean they believed that this was a white man's country, as essentially the right believes now.  And they were still fighting the Civil War, as they are now, you know, and as the right is, the Christian right is now.  And you know the fighting of the Civil War as my fath- okay, much of my father's interpretation, when my father left, he did not leave because he was running.  He came here [Chicago, Illinois] because he said there was no opportunity in the South for a black person.  You either had to be on the white man's plantation, and he was not that kind of man.  My father believed in education.  He would constantly tell me, "You've got to go to school, you've go to go to school, you've got to go to school."  And he would laugh at any of my suggestions that were to the contrary.  His relationship to I.T. Montgomery, I.T. Montgomery was like a foster father to him.  And like a foster grandfather, because there were others who lived in the house with my father, one whose name was Dewey Lee [ph.].  And another whose name I think was Richard Booz, B double O-O-Z [sic. Richard Booze].  And my father referred to all of them as half brothers and sisters, like extended family people.  Because they were all--now I remember Dewey Lee was a very light-skinned fellow too because he was a good friend of my father's and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he--
Speaker 2: But they were all reared together.  Huh?
Speaker 1: So they were reared by I.T. Montgomery or something--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I won't say reared by him but I would say certainly housed by him and given resources by him.
Story_ID: 324609
Speaker 1: So your father [Squire Pates], he was part of a household of young men that were raised by, supported by I.T. Montgomery [Isaiah T. Montgomery]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he never really talked, he never--my father was not a complainer, and I think that sometimes my impression of my father was that whatever he left, he wanted to leave.  In some instances, the past that out of which they had come, especially among black men, was so painful, but it wasn't that so much as it was that they saw no unified effort to do anything about it.  That they could not do anything about it, so, therefore, it appeared to them that the wiser move would be to migrate north or to migrate to a place where they could get jobs.  So my dad came here [Chicago, Illinois] and he started working at the post office.
Speaker 1: Now what year was it that he moved here you know?
Speaker 2: I think it was around 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wanna ask this before it gets out of my mind, I'll forget it if I don't.  But '27 [1927], from what I understand and even from talking to our friend Anderson Thompson, he talked about his family being in Mississippi in 1927.  That was the year of the big flood, this tremendous flood, it's almost a huge natural disaster in the U.S.  They had a big flood in Mississippi in '27 [1927], did he ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: No he never did, because I would imagine when we talk about a flood the only places that could flood would have been the delta.  And the delta, of course Macon [Mississippi], Starkville [Mississippi], Macon, Starkville, Clarksdale [Mississippi], all of the--Mound Bayou [Mississippi], all this was delta area.  Because it was the most fertile land for cotton, and cotton was king, as a matter fact I have picked it myself.  That's how I learned that cotton, I mean, cotton was a heck of a product to harvest manually.  But no, he never talked about a flood, and I was, Andy and I spoke about that and I was kind of surprised to hear that.  Because I never heard my father or any of his relatives talk about a flood, or that being say, the precipitating cause for they to have abandoned or leave the South at that time.
Speaker 1: Now what I heard, they had a special on public television about it on 'American Experience' or one of those shows, and they said that it provided an opportunity for a lot of black sharecroppers, who were obligated to stay on the land, to get out of there.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: In fact they were, the white landowners and landlords at one time posted armed guards to try to keep the black people down there.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: The flood disrupted the normal way things were done, and you could actually escape, you could get out, you know I mean it wasn't slavery.  We're talking about escaping obligation or whatever, debt, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Getting out, a lot of people got out.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's, I haven't heard that story.
Speaker 1: But your father's story doesn't sound like that but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No my father seemed to have--well first of all unlike his brothers, well two of them.  Those two were like, athletes, my father was not an athlete, although he enjoyed being in shape until a certain point.  But the athletes seem to have been able to move around fairly well, particularly those who played baseball, because at that time, baseball was very, very popular you know.  So no, I never heard about the flooding in '27 [1927].
Story_ID: 324610
Speaker 1: What opportunity, you know, came along that you know, I guess was the impetus for him [Pates' father, Squire Pates] to make his move?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he talked about the fact that he knew could get a job where he could support his family.  Because at that time, that generation of men always talked about how a man is supposed to support his family.  Inheriting the whole question of manhood was whether you could support your family, and so they were always looking for jobs.  At that time those jobs that were very, very popular, and those to which men who could read and write gravitated, were the Pullman porters, the post office, the stockyard, and the steel mill.  And as you know, some of the biggest rioting took place when the Polacks went on a strike, or the Polish went on a strike at the stockyard.  And they tried to ease black workers into the stockyards, and rioting began, you know my father told that story innumerably. 'Cause they used to watch them go on the "L" [elevated train], see the "L," there was a special "L" that went straight to the stockyard, an "L" line, it went across about 43rd Street.  As a matter of fact, a part of that track is still around, right behind Drexel [Avenue] and 39th Street around in that area.  Right close to Grant Memorial Church [Grant Memorial AME Church, Chicago, Illinois] that track I think is still up there.  But that, that used to be a special train that they would get on to go to the stockyards, a special.  But yeah he came for that opportunity to work at the post office, and which he did, and then stayed there forty years you know.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what I neglected to do was ask you about how your parents met, I know they met in school [Mound Bayou Consolidated Public School and County Training School, Mound Bayou, Mississippi], but is there a story about how they met that they tell?
Speaker 2: No, that's the only thing I know is I saw them in the school picture, and I think that's how they met you know.  Yeah I think that's how they met and I think, that's about all I can say about how they met because they never really talked much about that until after I had seen the picture.  I said, "What is this?"  Said, "Well, that's where we met," you know.
Story_ID: 324611
Speaker 1: --We finally get to [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates, now you've got a brother [Henry Pates] that's older than you.  How many, I know you have a sister [Patricia Pates Eaton] too, but how many in the family?
Speaker 2: My brother and me, my brother and I didn't have the same father; my brother's father was Frank Merrill [ph.].  We have the same mother [Amanda Beasley Pates], but my, as far as I knew, my brother actually didn't, well, had no relationship with his father.  Because he lived in our house, all the way up until the time he went to the [U.S.] Marine Corps, which was right aft- during high school, well right after I graduated from high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].  He graduated from high school in '49 [1949], I graduated in '48 [1948] he graduated in January of '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: He was a year older than you or younger than you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was a year older than I, but I got double promotions in elementary school, which meant I started school before him.  I mean I started school after him and graduated before him, you know.  My sister, I really don't know how old my sister is, you saw her picture.  I think she's about four, maybe four years younger than me.  Maybe four, maybe five, yeah, I think it's four years, because I think yeah I think she's four years younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was just the three of you?
Speaker 2: It's just the three of us right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now and your sister like she's, she's a singer as I remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah she, well she was a combination of many, many things, actually when she was in Chicago [Illinois], she, let's see my sister went to var- let's see I think she went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] for a while.  Then she left here and went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], not Princeton, Columbia [Columbia University] in New York [New York], and then she started--I didn't know my sister; well this is an interesting thing about my sister.  I used to take my sister to her music lessons, but I didn't know she could sing, I thought she just played the piano.  I used to hate to take her to music lessons, because I had to walk through the park and the fellows were playing ball, you know, "Hey Harold, you gonna play?"  I said, "Man, I gotta take her to her music lessons, and I have to her take to her music lessons over there in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]."  And right beyond Washington Park, and then bring her back, but see, my father [Squire Pates] wanted all of us to learn some musical instrument.  So he started me on the piano when I was young, started my brother on the piano and my sister on the piano.  Well my sister continued to play, we stopped playing because we had a kind of negative experience with a man who taught us to play the piano.  Now he was homosexual and we didn't know that until he kind of made some what we called, what we interpreted as gestures.  Came back and told our father and our father said, "He's a churchgoing man, that's not true."  However, it was very clear that he was saying that to us but he believed us too.  But I would take my sister to her piano lessons, and I subsequently found, I mean later on, because she left the house.  And she moved to New York and she subsequently married her child- well I won't say childhood sweetheart.  But they went to high school together, she subsequently married him and had a child.
Story_ID: 324612
Speaker 1: But she [Pates' sister, Patricia Pates Eaton] was singing in the chorus, I think of the Metropolitan Opera, I have a picture of her while she was singing.  And I was shocked when she came back and sang at the church one time and lit the church up, I said, "Wow, I didn't know she could sing like that," you know.  But she definitely had an opera quality voice and I think she had aspirations of being an opera singer.  But I think age kind of caught up with her too you know, because that might've--of being a realization at a certain point in time, that she should've made much earlier.  I don't know what her decision-making process.  And interesting thing about it when you, when we talk about it, the gap between the age gap between my sister and I did not promote our togetherness too much when we were children naturally.  We were two boys, me and my brother [Henry Pates], and she was a girl--
Speaker 2: Four years younger.
Speaker 1: Right, and she's four years younger and we had taken her around and so forth, but not really associate, I'm not in school with her and you know.  I remember when she pledged in the sororities and that sort of thing, but I never had the opportunity to really be a part of her social setting.  And in the house the only thing that my brother I would conclude is that she was so worrisome because she was always telling on us you know.  And that was interesting too with my father [Squire Pates] 'cause my father--everybody who came to Chicago [Illinois] from Mississippi who was in our family stayed in our house at one point in time.  And I think that was, and that had an interesting set of experiences too you know.  But yeah my sister, even though she's coming to visit me this Christmas, I'm sometimes amazed that how she sees things and how I understand them having been there.  Because many instances she was kind of abstract from, she left, like I say, she left and went to New York [New York].  And became a part of the whole New York art circle, particularly on the level of opera singing.  Which is another whole genre of African existence (laughter) you know, I'm telling you.  So it, I mean that's kind of like a prima donna atmosphere, it's not like the jazz singer or the jazz musician.  It's another whole--I don't know, I, as a matter of fact, I would've imagine that's another whole set of African American warriors.  Because they were really cracking into Europe's classical art so to speak, and now that I notice people like Grace Bumbry and Leontyne Price.  And the one you're doing something on--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Denyce Graves.
Speaker 1: Denyce Graves, there was a time when if an African American sister sang opera, I mean that's incongruous with the, because what you're talking about, you're talking about German and Italian culture.  And I mean those who had a high appreciation, particularly I would imagine German Jews and whatnot because essentially they sort of supported that level of art history.  When you really look up under it, you see a lot of that kind of money supporting the various--Metropolitan Opera, the Lyric Opera [Lyric Opera of Chicago] here I would imagine, you know.  Because they still have an appreciation for that kind of so-called classical culture.  So I would imagine that's another whole set of experiences and observations that she would make in terms of that fight.  Because every kind of, every move that African American people have made in this country has been one that has met resistance.  You know in terms of trying to--unless it was in, even jazz you know, even jazz, and you know you asked me a question and the question kind of leads me into some other kinds of reflections.  But you know I can remember when they called jazz, jungle music, and black music, and that sort of thing, especially the blues you know.  So when you talk about my sister I can remember when my sister used to live in, my father bought this little house over on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  He'd created an apartment for her to live upstairs, and just when he created the apartment, she stayed I think about two years and that's when she left and went to New York, you know.  I think she saw the opportunity to engage with a greater intensity in opera singing.  And I think the venue for doing that is naturally in New York, you know.
Story_ID: 324613
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh I have a great many of them, I mean.
Speaker 1: Well an earliest, an earliest one.  First one (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think one of my earliest memories was certainly--I think when we talk about an early memory that would've been pivotal.  I think that was my father's [Squire Pates] aunt and her fingers being cut off.  That had stayed with me, and has evoked a certain kind of emotion every time I think about it, you know.  Because this is something I saw and heard, and I can see my aunt, my great-aunt's whole countenance every time I think about it.  Because I can remember reading King Leopold's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Soliloquy.
Speaker 2: You know the book by--
Speaker 1: 'King Leopold's Soliloquy' by Mark Twain.
Speaker 2: And how Leopold [King Leopold II], in creating the slave factory in the Congo [Congo Free State; Democratic Republic of the Congo], would amputate the hands and the arms of the African men to force them into the mines.  And when you think about that as being a kind of a way about which oppression and slavery was maintained, that was no anesthetic.  He chopped off two fingers; if we get a finger caught in the door (laughter) I mean can you imagine getting two fingers cut off, you know?  I think that's my earliest childhood impression that has stayed with me all the way until this time.  That has really, oh and I can remember my father's admonitions.   My father would always admonish me, he'd say, "Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], never trust a white man," now that helped me a great deal when I was president of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois].  Because I discovered that the difference between the man who was chairman of the board and what he thought.  And what I perceived as being an arrogance relative to the existence of Kennedy-King and the needs of Kennedy-King, for which he had no credentials at all, other than his political relationships.  I used to wonder about what right can a person like this sit as chairman of the board over colleges that administer to the educational needs of our people.  By what right does he challenge me when I bring him a package of those things that are needed in the community?  When I have far more experience and far greater credentials in this particular area, and then I'm reared in the culture.  I think that so, therefore, when you, when you talk about these memories that are pivotal in molding character and in molding personality.  These are memories that you can't forget which become foundations for the building of your perceptions and your translations of experience into your aspirations.
Story_ID: 324614
Speaker 1: How you might see life as you live it, you know, imagine my father [Squire Pates] admonishing me, "Harold [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], never trust a white man."  Now what's he saying, is he saying thing that the Indians [Native Americans] said, that the white man speaks with forked tongue?  Well I think that it might've been an adaptation of that because he's saying that in authority, they say one thing and they do another.  They say one thing and they do another, or there's inconsistency between what they say and what they do.  Or that you can step out on the basis of what they tell you, but you'll find that there's no support under you when your decision based on what you heard.  When that decision has to be tested by the conditions that are produced as a result of the conditions.  You go back and say, "But you said," and you begin to see the political machinations around that.  It also says something else, it says that no matter, son, how you proceed through what it is you think you want to do, you must always understand that there's a white authority over whatever you do in this culture.  No matter how it's disguised, it's still there, so my father was very flat with that because my father came along during the time, he was a very proud, what they call race man.  And he's very proud about it.  And he was very proud of anything that African Americans did, he was very proud of the heritage.  And if you recall back in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and whatnot, a lot of our African formations, a lot of our formations in the city were called African this, African that, African this.  And you know as the African Episcopal, the A.M.E. church, African Methodist Episcopal church has still maintained that African identity.  So I think when you talk about those, that memory has been pivotal and has been really like you know when you put two weights on a scale to get a balance?  You know, it's always been my fundamental weight that has caused me to have to measure and interpret the reality of our existence, even now.  And I also suggest ways by which my grandchildren can also look at society.  Because there is such a thing as white privilege that that my father was warning me about, and I think that is very jealously regarded in what we call a racist society.  So that's very jealously regarded.  As the black comedian said, Chris Rock, he said, "I'm a rich black man and no white man would want to be me, a black man, you know, would wanna be me."  And that's an interesting--I don't know about the accuracy of that, you know, one takes it literally, but you certainly understand what he's saying within the present context.  So that kind of takes me off when you ask me about that indelible memory, I think that's the most indelible memory I have.
Story_ID: 324615
Speaker 1: This is one question we always ask, and I know you could really tell stories about where you grew up.  But what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Now I can talk a thousand years on that (laughter) so I'll start talking and you can stop me when you get ready.  You see I was reared at 4624 Evans [Avenue], and so, therefore, I was very privy to 47th Street, 47th Street was indeed the main artery of culture in this city [Chicago, Illinois] during the time I grew up.  I would say in the '30s [1930s] in the '40s [1940s] in the '50s [1950s] yeah.  For that thirty years, 47th Street was I think one of the most fundamental African American cultural experiences of my life.  And I think the basis for what they call Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] today.  Now it just so happens while I was in elementary school, I delivered papers, I started working when I was nine years old.  I started delivering papers (laughter) I never was without a job all the way until I the time I retired, and I started when I was nine.  When I started at nine, the paper branch where we got our papers was on, was between 47th and 48th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] next to the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  This meant that at 4:30 in the morning me and my brother [Henry Pates] would go to get our papers, now I'm nine years old, he's ten.  My paper route went from 51st [Street] and Calumet [Avenue] down one side, down to 35th Street, and back up Calumet.  And if they had, and back up to 51st Street, and I doubt as to whether I delivered seventy papers at that time.  At that time, the papers that were being delivered, I think the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] today was called the Times [Chicago Daily Times].  There was also a Daily News [Chicago Daily News], there was also the Herald-Examiner [Chicago Herald-Examiner] and the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 1: Did you deliver all those papers?
Speaker 2: I delivered the Times.  I delivered the Times and the Tribune.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the Daily News was an evening paper, and the Herald-Examiner was an evening paper, there were two papers that came out in the evening, two papers that came out in the morning.  It wasn't until I got older that I had two paper routes, a morning paper route, then after school an evening paper route.  Now the reason I mentioned that is because at that time, we needed a bicycle, and I asked my father [Squire Pates] if he could buy us a bicycle.
Story_ID: 324616
Speaker 1: We were talking about sights and sounds and smells for 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois], and you had delivered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sights and sounds, okay.
Speaker 1: --papers in both--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The morning and the evening at one time.
Speaker 2: I wanna tell you how I became cognizant of the sights and sounds, because I have to introduce my friend Charles Arrington.  Now Charles Arrington was five years older than me, so he used to take me to elementary school, but Charles Arrington was also the brother-in-law of a fellow named Bill Summerford [William Summerford], whom I think is still alive.  Bill Summerford married Charles Arrington's sister [Vera Arrington Summerford], Charles Arrington's sister was a model.  And she was a model like along with Marva Louis [Marva Louis Spaulding] and so forth, and she was very pretty, I think she's still alive today too.  Now Bill Summerford, because this is all related, Bill Summerford used to run policy.  Bill Summerford bought Charles Arrington a car, a '41 [1941] Chevrolet, which Charles Arrington and I used to drive.  I learned to drive when I was twelve; I got my driver's license when I was twelve.
Speaker 1: You were twelve?
Speaker 2: That's right. I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that possible in those days, I mean was that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now how did you manage that then?
Speaker 2: The way--you know they have Ryan [George Ryan] now, they're looking at Ryan, trying to put him in jail?  I got my driv- that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Now this--do the gesture I just made on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Do it for the camera.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Back during that day, the driver's license place, or whatever you call it--
Speaker 1: The bureau.
Speaker 2: The vehicle license place was on 45th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue], you could go, if you had a car you drive up, you'd put two dollars on the seat.  You go in, you take the written exam which was a breeze, I think there were about ten questions on a piece of paper.  You come out, now I was twelve years old, you come out, you put, I had to get that straightened out too.  Because I had two social security cards too, I had to get straightened out when I got older.
Speaker 1: So you put two dollars on the seat, you go in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I put two dollars on the seat.  I go in to tell them I'm ready for my practical, which was a drive around the block to see if I could drive.  He would get in the car, I would drive to the corner, he would get out, take the two dollars, and tell me, "Come back in a week."  My driver's license, I'd get my driver's license, and he'd get his two dollars, and that was that.  I don't know what I made on the written and I don't know whether I passed, all I know is we drove to the corner, he would get back and that's the way I got my driver's license.  Now all of this is when I'm twelve years old, but I, like you said the paper route was, like I said the paper route was when I was nine.  Now--
Speaker 1: But this car though, back to this car, a '41 [1941] that's a new, basically a new car.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Or close to it right?
Speaker 2: Well understand, he ran policy, and I don't know what a car might've cost then, but I can remember in 1939, the man across the street his name was Mr. Page [ph.], similar to my name.  I remember Mr. Page bought a Buick and my father [Squire Pates] came home one day and he says, "Brother Page just bought a car."  My father never had a car, he said, "Brother Page just bought a brand new Buick car," he says you know, "it cost eight hundred dollars."  And everybody said eight hundred dollars, my goodness, how in the world did, brand new Buick.  The model would tickle you to death today if you--the wheels were big, and he had--it looked like a gangster car, that's the way it looked.  I remember one of those cars today could hit one of these cars and tear it up, you know.
Story_ID: 324617
Speaker 1: But back to the sights and sounds, now the sights that I remember, back during this time, double decker buses were up and down King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  Double, they used to call it the Surface Lines [Chicago Surface Lines], there was the green double decker buses with a top, no top on the top.  And I used to enjoy riding on there in the summertime, you know, on the top up there, and I can remember my brother [Henry Pates] and I, see we'd get up at 4:30 in the morning, and we go get our papers.  And we'd ride King Drive, although we were on Calumet [Avenue], ride down King Drive and all without bicycles.  And I would be very, very impressed at these double decker buses because the thing that impressed me mostly was that they just disappeared all of a sudden.  Now the other thing about it was this, there were so many shops that were owned by black people, I mean you had Metropolitan Insurance Company [Chicago, Illinois] that was next to the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois].  You had all of these clubs up and down King Drive that were clubs that were like African this and that associations.  You also--Father Divine [Reverend Major Jealous Divine] had a house, remember Father Divine, he had a house on King Drive I think, it was somewhere around four between 47th [Street] and forty- yeah 47th and 48th [Street] on King Drive.  Also right down the street was the Poro College [Chicago, Illinois], which was a college for teaching black women how to do hair.  And in that yard was an airplane, they had an airplane in that yard and I can remember going by there and looking at that airplane all the time.  The YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] was also on the corner of 46th [Street], I think right where that bank [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois] is now, the what's that called, is it called some kind of, Home Federal, no, not Home Federal.  You know what I'm talking about, 46th and King Drive, there's a bank there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'll recall the name in a minute.  The Alpha House [Chicago Alpha House, Chicago, Illinois] was across on 44th [Street] and King Drive.  Now almost every Sunday you would have one of these organizations, either the Father Divine women marching down King Drive, there was always a parade.  You had the Knights of Pythias, I don't know who they were, and what they stood for, you had the Elks [Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks].  Now the Knights, the Knights of Pythias used to wear hats that looked very much like those that Father Divine--not Father Divine but Marcus Garvey.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like with the plumes and the long hats?
Speaker 1: And the, and they had little drapes on theirs, but they had real swords, you know, they had real swords, and it, there was nothing like being on the corner of 47th and King Drive on a Sunday and watching many of those parades come down the street, because like I say the Knights of Pythias would march every, the Elks would march and the Masons would march.  You would have these parades going up and down King Drive.  Now as young boys we saw a lot of nightlife.  I can remember on 35th [Street] when the ba- the nightclub, I can't think of its name it slipped my mind just like that.  I can't think of its name but also, I'll think of it in a minute.
Story_ID: 324618
Speaker 1: Charles Arrington, as I told you his, I've skipped a little bit now, because Charles Arrington also--his brother-in-law also had the hat checking concession at the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nightclub, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nightclub.  I was one of the hat checkers, very young, and it was at--the Rhumboogie was on 55th [Street] between King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and Calumet [Avenue] on the south side of the street.  Well we used to see movie stars and whatnot, as a matter of fact that's the first time I'd ever heard Sarah Vaughan sing.  And one of the things that characterized Sarah Vaughan in her singing was she used to--tears used to come down her eyes, you know.  That's right and as many instances they used to talk about how she would weep when she would sing.  But you know I mean, and as a jazz connoisseur you're familiar with Sarah Vaughan and her style.  Now the jazz musicians were profuse and I'm gonna talk a bit about that too--because you had the Morris Eat Shop [Perfect Eat Shop, Chicago, Illinois] on the corner of 47th [Street] and King Drive.  Right above what subsequently became Walgreens.  And then you had, there was a funeral parlor right there on the corner of the alley.  You had the Metropolitan [Metropolitan Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] show which was right across on 47th, right across from [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman, I think that--well they've torn it out of there now I think.  But right on the corner of--between 47th and 46th [Street] and King Drive.  You also had--Morris Eat Shop was one of the few dining places where they had tablecloths, I mean it was very ritzy, like you know.  And now naturally you had the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] where every jazz musician worth talking about played on that stage, because these were the days of the big bands.  And the big bands were Cab Calloway, Earl "Fatha" Hines, Billy Eckstine, Count Basie, Duke Ellington.  I don't remember many white bands coming to the Regal, they were mostly all, Nat King Cole, The Ink Spots, The Three Blazers [Johnny Moore's Three Blazers].  I remember Lena Horne, I don't remember Josephine Baker ever coming, I think Josephine Baker was in Paris [France].
Speaker 2: Right I think she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --did come to the U.S. a couple of times but she may not--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I do remember also some of the comedians.  Butterbeans and Susie, Dusty--or is it Dusty, was it Dusty Fletcher [Clinton "Dusty" Fletcher] here, he was the one who put out that record, I'm trying to, 'Ain't Nobody Here But Us Chickens,' Louis Jordan, Louis Jordan, Louis Jordan.  Now on the corner of 48th [Street] and King Drive was the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois], and the Savoy had boxing, it had a big tent where we and my brother [Henry Pates] used to slip under the tent to go and watch the boxing.  And at that time, you had boxers like Johnny Bratton who was really--Johnny Bratton was a fighter like Sugar Ray Robinson.  Who was really one of the--I think he fought welterweight, was one of probably the slickest welterweight fighters during, not only during that time, but during the lifetime of boxing.  Reminded me of a lot of this young boy Sugar Ray Leonard, because Johnny Bratton was the talk of the town then.  Now remember I'm going back also during the time in which a little bit earlier, during the times of the reactions on 47th Street when Joe Louis knocked out Max Schmeling.  Because I can remember everybody in my dad's [Squire Pates] house, we were sitting there listening to the radio.  Everybody in my dad's house ran in the street the second time, because if I recall Joe Louis knocked out Max Schmeling in the first round.  Knocked him out, you understand, see that was, Max Schmeling beat Joe Louis once, and then Joe Louis came back and beat him.  But, and it was, oh Joe Louis was also, Joe Louis was a very popular sight on 47th Street everytime he came to Chicago [Illinois].  Now remember Marva Louis [Marva Louis Spaulding] moved into the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], she lived in the Rosenwald Building for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was his wife?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That was his wife?
Speaker 1: That was his wife, Marva Louis, who later, you know, she divorced him.
Story_ID: 324619
Speaker 1: But the Bud Billiken Parade used to come down Michigan Avenue, not King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], it used to go down Michigan Avenue.  And they used to stand up on top of the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and watch the Bud Billiken Parade.  Now all of this is like in the 47th Street venue, because if you would go from 47th and Cottage Grove [Avenue] all the way, because across Cottage Grove that's where the white folks were.  All the way to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So everything like east of Cottage was white--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was white.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] now--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: There's still there's black folks over there now, but in those days it was all white.
Speaker 1: Oh back in that time, the only blacks were over there were in-house servants, 'cause I knew a young lady, I met a young lady who lived on the white folks.  As a matter of fact I think she's still alive.  All the way to State Street, so you had the Apollo Theatre [Chicago, Illinois], the Apollo Theatre was right where 47th, right where Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] runs into 47th Street.  There was a theatre there called the Apollo.  Then there was, later on there was a moving picture theatre between Drexel [Avenue] and Cottage Grove, it was first called the Pic, the P-I-C.  But then after World War II [WWII] it became the Vee, after and during the World War II it became Vee, because it was V for victory.  And it became the Vee, and then black people used to--when I went to the Pic you could count the number of blacks who were in there, when I was a little boy.  Later on, the Vee became a very popular show on 47th Street, now let me go further with that.  I left delivering papers in the black community and started delivering papers in the white community, because you could make more money.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You indicated earlier that you had a long route, but there wasn't as many papers as you would expect--
Speaker 1: About seventy papers, that's what, you know as I got older, I used to be impressed with the fact--I mean you don't deliver any papers in the black community.  But black people bought the Defender [Chicago Defender] and Jet, and I used to sell both the Defender and Jet.  Now all of this is going on kind of simultaneously, I'm dealing with kind of like the age between like nine and twelve, because I'm in elementary school here with this variety of experiences.  I'm delivering policy with my friend and driving the car, and I'm also delivering papers, you understand?
Story_ID: 324620
Speaker 1: I remember the first time I ever got afraid of a policeman.  I told you I was twelve years old, I was tall.  I started delivering papers in the white neighborhood; the paper branch was in the alley between Cottage Grove [Avenue] and Drexel [Avenue].  We would, I would go from 46th [Street] and Evans [Avenue], down 47th Street into this alley.  There was a drugstore on the corner of 47th and Cottage Grove, it was called Orenstein's [ph.], there was also a newspaper stand right in front of it.  One day I had my paper bag, 4:30 in the morning, I'm going to the paper branch.  I walk down 47th Street, a white woman was coming in front of me, she saw me and ran across to the south side of 47th Street.  It was a policeman standing at the newsstand, and this is one of these pivotal experiences too.  I saw this lady, I knew that this lady was afraid of me, it was very clear, she went across the street and walked to the newsstand.  There was a policeman at the newsstand, and I saw her doing like this, the policeman took out after me running.  And I saw that, I started to run but I didn't because you know how white policemen dealt with black people at that time was no myth.  I mean it was very real, I started to run but I didn't, I continued to walk, and I tried to act like I didn't know that he was coming behind me.  He came up to me, right when I got in front of the Vee show, he pulled his gun out, put it up to my head and he said, "What are you doing over here?"  He said, "Turn around," where my back would be to him, he put the gun up against my head, and he said, "What are you doing over here?"  And I went to turn around to talk to him; he said, "If you turn around, I'll blow your head off."  So I just stood there, but I said, "You see this paper bag, I'm about to go to the paper branch," but it occurred to me I can't see this man's face.  If he killed me nobody will know who he is, but I wouldn't have been able to tell it anyway, you know.  So I'm standing there and he's--then he cocked the gun and I thought, Crowe [Larry Crowe], I really thought I was gone then, as a young boy you know.  So finally I said, "See the paper bag, see the paper bag, I'm going right back here, the paper branch is right here."  So then he, I guess he took the latch off the gun and then he turned around and went on away.  And there was a florist shop and when I got back in the paper branch, I thought about that because I never told any of the fellows.  See back at that time, there was only one white boy working in the branch, his name was Tommy North, N-O-R-T-H, and he lived in the white community.  All the rest of us who delivered papers in the white community were black.  My brother [Henry Pates] delivered the papers over in five hotels which are now, which have--many of them have been replaced by 50th on the Lake [50th on the Lake Motel, Chicago, Illinois].  There was also an [U.S.] Army barracks over there that was called the [U.S.] Fifth Army, now that's important.  Because in the '60s [1960s], the Fifth Army came out in the '60s [1960s] after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and posted a .50 caliber machine gun right there on--this is what I saw with my eyes.  Right there on Stony Island [Avenue] and 63rd Street, I guess they decided they were gonna shoot down 63rd Street.  Because young people were setting 63rd Street on fire, you understand?  And they didn't know what to do, so the Army--I came out that night to see, but I was, you know.  This is not when I was young; this is when Martin Luther King got killed.
Story_ID: 324621
Speaker 1: I'm running policy [in Chicago, Illinois] with my friend Charles [Charles Arrington], and we're delivering policy in many of the places.  The wheels that have been identified in this book called 'Kings' ['Kings: The True Story of Chicago's Policy Kings and Numbers Racketeers,' Nathan Thompson] that was written by, I can't think of his name now, but I got a copy of it around somewhere.  Have you read about this book or heard about this book 'Kings'?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay most of the places that he identifies in this book are places that I know about, because me and Charles Arrington delivered policy as young boys.  Now, and I was also delivering my papers, now on 47th Street at that time you had entertainers who would--and preachers who would come out on the corners.  Especially on Evans [Avenue], and the preachers would have their megaphones proselytizing, but you also had, there was a puppeteer, for an example, who had a, this puppeteer had a cart.  And on this cart was some boxes made out of wood and every time he'd hit that board it looked like the boxes would be boxing and people would pay a nickel to see that, to watch that, you know.  And he would have a whole crowd, okay and, and they would pay a nickel and he'd bang the thing, and the boxes would be boxing.  Also, they had another fellow, I never shall forget this fellow, he would put a blanket on the ground; this was on the corner of 47th and Evans.  He would put a blanket on the ground, he had no arms, he would do everything with this toes, and he would like thread a needle with his toes.  He would sew with his toes, he also had a money making machine where he would (laughter), he would tell people, okay, they would put a quarter on the blanket.  You know, just toss a coin to watch him make money.  He'd take a blank piece of paper and put it in a little bitty little thing that looked like, at that time they had washing machines that had wringers, you know.  He had a little machine about like this, and he would put a piece of paper in there, and out a dollar bill would come, you know.  And people would say, but he'd do it with his toes you know, he had this little thing with his toes, and he'd do it.  And people would be fascinated, and of course naturally I was fascinated because I would wonder.  I used to say, "Well wait a minute, hold it, if he's putting paper in there and money is coming out, why is he on this corner, you know?"  He has no arms and he can make money with that machine, you know, as a kid I used to say, "Well what's going on?"  And the people would throw a quarter down there, though I guess as they got further down the street, they started realizing it themselves too.  Now that's one thing, of course we knew all the prostitutes as young boys, we knew the prostitutes, I used to go in the poolrooms, you know, just like that.  And the poolroom was a source of information, poolroom and the barbershop.  Anything that you wanted to know or do on 47th Street, if you went into the poolroom and barbershop somebody in there was an authority on that.  I mean you could, if you wanted know where the wheel was, now the wheels, now let me tell.  Now this is, all of this is what I saw, the policy wheel.  Reverend Cobbs [Clarence H. Cobbs] down there on, Reverend Cobbs whose church right now stands on 43rd [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  He would give the numbers, he would tell you to play what numbers on certain wheels, like they would have a wheel that had a title.  And he'd tell you, "You know, I had a dream last night, and I dreamed so and so and so, and I think number 3241 and I," you know.  Now Reverend Cobbs was a very earthy fellow and you know, now, but people would go to Reverend Cobbs' church, Reverend Cobbs' church was extremely popular and was endorsed considerably.  Now we get into politics a little bit, because that's part of 47th Street too.  Was endorsed considerably by the old mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley], you know, back during that time, and also Mayor Kelly [Edward J. Kelly] and Mayor Kennelly [Martin H. Kennelly].  These Irish mayors that preceded Daley, Mayor Kelly and Mayor Kennelly.
Speaker 2: Well what was the name of this church, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First Church of Deliverance [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: First Church of Deliverance.
Speaker 1: First Church of Deliverance.  Now Reverend Boddie [Louis A. Boddie] also, whose church still, he used to come on the radio, "My Rock," that was his sermon, "My Rock."  I guess it's, upon this church I'll build my rock.  He, his church [Greater Harvest Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] I think is still unfinished, but his name is still on the sign there on 51st [Street] and State Street.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah if you go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was building one but he didn't get--
Speaker 1: Somehow or another Reverend Boddie died of course, but his church is still, I think he was in a big church building enterprise.  Also I want to tell you about when Emmett Till was killed too, but that's later on, you know.  'Cause when I think of churches I put that in context too.  They're talking about making a landmark out of his, out of--
Speaker 2: The church [Roberts Temple Church of God in Christ, Chicago, Illinois] where his body laid--
Speaker 1: Ruth, Roberts, Bishop Roberts [Isaiah Leon Roberts], 'cause my brother [Henry Pates] used to go with his daughter, that's how I remember him you know.
Story_ID: 325093
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we were talking about the policy [in Chicago, Illinois], two people I think were pivotal at that time and we're talking about the '40s [1940s].  With respect to the ministers giving policy numbers; Reverend Cobbs [Clarence H. Cobbs], was very pivotal in that regard, and Reverend Boddie [Louis A. Boddie].  But one of the characteristics of their churches was that they took care of their people.  And by that I mean, in many instances they fed them, housed them and buried them, which was a very practical relationship between the church and its congregation.  Now yeah, I was talking about as I, those years between twelve and nine on 47th Street.  Now also I said that the entrepreneurs on 47th Street, there were many black entrepreneurs, you had funeral directors, you had tailors, you had grocery stores.
Speaker 2: Who's the most fam- who is it Scotty Piper [Louis "Scotty" Piper] was a big famous tailor over there?
Speaker 1: Yeah Piper, yeah Scotty was very popular on 47th Street because you had--there were three tailors Scotty was the black one.  But then you had two other Jewish, one was Wulmmuth, W-U-L-M-M-U-T-H, and then there was another one called Jerry Rodman.  And they were very popular on 47th Street with respect to the clothes, because when Cab Calloway would come to the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois]; he brought not only his music but his clothing style.  And one of those clothing styles that achieved great popularity was the drapes, they called it zoot suits, they called them zoot suits.  Cab Calloway, long chains, long coats, outer seams on the pants, outer seams on the jackets.
Speaker 2: I haven't seen very many color pictures of those, I know there's a depiction of them in Spike Lee's 'Malcolm X' movie where, what did, was the colors as loud as the ones in the Spike Lee movie, now they had a yellow one, bright yellow and they had like other real loud colors that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were any color, they were any color that you can imagine.  Now I'll tell you there used to be a fellow that used to stand on the corner, used to stand under the "L" [elevated train] on 47th Street.  And he lived on Calumet [Avenue] and the "L" was right there at Calumet, but this fellow, almost every weekend you'd see him in a different suit.  One was yellow, one was red, now when I talk about red, I'm talking about that like that napkin we have.  Red, yellow, green was one of his most popular ones, like a pea green, and he had green shoes, you know, a green hat.  Because hats were worn, you see with the zoot suit came also the wide brim hat, and the hats became very popular.  As a matter of fact many of the fellas used to wear what they call a Borsalino, and they used to wear the beaver hats.  They had a lot of stuff that look like fur on the outside of the hats but they were hats.  And this was a part of the 47th Street character, clothing character that you might've seen at that time.  Especially among grassroots people who had a little money.  Now in some instances you, yeah the social crowd, the dancing crowd and that sort of thing you know the dancing, the gambling, the sporting life crowd, very popular.  Now also on 47th Street your politicians were very, very prominent because at that time, if a politician was running for something, he'd get a megaphone get on top of the car.  And drive up and down 47th Street, one who was very popular was the one they called "Billy Goat" Brown, I don't know, I wish I knew some of the relatives of "Billy Goat" Brown.  Because "Billy Goat" Brown was very popular, he was always running for something and to my knowledge never really became elected to office.  But I might be wrong about that, because some of the fellows who were more like in the street politics.  Now another thing about the Democratic Party at that particular time which also flavored 47th Street was the fact that the Democratic precinct captains would give clothes around Christmas.  I remember my precinct and my father's [Squire Pates] precinct captain would come to our house and would give us two boxes of clothes.  In that would be a woolen cap, we used to call them Ace caps, would be some underwear, some pants, some gloves and sometimes some coats, you know.  The Democratic Party would be giving that, and the Democratic precinct captain would get you to understand that this was being given to you by the Democratic Party.  In other words, this was not just a gift, you have to know its source, now that was another aspect of 47th Street life.
Story_ID: 325094
Speaker 1: And when I was a young boy, I used to stand on the outside of 708 East 47th Street, 708 East 47th Street was a joint.  In there, a blues singer named Muddy Waters used to play.  Now at that particular time, at that particular time, the white people would come in off 47th Street, Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive].  And drive down and they would sit in there, they used to call them sawdust joints, and they would throw quarters up on the stage to Muddy Waters as he would be playing and singing.  And in the summertime, in the summertime, they would keep the doors open and right out there on the street you could, you would hear the guitar strumming and you'd hear him singing.  And you see the cars driving up and the people getting out going into the joint, you know.  And they called them sawdust joints because there was sawdust on the floor, as some of the people would party so hard, when they threw up all they'd have to do is sweep the sawdust up and put some more down there (laughter) you know.  And that was kind of like a part of it.  Now also, also now this is when I was in elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] too, Bo Diddley moved--I lived at 4624 Evans [Avenue], Bo Diddley lived behind 4633.  I think it was about 4633 Evans, now Bo Diddley went to elementary school but dropped out.  Because at the time in which Bo Diddley came to Chicago [Illinois], Bo Diddley came here from Mississippi and I doubt as to whether he could read or write.  And they put him into what they called at that time, the dummy room, you know, it was like ungraded, I don't know they--EMA [ph.] sort of thing you know.  And so Bo Diddley used to go on the corner, he had a washtub and a string on a like a two by four in a tub, and he would stand on the corner on 47th and Evans and pluck that thing, you know?  And sing, a washtub, you know, and it was amazing because when I left 46th [Street] and Evans, I was amazed that Bo Diddley had developed as he has into a rock and roll singer.  But because it was like a man coming into his time because there was a time in which Bo Diddley--say until rock and roll came in.  See at this time you had a lot of so-called rock and roll, and naturally Elvis Presley was able to exploit that.  Because he had heard all of the rock and rollers and began to copy it, and he delivered it to a white audience.  And that's when of course--but this was all up and down 47th Street, so you had jazz, you had jazz in the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois], jazz and swing and everything like that in the Regal.  You had Bo Diddley down further east up and down the street playing outside attracting audiences on the outside on the corner.  Now that's a part of the sound, you also had and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what was, I'm sorry, what was Bo Diddley's given name [Ellas McDaniel], you remember at all, do you remember?
Speaker 1: I don't remember, but you know something, they had a write-up in the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] about him, and I remember reading it and laughing a bit about it.
Story_ID: 325095
Speaker 1: Because, Bo Diddley lived, you see at that time, people lived in kitchenettes.  The owners, who were essentially Jewish landlords, like if you had, or was like my house here, they'd make three apartments out of this apartment, they were all cut up.  So, therefore, now so, therefore, you almost and you were charging people many instances rent by the week.  Like so much a week rather than you know, so people would live in an apartment and be paying twenty dollars a week or thirty dollars a week rather than a whole apartment.  As a matter of fact let me say something, it wasn't until I got to be as I was delivering papers and I delivered over--you see my paper route was up and down Greenwood [Avenue] and Ellis [Avenue] from 47th [Street] to 51st [Street] and 51st back down the street.  Now you know what's over there, right, and that's over there now.  I can remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pretty posh kind of?
Speaker 1: Oh man, mansions you know, and I also delivered papers up and down, well from the 47th Street side, to the 51st Street side, all up and down Lake Park [Avenue].  They had a museum, a medieval museum, they had a museum that had medieval like armored suits and all like that, it was called the Harding museum.  It was on 47th and Lake Park, 47th, 48th [Street] and Lake Park, it looked like a big castle, and it was called the Harding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened to it, it's not still--
Speaker 1: It was torn down I, it was torn down, I think it was, I was trying to remember who Harding [George F. Harding, Jr.] was, seems like to me it had something to do with a newspaper entrepreneur.  But it was a big castle between 40- what was it 47th yeah right around 47th, 48th and Lake Park at that time.
Speaker 2: What's over there now where the bus turnaround is I guess?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, it's right around in there, that's right.  'Cause see they had--one of the reasons I knew about it because they had a bicycle shop over there on Lake Park on the corner of 47th Street.  And I would there and get little things for my bicycle see?  Now in terms of--you could stand on the corner of 47th and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] around the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois], you see because like I said from 47th to 48th you had the Regal, you had the Met [Metropolitan Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] across the street.  You had, you had the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois] down on the corner, you had both boxing on the outside and dancing on the inside.  And also a roller rink later on, and there, it was always crowded, the ballroom was always crowded.  You always had good--Lionel Hampton and musicians like that, you know, Lionel, all of the black musicians.
Story_ID: 325096
Speaker 1: Your father, Squire Pates, was very much involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that affect your upbringing?
Speaker 2: Tremendously, tremendously, my father used to read the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] to us every morning, I mean every, at least once week, 'cause the Pittsburgh Courier was a pink paper.  It came out pinkish had a pinkish, okay--now he would get the paper because the Pullman porters would bring it to the station and they would distribute it around.  And I delivered the Defenders [Chicago Defender] too, and my father would read to us the lynchings, like he'd read, the Pittsburgh Courier would have four lynchings in, around the country, this week, five lynchings the next week you know.  In other words, it ran a statistic on the lynchings that were taking place in the country.  And at this time my father was very adamant about anti-lynching, why don't they pass an anti-lynching law, why don't they pass an anti-lynching law?  Well the [U.S.] Congress, white folks in Congress and whatnot-- Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was very popular at that time, Archibald Carey [Archibald Carey, Jr.] here in the City of Chicago [Illinois] was a preacher and his daddy [Archibald J. Carey] was a preacher.  And they were tremendous orators and they were A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] preachers, you know, Archibald Carey was also a judge.  And then you had, I can't think of the fellow's name [Corneal A. Davis] down at Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel AME Church, Chicago, Illinois], he was a state representative, I'll recall his name in a minute.  But now as a result of this, the NAACP was fighting for anti-lynching laws.  And the more they'd fight, the more my father would talk about it in the house because this was the fundamental problem in the black communities among men who had pride in themselves.  They would say, "If there's still lynching down there, the South is no place to be," and so, so, so.  But there was also lynching here because the police was carrying out a process that was similar to that, but they didn't see it the way it was kind of like disguised, you know.  Now because the North was supposed to be a much different climate than the South, well in a way it was, but remember now the European unions and whatnot had a very tight hold on the jobs in the cities, in the major cities.  And in order for black people to get into those various union jobs, well even to this day, that's a problem because the European immigrants had reserved these for their, they called them the brotherhood of this and the brotherhood of that.  And my father would talk about these injustices with respect to black people in this country, and lynching was one of those.  Now, they would have meetings in my father's house, and as a kid, the law in my house was, young people are not allowed in the room when grown people are talking.  Well naturally if that's the truth then the young person wants to see, what is a grown person that you can't be in the room.  So I used to sit, like there was a little vestibule area in the house like this and the living room was here, so I'd come up and kind of sit and fool around in the vestibule there.  'Cause a lot of cigar smoke too, my father's friends smoked, my father smoked a pipe, and all of his friends smoked cigars.  So the house was always full of cigar smoke when he was at a meeting in the house.  My father was also a very strong functionary with the Postal Alliance [National Alliance of Postal Employees].  And many of the men who worked in the post office were very avid NAACP members.  So my father became a solicitor of NAACP memberships and whatnot, and at one while I think he had--let me tell you about my father in that regard.  If my father would walk into a barbershop or into a doctor's office, he had his NAACP membership blanks with him at all times.  And you would have a hard time as a black person in one of those doctor's offices or in the barbershop explaining to my father why you were not a member of the NAACP.  When you walked--when he'd get in the reception area, he'd take out, he'd say, "Are you a member of the NAACP?"  Somebody says no, he says, "What?"  And then you'd have to, you would be burdened by his attack because he didn't care, you would just have to deal with it.  Now my father was a frank, forthright person and he could explain his situations, I mean he, you know, he was not like a marketer, he would make you feel so bad as a black person for not being a member of the NAACP.  Because after all, they were the only ones fighting to protect black people at that time from being lynched.
Story_ID: 325097
Speaker 1: When one goes back into the history of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, that was one of the reasons why he [Pates' father, Squire Pates] was a member, because of how it came into being, you know.  Separating from the regular Methodist church and creating its own African identity.  And being, the church being very fundamental in the fight for African American rights in this country he carried both of those badges so to speak.  The church one, the A.M.E. church and also the badge of fighting to get members in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], make sure everybody was a member of the NAACP.  So, and that affected me because it made me aware of what--of one of the concrete images of the resistance, of the fight.  See that was just one, as I got older I began to see, I began to understand what oppression was, systemic oppression.  Because lynching black people was a form of intimidation to make sure that a black person was never able to express an authority in anything.  This is why so many of our professors and our teachers and preachers at that particular time may have been Uncle Tom appearing around white people.  Because they, especially men, because the men knew that they had no protection, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was a part of the government.  It was a part of every institutional setting, so you had no appeal in the courts because it was not unusual for the judge to be a member of the Ku Klux Klan.  You had no appeal, so when they talked about the country is a system of laws; this is why Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] became so important.  Because remember now I'm talking about that period of time when racial separation was American apartheid.  And I would contend that South Africa had nothing on this country.  With respect to how it separated--see I can remember as a kid I told you about the separate coach, but we didn't talk about our rides on the Trailways [Trailways National Bus System] bus.  Where they would bring the--like, oh, boy, I'm telling you, just had a senior moment, the sister who sat on the bus.
Speaker 2: Rosa Parks.
Speaker 1: Rosa Parks.  As kids me and my brother [Henry Pates] would be sitting in the back seat on the Trailways bus.  When the bus had stopped, here would be another black person getting on the bus with four chickens.  And they would have to sit back there with us, and we'd be teasing each other, "I bet you the chicken's gonna mess on you," and he'd be holding it.  And here we got people sitting in the back, we might be, the back seat in about four seats here and four seats there and then the curtain is drawn.  Now all the black people would get on the bus got to go back here and sit behind the curtain, now that was true on the bus.  You got to go to the white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So even if the front wasn't crowded you'd have to go, you'd have to sit behind the curtain even though--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --there were seats, you had to get back there.
Speaker 1: No, you could have five white people on the front of the bus, and twenty-five black people in the back, standing up behind the curtain and all like that, see what I'm saying?  Because it was actually against the law to sit with white people, you couldn't drink on the same water fountain; you couldn't go to the same bathroom.  You certainly could not eat in the same res- and in the movie you'd have to sit in the balcony.  All the blacks sat in the balcony--
Story_ID: 325098
Speaker 1: Now how did that play out in Chicago [Illinois] in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The things that you had of that kind when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, I don't remember that kind of segregation except but--if you would to notice in hotels--see I think Chicago was very sophisticated, it's quite possible, black men might've been on the door in the Palmer House [Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois] but they certainly were not in the restaurant eating.  You see, and I would say that was pretty true in a lot of restaurants downtown.  Because it wasn't until later on you had jazz musicians who could play in places and then could not come back around and live in the hotels, you know, and that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Herman Roberts and he talked about how--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He became, you know, his hotel chain got big because nobody could go downtown.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Also that's the demise of his business too.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, because when they opened up he went out of business, that's right.  Because when we held the conference, we held a conference in the black community and sent all the conferees to Roberts Hotel [Roberts Motel, Chicago, Illinois].  And it was very interesting, particularly one down there near [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs, you know her house down there?  He said, "Hey man that's not the kind of hotel we run.  He said, "We turn this thing over four times in twenty-four hours, and you're asking us to give people rooms for three days," (laughter) he says.
Speaker 1: Four times in twenty-four hours?
Speaker 2: Understand that, that's right; he said, "We will turn the hotel room over four times in twenty-four hours and you talking about," you know, I said, "Wow, that's beautiful."  But that was very interesting.
Story_ID: 325099
Speaker 1: I was trying, oh yes, the beaches.  The beaches in Chicago [Illinois], black people would go to 31st Street, and there was a wire that separated the white part from the black part.  And that was certainly true on 63rd Street, 63rd Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois], and one of the biggest race riots you ever had was out there at Rainbow [Rainbow Beach Park, Chicago, Illinois] on 76th [Street].  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On seventy--
Speaker 1: Seventy-ninth [79th Street].
Speaker 2: Ninth, yeah and the lake [Lake Michigan], I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: There was a riot out there?
Speaker 1: Oh man.
Speaker 2: What year, was that in the, okay, so in the '40s [1940s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was when I was a teenager, blacks were out--and let me tell you about on 47th Street, we used to swim off the rocks at 47th and the lake.  And this was like when I was like 13, 14, 15 and we would go across Cottage Grove [Avenue] and try to walk to the lake.  Well they had an ice cream shop between Ellis [Avenue] and Woodlawn [Avenue]; they had an ice cream shop between Ellis and Woodlawn on the south side of the street.  In that ice cream shop were whole lot of white kids, teenagers, and every time we'd go to the lake and on the way back over we would get run back across Cottage Grove by a lot of white boys.  Except one time, when my brother [Henry Pates] went along, me and my friends and my brother, we were coming back from swimming in the lake.  And we got to about Ellis, they got after us, we ran and caught the streetcar, you know the streetcar.  You could catch it in the middle of the block and one of the white boys tried to jump on the back of the streetcar after us.  My brother hit him with that thing that you used to pull the tracks with, it was big, it looked like a real long carjack.  And it had a sharp thing you would move the tracks with it like a big lever and they would keep it back in the backend of the streetcar.  My brother hit him across the nose with it and the boy fell back off the streetcar and when we got back to Cottage Grove, we would stand on the other side of Cottage Grove and laugh and point our fingers and laugh and point our fingers.  But that was just one incident that--but going across Cottage Grove was notorious, and especially--see on the other side, what they called the Kenwood Oakland [Chicago, Illinois] community, it was real treacherous down there.  Because a poor type of white boy lived down there, from 47th to 51st [Street] you had a different kind.  Now you also had a Japanese colony or Japanese area on Oakenwald [Avenue], around 43rd [Street] and Oakenwald because as a young boy I can remember after delivering my papers I would notice all the Japanese standing down on 47th and Lake Park [Avenue], kind of like to catch the, the streetcar to go to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  Most of the Japanese would go to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 324629
Speaker 1: You were getting ready to tell me one more thing about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or something else with the NAACP.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your father [Squire Pates] was quite a solicitor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he probably, my father was very--he was very responsible for his family and with his family.  So in, therefore, you know like some of the opportunities that might've put him on the national level, he did not have that kind of aspiration.  Because he really wanted to stay pretty--he was a family man; he was really a family man.  And I think, I achieved some of the skills of fatherhood and parenting from him, to know what was important, and what was unimportant.  To acquire the temperament to be able to tolerate family life, to understand the magnitude of giving of your own personality and understanding what is important.  Relative to that sort of thing for which you should take a stand so to speak, and those sorts of things for which you should compromise and give in.  I was very fortunate to have a father like my father in that regard because it made my own marriage, and as a matter of fact it made my own ability to associate with women very easy, I think.  You know now that's my opinion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have two things, remarks here, comments, but one was, what is your father, did he know about your traveling around with the numbers people and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not, absolutely, everything I'm telling you, all my father knew is that I was going to work, when I was delivering my newspapers in the morning.  We never talked abo- you know I didn't bring this up, that's a good question.  I dare not bring this in the house because if he had known the various things that I had seen and the fact that we were, that I was delivering policy, I mean no.  And as a matter of fact Crowe [Larry Crowe], this taught me something very real about the fabric of Chicago [Illinois].  On every Friday the numbers would be pulled from the wheel so that you know who won what.  But also every Friday, I remember one wheel in particular there were always two white plainclothes policemen waiting for their envelope.  They would always get paid off and they would go on and shake hands and drive on away, they weren't in the police cars, but they were definitely plainclothes policemen, you know.  It was Chicago, as I got older I began to understand that this is a part of the politics of Chicago.  And when we go back to 47th Street, now I want you to remember, Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson] now this is, I think I was about sixteen or seventeen.  Congressman Dawson moved his office to 47th, between Evans [Avenue] and Cottage Grove [Avenue], and on the window it had, on the window it had Harold Washington, young Democrat, president of the Young Democrats.  And I remember it so well because on the corner of 46th [Street] and Evans there used to be a prostitute that used to go in and out of the whiskey store there.  And she would, some of the fellows who knew her and I, my standing on the corner, they say, I forgot her name now.  But they'd ask her, "Who you waiting for now, who you waiting for," and she would say, "The congressman."  Now Dawson would drive up in a blue Oldsmobile, that's what he had, a blue Oldsmobile, dark blue Oldsmobile.  And surely enough he'd drive up, she'd jump in the passenger side, and they would scoot on away.  And me and my buddies we kind of chuckle a bit about it, and that's when I first, now I guess I was about sixteen or seventeen.  That's when I first saw Harold Washington.  I, but I didn't know--in terms of what politics were I was not a part, that was, I had not matured into that mentality yet.  I was kind of like a young teenager, and you know, whatever people talked about with politics I associated it with the mayor or a congressmen.  I remember Alderman Despres [Leon Despres] and I remember, I remember Sidney Brown, who was a lawyer but he was not a politician.  As a matter of fact he had a son.
Story_ID: 324630
Speaker 1: I was trying to think of the name of that bank [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois] now.  I wanna say Home Federal but--
Speaker 2: Citizens Federal, was it Citizens Federal, not Citizens Federal?
Speaker 1: No it isn't Citizens Federal; it'll come to me in a minute.  But his son, Sidney Brown, was the chairman of the bank, and his son, he was a lawyer, and his son.  He was from Mound Bayou [Mississippi] also and his son became--he knew my father [Squire Pates] really well, they were good buddies.  His son also became one of the bank functionaries but he got killed, he was walking out and somebody stabbed him right on the outside of the bank you know.  Is it First Federal, no, it's not First Federal.  Anyway you know where it is, but that--and at that time the bank was in its--the Rosenwald [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] was also on 47th Street which is very important because at that time most of your striving black people lived in Rosenwald building.  Which of course was I guess the first project building, built by Julius Rosenwald.  And in that First Federal [sic.], if that's the name of the bank, it started right across the street, sort of like a cooperative investment company you know.  And many black people just as they did at Metropolitan Insurance Company [Chicago, Illinois] and Supreme Liberty Life [Supreme Liberty Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] would invest their credit savings in this co-op.  Which later developed into First Federal if that's the name of it (laughter).  I wanna get that name right before we leave, but, and that's important because there were many names in the Rosenwald building.  Many of whom I can't remember now--
Speaker 2: Well, Robert Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor] was in there.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Robert Taylor was and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, yes.  And I lived in there too, but I moved in, in the 19--right after I got married, I got married in what, '57 [1957], and I moved in there I guess about '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].  Because I moved here in '64 [1964], I stayed there about four years and then I moved here, you know.
Story_ID: 324631
Speaker 1: One thing about 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois], I think we have to remember in the community in general, were the horses and wagons and the deliveries of ice, the iceman, the coalman.
Speaker 2: So those were still going on when you were coming up, the horses and wagon thing?
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, when I was a kid, the vegetables were sold out in the street, horse and wagons.  The iceman would sometimes have a truck, or he would have a horse and wagon.  The milkman, horse and wagon, I remember Borden Milk Company [Borden Company] used to come down the alley, horse and wagon, milkman deliver your milk up to the door.  A ragman, these were usually old white men and they would come down, they had a yell, (unclear), and I never, that's the way it sounded to me.  I never was able to translate that into what he was really saying, but I do remember, "We buy old rags and paper."  Now also I used to work with a junkman named Tom [ph.] in a garage, and Tom had only one arm, and Tom was a black man.  And to me as a young man he looked like he was the strongest man on earth.
Speaker 2: Even with the one arm?
Speaker 1: Because what he would do, is he would, he had a baling machine where you would put paper in that baling machine and bale it all the way up until it was like, you know, and he would tighten it from the top.  It had a kind of a level where you would turn it like this and this thing would push the paper down, push it down, and then you'd push it down some more, push it down.  And then he would bale it, then he would take those bales and lift them with one arm and throw them up like that with his shoulder.  Throw them up on, and stack them in this garage, the garage was behind 4624 Evans [Avenue], and I remember that you know, it was a junk garage.  And we used to go up and down the alleys picking up iron, and picking up iron and brass and paper in baby buggies we had.  And we would also, as young boys, we would make wagons and we would make wagons in all kinds of ways.  We would take the wheels from baby buggies and hook them on to crates and make wagons out of them, you know.  Some of the boys would deliver groceries, I delivered groceries about twice.  But my main entrepreneurship was, after the papers, was selling coal and wood up and down Federal [Street] and LaSalle [Street].  Which was over by the railroad tracks actually, the railroad tracks that are over there now.  And what we would do is walk and up and down those railroad tracks, pick up the coal off the ground that would come off the trains and put them in baskets.  And we would sell the coal and the kindling wood that would be used in the potbelly stoves by the people to heat their houses at that time.  Because a lot of people didn't have, you go over in the white community and I was shocked at the space when I was delivering papers.  I was shocked, some of the people would invite me into their houses; well I had been instructed seriously by my father [Squire Pates], "Never set foot in anybody's house."  So I wouldn't do that, I'd stand on the out, they'd open the door, "Newsboy, newsboy, won't you come in and drink some cocoa," you know, I'd say, "No thank you, no thank you."  And sometimes I'd be freezing cold, I'd be (laughter) freezing, nose running, my gloves got holes in them you know.  And I'm just gonna drink a little bit--my father's admonition was always very prominent in my mind, don't set foot in anybody's house.  And later on I found that was a very wise admonition, very wise because I even got to the point as I got older where I kept some space.  Like when I sold the Sunday paper, I kept space between the man giving me the money and my giving him the paper.  Because I begin to get the feeling that one of them could grab me and snatch me in the house you know.  So I was always ready to run.  And that was when I got across Cottage Grove [Avenue], and my father's admonitions kind of stood up pretty well.  Now, let me go further here on the flavor of 47th Street because I think it was at this time that I, about at twelve years old, about to enter high school--
Story_ID: 324632
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Where did I go to grade school, I went to Du- went to Forrestville Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was an interesting experience too in Forrestville.
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers there that really stand out as people that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Glad you mentioned that, now in terms, there was one teacher that--okay I'm gonna give you some teachers.  One teacher gave me insight into my father [Squire Pates], very valuable insight into my father.  I had a teacher named Mrs. Prentice [ph.], my father used to read the newspaper to me when I was a little bitty boy.  And I don't remember when I learned to read, because when I went into elementary school, I could read.  And I was surprised because I could read when others couldn't, so when the kindergarten teacher would talk about a word, I knew the word.  And many of the other kindergartners didn't.  I think I had Mrs. Prentice in about second grade, she was a big white lady, and she used to read 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman] to us; that was her favorite story.  And she would (laughter) she would read it as though she were an actress.  Little Black Sambo had a father named Black Jumbo and his mother was named Black Mumbo.  And Little Black Sambo ate all the pancakes and so forth, we'd be sitting there just listening, and she would show us the little book of 'Little Black Sambo,' as you know was written by Richard Kipling [sic.] you know.  And she would show us a little book of 'Little Black Sambo' and she would, we'd be looking at it and laughing.  But you know there was so many caricatures of black people at that time.  The soap company Gold Dust [N.K. Fairbank Co.] had that box with the Gold Dust Twins, Aunt Jemima had Aunt Jemima pancake mix, with Aunt Jemima, you know, looking like an antebellum big fat black woman with an apron on.  A red bandana, everything caricatured black existence, the commercials in the black community.  If you wanted to make something white it was always usually a black person with big red lips and big broad teeth.  You know it was that minstrel kind of thing, and we had a diet of that in second grade in the literature founded by 'Little Black Sambo.'  Now one day I was kind of acting my usual self as a little boy in Mrs. Prentice's class.  Mrs. Prentice grabbed me by the neck and shook me like this you know, okay, I went home and told my father.  I was a little kid, I said, "Daddy, Mrs. Prentice wrang my neck," he said, "What?"  I said, "Mrs. Prentice wrang my neck."  And so the following morning my father and I went up to the school, my father always had a way of coming to the school and looking in the window anyway, you know.  Particularly when I got in seventh, let me see, seventh grade I skipped sixth grade I think.  I think I skipped fourth grade and sixth grade, something like that.  Anyway, he came in, he said, "Mrs. Prentice, I'd like to talk to you," he said, "you wrung my son's neck," and she tried to explain that.  And he told her, he took his finger, he said, "Listen, don't you ever put your hands on my boy again, if you have something, if that boy acts up, you call me and tell me.  But don't you put your hands on him," I said oh, look at this you know (laughter), so you know I felt kind of embarrassed a little bit as a little boy.  Miss Prentice was red as a, I mean she was red as a beet you know, she could, I guess she.  And I don't know, her grabbing me and wringing my neck like that I guess, I was a very active little kid you know.  Very talkative, very active, so I guess she figured she was gonna sit me down some kind of way.  But I was very proud of my father for having done that, and as I got older I thought about that I said, "Hm."  But that diet of 'Little Black Sambo' made a tremendous academic impression on me, because I wondered, I started wondering why she read it so much.  You know, why we stayed on it so long, there was the little primers and stuff like 'Dick and Jane' and all that stuff, but her thing was (laughter) was rich on the diet of 'Little Black Sambo.'
Story_ID: 324633
Speaker 1: Well, as I got older I tried to assimilate that and didn't do, you know, couldn't do much with it, except but--see in elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] I had Miss Ware [ph.], I had Miss Ware, Miss Chaney [ph.], let me see, Miss Ware, Miss Chaney and Miss Ford [ph.].  Those were the three black teachers I had, all the rest were white.  Now that's important, because the three black teachers I had emphasized that you must go to school, you must go to school, you must finish school.  And if you don't I'm calling your father, you know, and that sort of thing.  It was as though the white teachers were anxious--and at the end of school, the black teachers, we were anxious to carry their bags and so forth.  Because the black teachers would walk to their houses, we had one that lived one black from there, and we'd be anxious.  In other words, they lived right there around the school.  Miss Ware was a very, well they were all very strict, they were very strict teachers.  And I had one named Miss Ford, Miss Ford subsequently went to teach at Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], Miss Ford, I think she died.  Oh I had another one named Miss Matlock [HistoryMaker Frances T. Matlock], Miss Matlock was a historian, and she was a very pretty woman you know.  And as a little boy I was struck by how pretty she was.
Speaker 2: Is that Frances Matlock?
Speaker 1: Frances Matlock, that's right, Frances Matlock, she was a beautiful woman in so many ways, she was--I mean first of all, aside from having to learn, there it was a way that you had to carry yourself.  Miss Matlock demanded that you carried yourself in the appropriate fashion, and as a little boy I used to always wonder, now what is appropriate, what is she talking about, you know.  But Miss Ford was like that too, I don't remember Miss Ford's first name, Miss Ford taught at Dunbar.  Miss Ford forced me to read Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], and she introduced me to--Miss Ford introduced, this was in the seventh grade.  No, Miss Ford, I was eighth, eighth grade; I graduated with Miss Ford.  Miss Ford introduced me to Shakespeare, to, well she would have us read about Caesar, the biographies of the Caesars.  And she would also--'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare], she too, well naturally that's part of Shakespeare.  But she had a thing about that kind of literature that was very helpful when I went into high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Because I found that in eighth grade I was reading, I had already read much of the stuff that they would been studying as a sophomore, you know.  So when I went into high school, I went into my courses were, my first semester of high school, algebra, physics let me see, English, algebra, physics and history, you know.  Now when I look at that now I see that the courses in high school and I look at exactly the curricula now, that's called an honors curriculum now, you know.  But everything was honors curriculum it seems to me back in those days.  Because I do know, but we did have the A class, the B class and the C class in the rooms, two rows of A people, two rows of B people, two rows of C people, you know.  And there were usually, what, six rows, I think there was eight seats in a row 'cause see I was also patrol boy and I was also in charge of passing out the milk and cookies (laughter) isn't that funny?
Story_ID: 324634
Speaker 1: But I, I was anxious (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you were busy as a kid, I mean you were selling coal and wood--
Speaker 1: As a kid--
Speaker 2: You got two paper routes, you're delivering policy (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You're, I mean this is a--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then passing out the milk and cookies--
Speaker 1: Plus--
Speaker 2: And patrol boy too.
Speaker 1: That's exactly, plus--
Speaker 2: And that's a big deal in those days, they'd give you the flag or did you get the band--
Speaker 1: I had the belt that went down like this and went across like that that you had to keep clean.
Speaker 2: I don't, they don't do that anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no and boys--
Speaker 2: I remember what an honor it was, my brother [Henry Pates] was a patrol boy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they had abolished it by the time I came to eighth grade but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a big deal, he had a badge.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It was, you know--
Speaker 1: That's right--
Speaker 2: He had to carry himself a certain way.
Speaker 1: Well the interesting thing about it is, I don't think that really this was, we had, there were gangs then.  But they were not as vicious, not nearly; the definition of gang then is so different from the definition of gang now, very, very different.  Because the gang around Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] at the time that I was growing up was called the Counts.  And the gang around my house at the time was called the Invaders.  Now as I got older, these gangs matured into a different level of aggression, most of the boys who did not continue in school went along the pathway of the gangs.  And one of the young boys who grew up in the community with me, they called him Sonny Boy [ph.], Sonny Boy was reared by all aunts.  I don't think he had a father, I don't there was a man in the house at all.  Sonny Boy was a very quick person, I mean he could run real fast but he never played.  See we used to play ball out in the street, we'd play base, softball out in the street.  Sonny Boy would never play with us, but he was always--he sort of, well he was just different in terms of what he liked to do.  Now we also had a boxing club, I had a, I belonged to a boxing club and we would--our club used to train at the CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] gym, which was behind Morris [Robert Morris College; Robert Morris University Illinois, Chicago, Illinois], Robert Morris--
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in that building or in a building that was there, the CYO gym.  One of the boxers was Tony Zale, Tony Zale was one of the trainers.
Story_ID: 324635
Speaker 1: Well, you wanna tell the Silver King story while we're still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well.
Speaker 1: We're still fresh, now you said that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: One of our eminent Chicago [Illinois] citizens Judge William Cousins [HistoryMaker William Cousins, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Judge Bill Cousins.
Speaker 1: Who's now judge, retired judge now, but he lived across the street from you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think the address might've been about 4637 or 4641 Evans [Avenue], and he had a Silver King bicycle, but Judge Cousins, he was older than I and he did not play in the street with us.  You ver- I met Bill Cousins; I remember one day he would get in the street and he'd played once or twice.  But we never really knew him, he did not really move with a regular group, but he had the Silver King bicycle, and everybody in the community wanted a Silver King, every boy wanted a Silver King bicycle.  But Judge Cousins, he had one and what he would do is sometimes lock it on the front rail of the porch.  And the fellows in the community would just walk past it, and admire it, and some, you know, I can remember being entranced by it at one while.  Because my bicycle cost ten dollars used and I can't imagine what the Silver King must've cost.  But later on, and I'll tell you the story too, I was playing in the band at DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] later on.  And I remember I played for the graduation, the band did, and I remember when they made the announcement that Bill Cousins had received a scholarship to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And when I heard that, I said, "Did they say Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?"  They said, "No, they said Harvard," I said, "You mean Bill Cousins got a scholarship to Harvard from DuSable?"  Yep, he got a schol- Bill Cousins went to Harvard on scholarship.
Story_ID: 324636
Speaker 1: That same year, Johnny Griffin, the saxophone player, was taken off the stage by Lionel Hampton right out of high school, he was just that good.  Johnny Griffin, now this was in 1946, Johnny Griffin was playing--Lionel Hampton brought his band to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Because Walter Dyett was a very popular band teacher.
Speaker 2: Right, now he's a famous--he's an icon in Chicago [Illinois], Walter Dyett (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He is abso- and should be.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You talking about a person who made an impression on me, I must include him, but he was in high school.  I must include him in my references.  Walter Dyett was a phenomenal person, but he got Lionel Hampton to bring his band to DuSable to play.  And they played, and Johnny Griffin went up on the stage and played along with Lionel Hampton's--there was fellow named Arnett Cobb who played saxophone on one end.  And he got up there and he and Arnett Cobb begin to play those solos together and he sounded so good.  Lionel Hampton took him from DuSable at that particular time.  And I'm pretty sure that was '46 [1946].  But now let me see, before I got to that, I was talking about Bill Cousins [HistoryMaker William Cousins, Jr.], but I didn't know Bill until much later on after that.  You know I met him much later on more formally because Bill Cousins was; his personality was very different from the fellas that I grew up with.  If he played any sports at all, see I also played on some of the softball teams that we had in the community.  And we had some tough (laughter) I was on boxing team, I was on the softball team.  Let me tell you a little bit about the boxing, now this was between like, I was kind of like sophomoric.  We had a softball team called the Ravens and they asked me to play with them because I could hit the ball, you know.  And so I played softball with the Ravens, now this softball team we played all around, all the teams in the neighborhood.  And they played in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 324637
Speaker 1: Now Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] was full of a great variety of cultural things.  For an example, you had the softball teams, baseball teams, and football teams that played in the park, but you also had what my father [Squire Pates] used to call the Nut Club.  Which they called the Washington Park Forum, now my father would call it the Nut Club, and it was very interesting.  Because I used to wonder why my father would call it the Nut Club, he would say, well it's just a lot of nutty fellows standing around talking.  But it was far more than that, I found, as I listened to them.  I would go over on a Saturday or Sunday with my father in Washington Park, and I would stand there with them and listen to these fellows talk in the park.  And I discovered that these were some of the most politically active, what people called radical, social analysts in our community.  Some of them were attending various universities around, and then you had some of them who were flat out communist.  And this is what of kind of made them radical.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the people that--
Speaker 1: Well unfortunately I cannot name them, I remember their faces, and I remember one of them owned a bookstore on 35th Street for a long time and then he died.  And he walked, and he was a big man, walked with a walking cane, Hammurabi [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb], Hammurabi used to come, I remember him all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Frederic Robb.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wish I could remember this taller fellow who was a Communist; they used to talk about his being a Communist.  And he had a bookstore on 35th Street between King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and Calumet [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Now there was Ishmael Flory, was he out there?
Speaker 1: Ishmael Flory would come out there; as a matter of fact you need to interview him real quick if you haven't.
Speaker 2: He actually passed away.
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: Last year, we tried to interview him, we went to his home and he wasn't feeling well, we set up.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And Andy was there, Dr. Anderson Thompson was there to try to help us, his wife was there, we need to interview his wife [Cathern Davis Flory] before she passes away.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She's still alive, but she knows a lot about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: --that period of time.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: She's very--
Speaker 1: They were flat out communists, and yeah Ishmael Flory would come out there.
Speaker 2: Now Mr. Gaten [HistoryMaker Junius "Red" Gaten], who passed away last week said that he used to speak out there too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Junius.
Speaker 1: I remember his name, I remember his name.
Speaker 2: Gaten, a short guy who had reddish hair I guess in those days.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: If it hadn't turned white.
Story_ID: 324638
Speaker 1: And in speaking of that, the Metropolitan Community Church [Chicago, Illinois] is where I first heard W.E.B. Du Bois speak.
Speaker 2: Now when was that?
Speaker 1: Now this was, I guess I must've been about ten years old, 'cause I was still in elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  So that would be, oh and there's some other things about this, too bad I can't pull all of this stuff in, but as I talk some things flick other memories.  Too bad I can't give it to you in sequence.  I was ten years old in 1941, about 1941 is important because around that time, my dad [Squire Pates], I used to like to go with my dad wherever he went.  And that he liked all the political activities that was going in the community.  And he liked the Negro baseball league [Negro Leagues], so these are the two places that we would always walk.  We would go to Bacon's Casino [Charles A. Hayes Family Investment Center, Chicago, Illinois], which is called--49th [Street] and, 49th and Wabash [Avenue] where old (unclear) was working there, what's it called now, Hayes Center.
Speaker 2: Oh Charles Hayes Center.
Speaker 1: Charles Hayes Center.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: It used to be called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Packinghouse [United Packinghouse Workers Union].
Speaker 1: Yeah it used to be, Packinghouse used to be called Bacon's Casino.
Speaker 2: Did they actually have a casino there?
Speaker 1: No it was never a casino, I think what they, when they said casino, they meant like a big dance hall, because it was a big like garage with an asphalt floor.  And this is where I first heard Paul Robeson 'cause he used to come there.  My father used to try to go up to shake his hand, but he could never get up to him because too many of the Communist people were around him, you know.  And my dad was not inclined in that direction, but Paul Robeson--as a matter of fact he used to speak against it. But Paul Robeson, Paul Robeson's content was so substantially relevant to issues in the black community that the fact that he was Communist was irrelevant.  Because his analysis was very penetratingly relevant to the issues that were in the black community then you know.  So Paul Robeson on the one hand at Bacon's Casino and W.E.B. Du Bois in--
Speaker 2: He was at the church you said, at the--
Speaker 1: At the community church over here where Leon Finney [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Leon D. Finney, Jr.] is trying to do whatever he is trying to do.  I think he's gonna make a museum, what he says, church and a museum.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Were you, I mean you were ten when you heard these.
Speaker 1: About ten, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did he impress you at the time?
Speaker 1: You know as a little boy, I was very impressed with both of them, the only thing about W.E.B. Du Bois is that the microphones, certainly amplifications certainly then was not what it is now.  But it was as though he ever wanted a question from the audience, he would deliver his speech and he never wanted a question.  And then if you asked a question, the answer, the response was so succinct that you had to understand that whatever the information was that you sought, you had to make sure that you very meticulously and carefully crafted your question to get the answer.  Because there was very little enlargement upon his answer, I mean like if you said, "Dr. Du Bois did you do such and such a thing or other?"  "Yes."  Well I mean is that the an- yes, you know that sort of thing.  And then of course as a matter of fact the time that I heard him, I recall that that he never took his overcoat off.  And I thought that was interesting as a kid, you know, I remember he wore a vest too or he wore a vest in his suits and whatnot.  But that was the first time that I heard him and I'm talking about personally now you know, same thing is true with Paul Robeson--
Story_ID: 324639
Speaker 1: Robeson [Paul Robeson], he was, I guess he was a little bit more engaging with the people?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Paul Robeson was a man of the people, that's why the crowds were always around him and whatnot, but I didn't have the perception then.  And my fa- I don't think that my father [Squire Pates] did either because my father never went into too much the examination of what a Communist was.  So in terms of what a Communist was and how it related to the European apprehensions of communism, I was never able, you know, I never heard my father talk about that.  But now that I think about it, one of the reasons probably is because he was working in the post office.  And if you, if any of that had been around you in any kind of governmental agency, you'd been fired, you know.  And, 'cause I can remember his having admonished me, never sign anything, and never sign anything.  And that's what they would always do at these meetings, have you sign the membership roster, and one of my buddies got into very serious trouble about that.  Took him a long time, because one of the things (laughter), see the Communists would give dances at Bacon's Casino [Charles A. Hayes Family Investment Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And many black men and whatnot would go over there to the dances you know.  Because this whole notion of integration was taking place on a whole lot of levels you know, and many of the Communist women would come.  They'd have on their brassieres and nothing, you know, and they would come (laughter) and you know young black fellows could see all the way through that, you know.  And then there was a lot of stuff going on around the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at that time, too.  There was a whole climate of open discussions and so forth around the University of Chicago and various places you know.  Matter of fact, I used to belong to a Great Books Club and so did Andy [Anderson Thompson], as a matter of fact, I think Andy and I kind of walked behind each other around that time.  Great Books Club and so forth.
Story_ID: 324640
Speaker 1: We need to get back to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] though, now you went to DuSable instead of Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  In those days what I understand was most black teenagers either went to one or the other.  Though they went to other schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: In the city it was primarily one or the other.
Speaker 2: Well let me tell you about my DuSable experience.
Speaker 1: Now you were in the district of DuSable right?
Speaker 2: I was in the district of DuSable but so were a whole lot of people who did not go to DuSable, and one of the reasons why the young men didn't go at that particular time was because they said the freshman initiation was so aggressive, they couldn't deal with it.  Well I can remember when I went to DuSable as a freshman, you always had, you were put in a division called division one-something it always began with a one.  Those divisions always met in the assembly hall, and those divisions were always given gym at a certain period.  And they were also given art as a class, this is the way you could identify freshmen.  Now you had the dropouts and whatnot who were always hanging around DuSable to take their money, and you would have to fight if you were gonna go to DuSable.  Many of the boys who lived in DuSable didn't want to engage that sort of thing.  When I, and neither did I or my brother [Henry Pates].  I had a friend named Millard Frazier [ph.], I really hate to use his name if this thing ever--'cause he spent thirty-five years in penitentiary.  But he and I and my brother went into DuSable together, he may not even remember us, and we got into the biggest fight on the first day.  But we managed to get out of that safe and sound, and our membership in DuSable, from that point on we could move freely.  But the gang element at DuSable was of greater variety, you had Counts and Fins [ph.], the Fins, the Fins were up around 58th Street.  The Counts were, were down further north and you had these various gangs that was still a part of the social fabric of DuSable High School.  So you had to make sure that that you had a certain level of competence and confidence as a young man to move through DuSable.  And once, once you got to be a freshman A, there was freshman B and freshman A, One A, One B, Two A, Two B, I think One A, yeah.  Once you got to freshman B then you could move with greater authority.  But as a freshman, first semester freshman, you had to always be watching, and some of them, some of the biggest problems I had was with fellows standing on the outside trying to take my money.  Now the other thing about DuSable was this, excuse me, everybody, all the young men at DuSable went to school while they still had part-time jobs.
Story_ID: 324641
Speaker 1: Everybody at DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] had part-time jobs, or jobs of one type or another, so therefore, when they came to school, they were sharp as tacks.  They had on the latest this and the latest that, there was no such thing as wearing jeans at DuSable when I was a young boy.  There were no jeans, no overalls and stuff, you had on shirts and ties and you were always sharp, you know.  And same thing, the girls would come to school in high heels and that sort of thing, you know.  That was like the social climate, now when I got to DuSable I decided that I wanted to play in the band.  And I kind of took off in the band because of Mr. Walter Dyett who was the bandmaster.
Speaker 2: Now had did you played an instrument before?
Speaker 1: I had played the piano but I quit, and so my father [Squire Pates], let's see, my father bought an old secondhand clarinet.  It was made out of metal, and bought my brother [Henry Pates] a silver trumpet and my brother didn't want to play so he didn't play.  Well I started playing in the band and I kind of enjoyed it, so I spent four years playing in the band at DuSable.  And I played in both the concert band and the jazz band, I think about playing in the band was DuSable, Mr. Dyett was the band teacher but he was also like, he was like a surrogate father to many fellas.  Now as you may know, DuSable was known for turning out some of the greatest of all Chicago [Illinois] musicians.  Dorothy Donegan, Eddie Harris, Richard Davis who plays bass, Von Freeman and his brothers [George Freeman and Eldridge "Bruz" Freeman], John Gilmore, Clifford Jordan.  Let me see Claude McLin, Billy Green, trying to name all these fellows, go down the line, let me see.  And this was just during my time.
Speaker 2: So these were all there when you, Eddie Harris was in the band?
Speaker 1: Eddie Harris was two years behind me, yeah he was just--so when I was a senior Eddie Harris had come in.  Eddie Harris and I were good buddies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the electrifying Eddie Harris.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now let me think of some more, now I'm trying--Paul Serrano (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Gilmore--
Speaker 1: Jimmy Ellis, huh?
Speaker 2: Jimmy, yeah, John Gilmore played with Sun Ra, I believe.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jimmy Ellis.
Speaker 1: That's right John as a matter of fact Coltrane [John Coltrane] used to come down, sit down and watch John Gilmore--
Story_ID: 324642
Speaker 1: I started playing the saxophone, and this kind of took me into another direction.  Because as I started playing the saxophone, I already knew the clubs and whatnot you know, and I had been in the Beige Room [Chicago, Illinois].  I had been in the Pershing [Pershing Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois], I had been in the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois], I had been all up and down 63rd Street.  So when I got to be a senior in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], I decided I was gonna play a little music, so I played.  I had a little group, Cecil Bogan on drums, he died, a fellow that I know a fellow named Larry Doss [ph.] played trumpet.  On drums Cecil Bogan, me on saxophone, a fellow named Green [ph.] on the bass, drum, bass, piano, oh Don Balthasar, who still lives in Chicago [Illinois] here somewhere.  I don't think he plays anymore, but some of those names that that you have on that sheet of paper you know.  So I played around, now, this was an interesting experience because that's one of the reasons why I never became a musician.  I was in a joint one time, and a prostitute was sitting next to me after we were taking a break.  And I was asking, how did you get, you know, how did this happen to you, pretty young black gal.  And she went on to justify prostitution, and I started asking myself, is this something that I would want to do the rest of my life.  You know, is the path down which I wanted to go, and my interpretation of the life outside of playing the horn was very positive.  Because the smoke, every time we would play somewhere the smoke was so thick, when I got outside I could hardly open my eyes, it burned.  And I would always come from 63rd [Street] and get in a jitney cab and ride, you remember the jitney cabs, ride down on 47th [Street] and I'd walk home.  Well it gave me a lot of time to think, sometimes I come in the house like four o'clock in the morning you know, I'd been out.  They used to have a thing on 63rd Street and Cottage Grove [Avenue] in one of the lounges, I'm trying to think, called Blue Monday.  This is when all of the old musicians, this was an experience that was just very valuable to me.  All the old musicians would come down and have jam sessions early like, there, early in the mornings.  And they would come down and have jam sessions, and they would be playing like 'til four or five, six o'clock in the morning.  Sometimes I'd come in the house, my father [Squire Pates] would ask me, "Boy, are you sure you been out there playing music?"  I'd say, "Yeah dad, you'd be surprised," you know, and we were able to work that out 'cause it really--staying out all day and on the weekends, but I--the beautiful thing about my constitution was I never required a lot of sleep, and even now.  I've, if I got five or six hours of sleep, I'm all right, I can go, you know, and that is always been the case, so that was kind of a short-lived musical experience for me.  As I, short-lived in that it was four, five, I'd say four or five 'cause even after I graduated from high school, I did a little bit of it, you know.  And I enjoyed it so much and, but at that time, around that time during high school, courting, and that sort of thing.  That sort got in the way a little bit because I had decided I was gonna attempt to go to college.
Story_ID: 324643
Speaker 1: You were always a bright student, and you had skipped a couple of times.  Now you're graduating from DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] in what, are you two years ahead (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-eight [1948]?
Speaker 2: I graduated when I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Sixteen, okay, okay.  So at that point did you know where you gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: I had absolutely no idea, there were no people, talk about, people talk about guidance counselors and that sort of thing.  If there were any at DuSable I don't know who they were, and I don't know how the various DuSableites decided to go into the directions they did.  Sterling Stuckey graduated I think with Andy [Anderson Thompson] and it's interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's like a year behind you, or two years?
Speaker 2: Andy was two years behind me, but you know when I think about it, I ask my, Andy, yeah he was two years behind me.  I think he graduated in '50 [1950] and I graduated in '48 [1948].  But when I graduated from high school my dad [Squire Pates] had pushed this business of going to college so much and I put my age up that summer, I put my age up.  And I got a job during the summer in the steel mill.  Now I had received two scholarships, one to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and the other to Kentucky State [Kentucky State College for Negroes; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky]; they were to play in the band.  Several of my friends went, and one of them got killed in a bus as a matter of fact, his name was Kidd [ph.].
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: The bus was carrying the band somewhere and the bus turned over and he was the drummer and he got killed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His last name was Kidd?
Speaker 2: His name was Kidd, right, but a lot of them went, some of those who were the brighter musicians went on down there.  And some of them came out; one of them named Abernathy [William H. Abernathy] came out here and came back to Chicago [Illinois].  But I went to the steel mill and I got a job.
Speaker 1: Now why did you, why didn't you go on to Tennessee State or Kentucky State?
Speaker 2: When I came back I told my father I said, "Dad, Mr. Dyett [Walter Dyett] is giving me scholarships to Kentucky and Tennessee State."  He said, "Boy you are not going back down south," and that was that.  He said, "You're not going back down south," so I said, "Well, all right."
Story_ID: 324644
Speaker 1: I wasn't caught up too much on the school thing, so I started working at the steel mill, and I was discussing college with both my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] and father [Squire Pates].  And my father said, "Boy, I'm gonna tell you something," he said, I said, "Daddy, they pay a dollar and sixty-eight cents an hour at Wisconsin Steel, 103rd [sic. 106th Street] and Torrence [Avenue].  A dollar and sixty-eight cents an hour, dad," and my father told me, he said, "Boy you'll be dead before you're forty years old if you go out to the steel mill and work," I said, oh.  So I worked out there during that summer, I would come home, I would wear long underwear and the oil dust would get, would penetrate my underwear and get in my skin.  Because when I'd take a bath and wake up in the morning, the sheets on the bed were brown.  So imagine what that was doing to my lungs on the inside, I worked, they gave me a job in what they called the blast furnace, me and my friend.  He's still alive now, Albert Lockett [Albert J. Lockett, Jr.], he graduated, he either graduated with me or maybe a year before me.  He went out there with me, the two of us got this job at the steel mill.  But I want to tell you something, it was an interesting experience, and here's the experience that was in the steel mill job.  I had never worked like that before.  We were given what they called laborer jobs.  And all of our supervisors were white foreigners, like, they put me in a place called a blast furnace where I was supposed to shovel clay into a bucket, shovel dirt into a bucket so that they can make clay, and they used the clay to line the furnaces in order to make steel.  Now in the process of shoveling eight hours a day, I injured my back, but I didn't know I had injured it, I didn't know I had injured it.  Until maybe about two years later, I think I was about eighteen.  I can remember one time--the beautiful thing about working at the steel mill is because I met a couple of fellows, grassroots black men, who taught me a lot about the black community and about myself.  I always thought that when you work you do a job as best you can.  I was up on the, I was up on that thing shoveling one day and one of the old time black men came up to me and said, "Boy," he said, "why you working like this," and I said, "Like what?"  He says, "The way to work here is the way you see us work, you watch us and you'll learn how to work."  In a way I didn't know what that meant, but I was always receptive to instructions from my elders, you know.
Story_ID: 324645
Speaker 1: So I started watching them and this is what they taught me [at Wisconsin Steel], they taught me a concept of pacing, if you are a laborer.  These men would come in, when the supervisor was there, they would work, when the supervisor left, they would sit down.  They would talk, engage in conversation, socialize, somehow or another they had the rhythm of the supervisor's rhythm because he also had a rhythm.  The supervisor might come at nine, again at eleven, again at two; they knew that the supervisor might come at nine, eleven, and two.  I'm giving this kind of like as an example, so therefore, around a quarter to nine they would start working.  When the supervisor left, they would stop, at the next rhythm when the supervisor's about to come they would work again.  And when I saw that I said, "Hmm, this is interesting, you know," I don't know the extent to which you--now understand this is private industry, it's supposed to be so efficient and all that kind of stuff.  These men were dealing with their own self-preservation, I subsequently reasoned it out.  It was very clear that if you did that kind of work and you did it with any kind of energy and whatnot, it is true, as my father [Squire Pates] said, you'd hardly live ten years.  Because with the environment itself and the kind of work you doing, if you didn't injure yourself, which I did, you would, you would exhaust yourself you know.  Or, and they smoked heavily and they drank heavily, every Friday night they had some place to go.  Every Monday they were talking about they didn't have any money because they had spent it over the weekend.  And working with one of the men by the blast furnace, I used to wonder, how in the world can a man talk about how many women he had procured every week.  That was his conversation, you know, I said, man this is all this dude can talk about, however, I'm listening to him.  And he'd come in and called me Slim, "Slim, let me tell you what I did last night.  Slim, let me tell you," and I'd listen to him, but he taught me that you don't, I mean if you're a laborer, you better understand how to labor if you gonna preserve yourself.  Or in many instances, if they're going to get to their retirement.  Now I was doing this to get whatever tuition I thought I might need because I was trying to figure out whether I was going to go to college.  I had told my father, "Hey dad, they're paying a dollar sixty-eight cents an hour, you know."  My dad doesn't have a car; nobody in the family got a car, what, you know.
Story_ID: 324646
Speaker 1: My dad [Squire Pates] still said, "You get your education boy, you get you edu-."  So what I did was, I went out to Wilson College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: So Wilson Junior College.
Speaker 1: Wilson Junior College at that time.
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it--
Speaker 2: Which is now Kennedy-King.
Speaker 1: It's now Kennedy-King.
Speaker 2: So it's--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a heck of a story.  So I went out to Wilson, the first semester at Wilson, at the midterms, I got all Fs.
Speaker 2: Now how do you account for that, you?
Speaker 1: I'm gonna tell you (laughter) I got all Fs.  So I come back home, and I tell my dad in the midterm grades, I said, "Dad, I got all Fs."  My father said, "Well, maybe you need to go to a counselor," (laughter) so I said okay, I went to, I'm trying to think of this lady's name.  I think her name was Miss Galbraith [ph.], she was a counselor at Wilson College.  So I went to Miss Galbraith and Miss Galbraith did something to me that was very similar to what my father used to do that made me read the books that I used to read when I was a young boy.  I went up there and I said, I showed her my grades, she said, oh, a little white woman.  She said, "Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], everybody is not college material," she says, you know, everybody's not college material.  "Perhaps you should look elsewhere and make a decision concerning what you'd like to do, there are a lot of jobs out here that a person like you can do."  So I went back, I told my dad, I said, "Dad I went to the counselor and the counselor told me that I wasn't college material."  And my dad was beautiful, he said, "Boy who is this counselor?"  And I told him her name, he said, "How long has she been knowing you?"  I said, "Well, she doesn't know me, she's the counselor," I said, you know, I went up there, she said, he said, "How long did she talk to you?"  I said, "About a half an hour," he said, "I've been telling you to go to college all your life.  Now you gonna go."  Now this is exactly what my father said.  He said, "And you gonna go up here and let some white woman who talked to you for a half an hour tell you what you cannot do.  And I been telling you what you can do all of your life," look, that hit me so hard.  I went outside on the campus at Wilson, they had a big stump and I sat out there, hmm, you know, just thinking it out.  Now my dad, here's what my dad used to do when I was a little kid, he would go to the grocery store.  And he would buy a bag of groceries at the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] store, this is when supermarkets first started, Atlantic and Pacific.  And when you buy a bag of groceries with so much money, they'd give you a book, so he'd come back and like, 'The Adventures of Mark Twain,' [sic.] I can almost name all the books, 'Vanity Fair' [William Makepeace Thackeray], 'The Adventures of Mark Twain,' I mean, 'Tom Sawyer' ['The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,' Mark Twain], 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], 'Pudd'nhead Wilson' [Mark Twain], 'The Count of Monte Cristo' [Alexandre Dumas], 'Vanity Fair,' 'The Scarlet Letter' [Nathaniel Hawthorne].  'The Three Musketeers' [Alexandre Dumas], all of the so-called classics that if you were to take a college examination back then you'd know the answer to every question.  He'd come home with the book and he said, you know, something, "Boy, I got a book here, but I don't think you can read this one."  He said, "I think this is a little too complicated," I'd say, "What're you talking about; give me that book," you know.  And I got back and I'd read it, and at the end of about a week, he'd say, "Did you read that book I gave you," I said, "Yeah, I read that book."  He said, "Oh you did, huh," he said, "well what's it about," and so as we're talking, maybe going to Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois] to a ballgame, he'd say, "What'd you say that book was about?"  And I'd go on, tell him the whole story, he'd say, "But how can that possibly be?"  You know, asking me little questions.  That evidenced that he did not read the book, but steady asking me those questions to see whether I had read the book.  Well that was an interesting little psychology that my father pulled on me.  Anytime somebody told me I couldn't do something academically, I always said, "Oh, you don't know what you're talking about."
Story_ID: 324647
Speaker 1: So when my father [Squire Pates] gave me that little counseling lesson, which was far, it had nothing do with an examination.  I don't think he even looked at the grades, my father never looked at my course book, my father never looked at my report card.  Jeannie [Jeannie Dorsey-Pates] got my report cards there, 'cause my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] saved them all, I got Es in everything you know, Es in everything.  And on the right side of the report card I got checks in everything (laughter) where it says discipline I got checks in everything, you know.  My father never signed my report card, it was always my mama, my father just assumed that hey, I'm doing what I'm supposed to be doing in school.  'Cause if I had ever told him I had failed in something, I think he probably would've fainted, you know.  So when he told me, he said, "How you gonna let this white woman who has talked to you for a half an hour tell you something about yourself, and I been living with you all your life?"  Well as you see that stuck with me all of these years.  Now my father was a very honest, very forthright man, I mean as a matter of fact see my father was the kind of man that every boy in the neighborhood knew him too.  When we were living on 46th Street, when my father came around the corner, if you were cursing in the street, you'd hear the fellows say, "Hey man there comes Mr. Pates," where, where, over there, oh, oh okay.  "Hey Mr. Pates how you doing," and he'd just done something that he shouldn't have done, "Mr. Pates, how you doing?"  My father said, well who's that James, my father knew them all by first name, who is that, James, is that Charles, that's this and that other.  You know he was that kind of man, so I had a great respect for him, and didn't realize how much respect I had for him, until I really got older.  And that was the kind of, so that was the kind of thing that kind of shook me up a little bit, I went to Wilson [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I said hmm.  So then I started getting myself together, well I stayed there I think one year, I left then, I said well I think I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year did you go to Wilson?
Speaker 1: I went to Wilson, I think that was right after I left high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], '48 [1948].
Story_ID: 324648
Speaker 1: Now because I didn't accept these scholarships, lo and behold I found that if I would play some music at DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] I could get tuition reimbursements, like.  So I ran into a friend, a fellow who became a friend of mine named Carlton Ennis [Carl Ennis]. Carlton Ennis, he's lawyer out in Berkeley [California] now I think.  He and I became good buddies, Carlton's a very bright dude, and Carlton and I, Carlton one time said, "Well hey man, why don't you go to DePaul?"  I said, "DePaul's a Catholic school," well my father [Squire Pates] used to say (laughter) what I told him as a young boy I wanted to go Catholic school.  He said, "Why do you want to go to Catholic school?"  I said, "Well dad, every time I look around," my friend Charles Arrington went to Catholic school.  I said, "Look, every time I go, they got holiday off and they got this day and that day and they all Christians."  I'm trying to kid my father because hey, every time I looked around they had some holiday, you know. So I said, "That's where I'd like to go," he said, "Well I don't want you to go there and learn all of that foolishness."  Well I didn't know my father had a thing about the catechisms giving you the question and then giving you the answer and proselytizing you around Catholicism you know.  So he had a thing about that, so he didn't want me to go to Catholic school.  Anyway I started at DePaul with my friend Carlton Ennis, now the interesting thing about Carlton Ennis, we were up there at 3500 North, you know.  Carlton was up there on a track scholarship.  Carlton, Carlton could fly, plus Carlton was real bright, Carlton had graduated from St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeth Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois].  And so he was up there, and this fellow Robinzine [Bill Robinzine] was playing, he was the only black on the basketball team.
Speaker 2: Bill Robinzine, Robinzine, or?
Speaker 1: Yeah Bill I think it was Robinzine.
Speaker 2: I've heard of him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you might, I don't think he's still alive though.
Speaker 2: Didn't he play in the NBA [National Basketball Association] or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah he, he went on to the professionals, and this guy, it kind of brought out the racism in the whole Meyer family, you know.  Because later on naturally they had to get black ballplayers and whatnot, you know.  Because they went a long time with, well I think the Catholic environment was a very cloistered environment.  And so I started up on the campus of DePaul.
Speaker 2: I think, you know, what you're saying though is true for--University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio] is a Catholic school too, they had an all-white team as long as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: As long as possible almost, almost like Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] they tried to do that, I don't know if DePaul did the same thing.
Speaker 1: Oh no doubt about it, no doubt about it, and old man Meyer [Ray Meyer] was very popular, you know, because well, but also at that time, Catholics kind of got a preferable--if you were black and Catholic you got kind of a preferential treatment.  Because the city government and infrastructure was Irish Catholic, and they kind of endowed black men who came out of Catholic schools.  I think they kind of knighted them you know, because many of the fellows, like Joe Bertrand [Joseph Bertrand] became an alderman, but he also went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana].  Many of the Catholic boys became a part of Deton Brooks' [Deton J. Brooks, Jr.] urban renewal program, Deton Brooks was really was kind of like the vehicle through which programs were set-up in the black community.  And federal monies were kind of disbursed amongst black people at that time.  I used to call Deton Brooks kind of like a deputy for the colored you know, because you had all of these, all of these managers, Negro managers of the progress of black people.  It was only through them that you could get a job, like through Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson].  There was a time that if you didn't have a letter from your congressman, there were certain jobs, particularly in municipal, federal and state levels, that you could not get.  You had to have a letter from your congressman or a letter always, you know.  And these letters, like old man Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] said, "Don't send me nobody that nobody knows."  Well what he was really doing is giving you the advantage of knowing what the whole system was about.
Story_ID: 324649
Speaker 1: You had to know somebody to get any job that had some security, and like I said, the Catholics were kind of given a preference.  So I went on and played, me and Carlton Ennis [Carl Ennis] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you had music--
Speaker 1: Played--
Speaker 2: A music scholarship?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Played with the band and orchestra and whatnot, went on, graduated, came out and started teaching.
Speaker 2: Teaching music?
Speaker 1: No, no, I was teaching, I was teaching English because I had a strong, I had a very strong literary background.  And that was kind of like, I had to kind of keep the music thing in order for my scholarship.  But I was an English major, like I'm all through English literature and Western literature and all that kind of stuff you know.  And that was what I was hanging on, to try to do both of them because if I didn't, I would lose a part of the scholarship money.  So there, the only realizations, there were two realizations I think I had while I was in that whole experience.  But a number of things, I joined Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity while I was at DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], and that's very important.  Because when I ultimately, see, when I ultimately got my Ph.D. it was the use of that literary background that got me into the university.  The literary credentials and stuff, but I didn't know I was building that background as I was coming along.  But now there were two Italian boys, one was named Rocco [ph.], I don't know, and another was named Lagatutta, I think his name was Joe Lagattuta [Joseph Lagattuta].  Now they were Italians, and they lived around, as you know around DePaul up in there that was like the Italian neighborhood.  'Cause when I was on the boxing team, we used, right on the, right around where Illinois Circle Campus [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] is, there was a place called Marigold Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], where we used to box.  And we used to box many of the Italian boys, and we used to laugh because we used to say, the difference between an Italian boy and the rest of the boxers, Italian boy don't wanna do anything but hit you one time.  And he'll give you his head, you can hit him all day long, but he just wants to hit you one time, you know.
Speaker 2: That's the 'Rocky' thing (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's exactly right--
Story_ID: 324650
Speaker 1: DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], now tell me, now who--were there any special teachers at DePaul or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Put your mic in there.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, let me--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Not one, not one.
Speaker 1: Not a single teacher that--at DePaul that made any difference?
Speaker 2: No, that, I'm gonna talk to you about the DePaul experience.  I think the thing that made a difference at DePaul that really started me studying was my experience with the two boys, the two Italian boys.  I was sitting in a, in a literature class one time, and Joe [Joseph Lagattuta] and Rocco [ph.] were friends.  And they decided to befriend me, you know, so I had no friends up there, me and Ennis [Carl Ennis] were the only two black faces that I saw on the campus, you know.  So I'm sitting in this class and they give a test, teacher gives a test.  So I got a C on the test. Joe Lagattuta over here, he gets an A and Rocco gets a B, I get a C.  And so Joe looks over at my paper and he chuckles, he said, "Oh, so you got a C," I got hot all over.  'Cause I saw right away that this was a competition that I'd never been--see nobody had ever competed a flat out competed with me on a grade thing you know.  I said, but, hey is that what this is, okay fine, so see I'd--when I was in elementary and early high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].  This is a fact Crowe [Larry Crowe], look I had read all the classics before I graduated from elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  Or, so I, all the classes when they talked about Western literature, if you gonna talk 'Plutarch's Lives,' 'Gulliver's Travels' [Jonathan Swift], hey, I read all that stuff.  I knew who was who and who the authors were and everything, you know.  So here I am sitting in class, I'm not reading because I already know it, unless you give me a question in such a way that I must've had it in the class and read the material.  Now that's another kind of thing.  So okay, I guess in my ignorant arrogance I deserved exactly what I got, a good kick in the tail you know.  So when I saw these fellows were competing with me I said, "Well okay, I'm gonna start studying."  And I started studying, the next time the grades came out, A, next A, A, and the fellows they started, or they started getting red and carrying.  But all I needed to do was see how, and my friend Carlton Ennis, he was a grade oriented person.  But he had gone to Catholic school like these two Italian boys; I had gone to public school.  Well hey, I mean the whole discipline was different.  Now so then I started, I, not necessarily competing for grades but I said, well let me, let me get on in the routine.  So then I started going to the library and started studying, and started moving along with the current.
Story_ID: 324651
Speaker 1: They invited me to--one time Rocco's [ph.] mother gave a party and they invited me and I went, this was the first time I'd ever been in the presence of Italian ethnics.  And it was a beautiful experience, from the language to the level of familiarity, to the food.  Now you talk about Italians and pasta, well at this, at Rocco's mother's house, she had all that stuff that I wouldn't touch and didn't touch, and didn't hardly touch it there.  Linguini, pizza, I used to think, I'd see pizza, pizza pie, I see it advertise as pizza pie, I thought that was some kind of pie.  So she says--
Speaker 2: This, forgive me for a second but, this speaks to I guess difference in those days and today in terms of food.  I mean a lot of, I mean and it's true in the hardcore black community kids aren't exposed to a lot of different kinds of food.  They wouldn't be eating Thai food or, they might eat some Chinese or something, but I know when I was growing up, we didn't know anything about pizza.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now it wasn't until I was eleven (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: But so you, Italian food period was kind of foreign to you, you said?
Speaker 1: Oh of course it was.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Because in my household, my family, my mom [Amanda Beasley Pates] was flat out, she was not soul food in the real greasy way, but the common meal was cornbread, greens, we never ate that much meat anyway, you know.  But our diet in my house was very vegetable oriented, my mother was a specialist at how she cooked various vegetables, you know.  And we might've had chicken or something on a Sunday or something like that, and turkey on Thanksgiving and so forth and so on.  But greens and vegetables was the orientation around my house, now my father [Squire Pates] did not like macaroni and spaghetti and stuff like that, you know.  So when they talk about pasta, I, pasta, all I knew was macaroni and spaghetti but I did, I might have eaten that at someone else's house.  But seldom at--but my father loved sweet potato pie and so do I (laughter) you know that's right.  But when I went to Rocco's house, they had pizza, what they called pizza pie and the little lady she says, "Come along and eat some pizza," you know.  So they had anchovies on the pizza, and I took a bite of this pizza with this anchovies.  Now anchovies are like pure salt, I bit into that thing, and I said, "Um, that's the nastiest stuff I ever ate."  Well you know, I guess I got a senior's, I should've been introduced to it gradually you know, and there's so many varieties of pizza.  But she had anchovies and I didn't like that at all you know, so I didn't eat much.  But it was very interesting to watch how they gravitated around me.  Now the way I grew up, I was a little apprehensive of that, I didn't, I mean you don't come at me too quick.   Don't bring me too much friendship all of a sudden, because I'm highly suspect of that in a culture about which I've had no familiarity.
Story_ID: 324652
Speaker 1: Only thing we had done with the Italian boys is fought them in the boxing ring, and we had played in our athletics when we had played white athletes.  At the end of the game we were always called niggers and whatnot you know, so I mean you know, and like I said the team we played on was good.  And we whipped a lot of white athletes you know, but at the end nigger this, nigger that, you know.  We always found ourselves making sure we were close together when we left the community, so we could get home without getting hurt, you know.  So that, that friendship kind of pushed me into a more concentrated effort in the Catholic school.  The other thing that I learned which is very generic, was the difference, you know, I had this whole notion about what a nun was and what a priest was.  I discovered that priests are some outrageous dudes, I discovered, man that priests got drunk, they drank.  Some of them were alcoholics you know, and the nuns, all those habit stuff and whatnot, but up under that habit was another whole set, was another whole culture.  And it was interesting; I said, "Oh, my goodness," and my friend Carlton [Carl Ennis] used to tell me.  He says you know, he would tell me, he says, you know, "They have the bingo games," and he said, sometimes you would go into some of the places where the nuns lived and whatnot, and sometimes you were a cleaning man or something like that, you up there cleaning.  You would discover that there were a whole lot of, well there was some conduct that you did not expect out of nuns and priests given the way they been marketed to you, you know what I mean?  And I think that was a set of surprises that had come to me as a result of having gone to Catholic school.  That--Catholic college because you see here I come out of public elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], public high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] into Catholic university.  I got another whole kind of orientation, and opportunity to see things, although I was a commuter.  I was not, there were no, I don't think there were any dormitories on DePaul's [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] campus up there then, you know.  But that's one of the things, a couple of the things that impressed me during those collegiate days that stuck with me and kind of helped round me out.
Speaker 2: So you were at DePaul from '49 [1949] I guess to?
Speaker 1: Yeah from about '49 [1949] to '51 [1951] or '52 [1952], '49 [1949] to fifty--it might've been '53 [1953].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay so, and you were, you majored in English?
Speaker 1: Very much yes.  They I came out and I had to work.
Speaker 2: Did you have a, did you have to, did you major in English education, something like that was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because I took those education courses, because it became clear to me, I gotta get a job on the outside.  So I started, I said, but I still had this strong music background, you know, and, but I had to get this job.
Story_ID: 324653
Speaker 1: So when I got out, when I graduated [from DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], I made applications in Chicago Public Schools.  And that became another whole kind of story.  While at the same time, let's see, Clark [ph.] and Edwards [ph.].  There were two people on the examining board, Clark and Edwards; I think they were two Irishmen.  They were in charge of what they called teacher personnel services.  And when I went in to try to get a teaching certificate; they told me I could not teach unless I had some classes from Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois].  I could not teach in the Chicago [Illinois] system unless I had classes at the Chicago Teachers, I said, "But, what?"  Well this was a way that they orchestrated the enrollment at Chicago Teachers College at that time.  In order to keep enrollment at Chicago Teachers College high, anybody who did not go to the Teachers College proper and graduate from that, then you had to go to the Teachers College to take some courses.  So I said, "Well okay, what am I to take, you know, lay it out, I'll take it."  So then I could teach conditionally, so I became a day-to-day substitute while I went to take the classes at the Chicago Teachers College.  Now, which was all right, 'cause I was still staying in my mother's [Amanda Beasley Pates] house 'cause my mother, my brother [Henry Pates], my sister [Patricia Pates Eaton] had left.  And my brother had gone to; my brother had gone to the [U.S.] Marine Corps, he got hoodwinked I think, but I don't know.  He may not think so now, my brother--they used to come by DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], I never shall forget it; they had an assembly hall the number of which was 174.  And you would go to room 174 to listen to the recruiters, so one time my brother wanted to do something to spite my father [Squire Pates].  So he goes down in his senior year and he signs up to be in the Marine Reserve [U.S. Marine Corps Reserve], I think about three weeks after my brother graduated, he was in the Marines.  And about the sixth week he was over on Kwajalein Island [Kwajalein Atoll, Marshall Islands], they snatched him out of here so quick that it surprised the whole family.  "You mean to tell me you jumped into the Marine Corps just like that," which he had you know, and they took him on out of here.  Went to the Marine Corps and he wound up in Kwajalein, on Kwajalein Island which is in the Philippines [sic.], which is now an island upon which they deposit atomic waste.  And they tell me the people there have cancers and so forth the likes of which are unimaginable.  It'll be interesting, as a matter of fact I think I might do something myself with respect to researching Kwajalein Island.  Because right now I think, right now, Kwajalein Island is used for, it either is a repository for atomic waste or it has been sealed.  A big vast seal has been placed on the island where the waste is there and will be there, has been covered up and so forth and so on.  And the people are living all over and around it, you know the Philippine--
Story_ID: 324654
Speaker 1: I went to Edwards [ph.] and Clark [ph.] and Clark, now every year we'd take the teacher's exam in order to become a regular teacher.  Well they used to give us the devil, because there was always an oral examination after the teacher's exam.  And we used to see that every time you'd pass the written you'd flunk the oral, because they would measure the number of black men in particular who would, who could go into teaching.  Well, we used to study for this and study and study for the exam, get passed the exam, flunk the oral, get passed the exam, flunk the oral.  And a lot of black men flunked the oral examinations you know, I finally passed it and I started my general teaching career (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what, how long did you take you to pass it I mean or when, when did you start--
Speaker 1: I think, I think I had to go to Teachers College [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] for about on and off, like I would be teaching, and substitute teaching then going to Teachers College for two or three courses.  I think I had to have about four, maybe six courses, so probably about a year and a half, four to six courses.
Speaker 2: So this is about 1955 I guess, or?
Speaker 1: No I think I started teaching in fifty- right after I graduated [from DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] which might've been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You became a full-time teacher?
Speaker 1: Yeah I, that might've been around '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Okay, so where were you stationed, what school?
Speaker 1: Now that's when the fun began, Fuller Elementary School [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], down on 41st [Street] and Bowen [Avenue], I started teaching.
Speaker 2: Forty-first and Bowen?
Speaker 1: Forty-first and Bowen, that's over there now.
Speaker 2: Is that, is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a little elementary school right there, if you go, let's see, 43rd [Street], 42nd [Street], it's about between 42nd and 41st and Bowen, B-O-W-E-N, it's right, about three blocks west of Cottage Grove [Avenue].  Bowen I don't think runs but about a block or so.
Speaker 2: Yes, I never heard of Bowen; I couldn't remember Bowen.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it might've been, might've achieved a considerable prominence during and around the Depression [Great Depression].  Because a lot of black people lived over in there you know, and a lot of black people owned their houses over in there too.  So it was a nice little community and I started over there and that's where I got really broken in, because it started teaching me a lot about myself in terms of how you relate to children.  And especially 'cause I taught every grade, I taught every grade from first grade--
Story_ID: 324655
Speaker 1: I also taught at an all-girls school.  I taught at an all-girls school, I think it was called--and I also taught at an Americanization program, I'm trying to think of the name of that all-girls school.  I can't think of it now, but they really taught me something.  When I taught at the all-girls school, I was in my twenties, early twenties, and those little adolescent girls were like thirteen, fourteen, fifteen.  And I discovered that when you're teaching all girls, if you can get those little girls to like you, you can teach them anything.  But if you, if they ever dislike you, you can't teach them anything, they'll destroy themselves before they will learn what you trying to teach.  And I thought this to very interesting in terms of psychology between boys and girls, you've got to find that point in common in order to have the kids to do something that is to their own benefit.  And in teaching the all-girls, all girls can create one heck of a discipline problem.  Because I found that in the all-girls school, there was an electricity among girls about which I knew very little.  Girls have a kind of an envy kind of thing amongst themselves, they have boyfriends, and if you like their boyfriends and you're in trouble.  And they don't like the dress that you have on, and you don't, you know it's a lot of stuff that boys are not socialized around.  And it became very clear to me that I was gonna have to get into some of this stuff and understand some of it in order to be able to take them to the level academically that they needed to be taken to.  And girls tend to form these love relationships and like relationships much differently than do boys.  Girls tend to become attached, boys, if you can get to them, usually you can get to them through athletics or music or something.  But with girls, you got to find--now the reason I'm going into this because I had couple of very recalcitrant girl students.  I mean some who, some of them might've gone to the penitentiary, too, you know, and in order to get--these girls were leaders among other girls.  And in order to be able to teach the other girls, I had to get control of these girls.  So I would have special meetings with the girl leadership around the table, not to acknowledge their leadership, but tell them about the things I liked the most about them you know.  And it was very interesting to see how those techniques would work, you know.  And the things that I liked did not relate to any of their academic ability or anything like that, I would go after like this.  I'd say, "You know something Doris, or Dorothy, that's such a pretty dress that you have on, you ought to wear that more frequently," something like that you know.  Or, "Somebody's got on some perfume that really smells good," and after you would do this with some of these girls would try to kill each other.  During class, after class if you ever distinguish one of them out above one, you even got one over here smart as she can be, but she can't evidence that smartness, because you got one over here who hates her.  I don't like her because she talks too much, I don't like her because she's always in front of the teacher.  I don't--that kind of stuff you know, and when you got about twenty-five, thirty girls, you would have to get through this.  Because I'm not talking about girls now, I'm talking about public school girls of variety.  I'm not talking about girls who had been selected and placed; now this was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was trying to I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not Flowers [Lucy Flowers Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois], Lucy Flowers.
Speaker 1: No, I remember Lucy Flowers, it seems to me I taught a school, one was called Foster [Foster School, Chicago, Illinois] and one was called Jackson.  Jackson was an Americanization school; I think Foster [sic.] was the name of the all-girls school.
Story_ID: 324656
Speaker 1: But it was out of both of these experiences that I came down into my regular teaching appointment, for which I was so thankful for that particular set of experiences, because that taught me an approach.  That really, you got to bring your honest self to the teaching of children, you can't bring any pretense.  Because it is not the subject that you teach that is important to them, it's the person; you have to teach the person, when you're working the on elementary school level.  You have to work with the person, everything that the person is and everything that you think that person is, you got to work with that.  You can't say well this is the period for language arts and we're gonna talk about how to diagram a sentence.  Or we gonna talk about how to write a paragraph, you got to first make sure that you have the kind of rapport that is going to give you the discipline that will translate into attention.  If you don't do that, especially amongst all girls, then the discipline will prevent the learning in the whole class environment.  And you're wasting your time and so are the children, you know what I mean?  And in many instances you have to remind them that they have a future, you know, you got a future.  And it's toward that that we are learning this, and I found that I had to put that kind of observation and that kind of understanding of information into operation in order to work with these girls.  And of course as I transferred over into the Fuller Elementary School [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I had some good mentoring.  I had a woman when I went full-time over to I got some interesting experience there.  I had a number of women who surrounded me to mentor me; I'm talking about women teachers.  One was named Miss Fine [ph.], one was named Miss Stinson [ph.] and one was named Miss Bowie [ph.].  And I used to take them to work, you know, I had a '56 [1956] Buick at that time, this was in 1956.  And I had a 1956 Buick (laughter) I'd take them to work.
Story_ID: 325100
Speaker 1: My mentors in my early stages of teaching, I spoke of Miss Fine [ph.], Miss Bowie [ph.], and what was it, Stinson [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Stinson, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah Miss Stinson, and I was speaking of them relative to their breaking me in, in the teaching process.  Giving me some fundamental understand of, of how to manage the children whom I would be working, with whom I would be working and to be able to teach them also the material.  I used to pick them up every morning, and this was somewhat of an aside.  I used to pick them up every morning and take them to school, and like I said I had this little '56 [1956] Buick.  And each of them, because I guess you would call it carpooling only I ran the carpool all the time you know.  And we would sort of summarize yesterday's teachers, teaching happenings and so forth, so one day I decide to play a little joke on them.  And it had an interesting aftereffect.  I used to go out in the forest preserve and pick up garter snakes and put them in a little jar, punch holes in the jar.  Put a little straw in the bottom and I would take them to the school and I created a little terrarium, you know.  And I would sort of work with basic science by showing, I'd have a turtle, but I had a lot of garter snakes.  So one time I took the, it was like a little Mason jar and I had these snakes in the Mason jar and took them to school.  I let them out in the terrarium and I put the Mason jar back in the back window of my car for the next occasion.  The following morning when I picked up the three ladies we're going, and one of them asked me, "Well Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], what's this empty bottles doing back here?"  I said, "Oh, in the window," she said yes, I said, "Oh is the bottle empty?"  She says yes, I said, "Oh, I had a snake in it," I said, "perhaps it's in the car, I'll get it out when we all stop."  It got deathly quiet in the car, we drove about one block and the ladies, all three of the ladies said, let me out now.  I said "But we still have a distance to go," I said, "I'll let you out when we get to the school."  I said, "It's only a garter snake, it's not harmful."  "Let me out now, I'm serious, let me out now, if you don't let me out, I'll jump out."  (Laughter) Oh it just got hilarious you know.  But then I told them, "Oh I'm only joking, the snake really did not," I had to let them out and I had to patch up that relationship.  It took me about another two or three weeks to convince them that the snake was not in the car, you know.  But I just say that to say that they were my mentors and I used to, they taught me a great deal about how to teach.  But it wasn't so much how to teach as it was how to relate to the particular group that attended that school.  That the school was Fuller Elementary School [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is really down at 40th [Street], 41st [Street] and Bowen [Avenue], now the neighborhood is changing there drastically now.  It's no longer as it was when I was teaching there, but that was one of my initial teaching experiences.
Story_ID: 325101
Speaker 1: And when I left there, I went to Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and that was one of my, I think that was certainly a very significant teaching experience.  Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now let me just ask you the dates, when were you at Fuller [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and when did you move to Forrestville?
Speaker 1: I was--I think I went to--I think I stayed at Fuller for about three or, about three years, and then I transferred to Forrestville.  I would've stayed at Fuller but I think I need to talk a bit about an impetus that stimulated me to leave.  I had a principal, her name was Vanderove [ph.], she was a Dutch woman, and I liked teaching.  I was, although I didn't know I was going to become a teacher, but when I got into teaching I really liked it.  And one of the things that I really liked was how easy it was for me to work with the students, even though many of them were say, fifteen, fourteen, thirteen you know.  The fifteen-year-olds were too old to be in elementary school, but you know, some of them had failed and so forth.  But I would notice that many, many, especially young men, many of the young men who had failed, many of them had failed because they were trying to get revenge on teachers.  I'm not going to do it sort of thing, simply because I don't like you.  And when I started working with them, I, you know many of the teachers were surprised, that you mean to tell me that this is his report card?  I said, yeah, I said, "Look at his work you know, he did this," I said, "yeah he did it," and you know it was very interesting.  And I'm using that as a singular example.  It's very interesting to notice that, but it was also interesting to notice that there were about five men in the school, and all the rest were woman.  And the women, as the young men got older and bigger, seem to have approached them a bit differently.  And of course the young men approached them differently too, and you had to notice that too big to be little and too little to be big kind of mentality emerging.  Miss Vanderove, was the principal, and this was an area also that had its gang element around you know.  And I don't think in my experiences I don't think there's anything more dangerous than a thirteen, fourteen or fifteen-year-old young man who is not mentored by somebody who's responsible, and somebody who sees a future for him.  Because they will do anything, I mean anything good and anything bad, based on their capability.  Now Miss Vanderove, her response to most of the young men was that if they were a discipline problem, whatever that might have been, you expel them.  That's to put them out, you know, and then you keep them out until they're sixteen, and at that time they had a thing called continuation school, where you would go and you would stay.  They would say, you go to continuation school and then you get a job, you go to school and get a job.  Well most of these young men who were put out of school, there was no job you know, so they had, they would go to continuation school I think until they got to be about sixteen or sixteen and a half, drop out and that was the end of that.  They went on to wherever they went, many of them got in our little underground culture and whatnot and next thing you know they were they would wind up in well if not in a reform school or a detention home or one place or another.  So Miss Vanderove, I took up, I took an issue with some of the suspensions and some of the expulsions and she and I found that we sort of clashed.  And I remember her bringing me into the office one time and lecturing me and I asked her, I said, "What is your background with respect to being in this community?"  And when I posed that to her she flushed red, and she said, "Why do you ask me that question?"  I said, "Because it seems to me that you're in an area where you don't really have a feel for the young men and young women."  But really the young kids, the young girls would tend to flow along fairly well.  But the young men would get expelled and that used to concern me.
Story_ID: 325102
Speaker 1: I could see that we would--now my ability to teach summer school and so forth and so on was based on my rating.  And if you got a superior rating you would, you'd have no problem teaching summer school.  Well as a young man you wanted to teach summer school 'cause you know two or three months out of the school (laughter) that's a long time to go without working.  It was very clear to me that she [Principal Vanderove (ph.)] was not going to give me, although she depended on a great deal on me, she was not going to give me the rating that I thought I deserved.  So one day I told her, I said well I'm leaving, and she asked me if I would stay, because should would have me on playground duty see where I could.   And I knew she needed me for playground duty, the rest of it didn't matter, but I could see that there was no future in my being there you know.  So I left Fuller [Melville W. Fuller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and that must've been like in about 19--I'd say about 1960, I think I might've stayed about four years at Fuller.  And of course when I went to Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] that was another whole kind of experience, because at that time they had what they called the Forrestville Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was seventh, eighth and ninth grades at that time, it was like a junior high school.  And when I went to--see I attended Forrestville Elementary School myself, and I grew up in the neighborhood.  And I knew all of everybody, parents and everybody, the parents of the children.
Speaker 2: Did you chose Forrestville, I mean did you have to choose the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well at that time, you couldn't choose it, you, the principal had to request you.  So you could go to the principal or somebody could recommend you and the principal could take care of that higher echelon work.  Because I think I said, I spoke earlier about the kind of blatant racism that existed in the Chicago Board of Education at the time that I attempted to teach.  There were two fellows there were in charge, Edwards [ph.] and Clark [ph.], that was their, those were their names, Edwards and Clark.
Speaker 2: In charge of the--
Speaker 1: They were in charge of what they call pupil personnel services I think, or student personnel services; they were in charge of hiring teachers.  Teacher personnel services, teacher personnel services.  And they were in charge, and they would say that you could not; I don't care if you graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Unless you took at least two courses from Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] you could not teach in the public school system [Chicago Public Schools].  Well, later on as I became more knowledgeable about the system, it was very clear Teachers College needed recruitment.  And they would, no matter where you came from if you wanted to go to, if you wanted to teach in Chicago [Illinois] you had to go to Teachers College.  Because they needed that consistent enrollment see, so they were working with that.  But they would also, when you took the teacher's exam to become a regular teacher, there was a written exam and then there was an oral.  They would wipe black teachers out on the oral, and many of them, you know you would always question, how'd, I get an 80, 85, or 90 [percent] on the test?  I go down to take the oral, and they'd ask you a question, kind of, I remember when I went in to take the oral.  They talked about my southern drawl, which I didn't know I had (laughter) they talked about my southern drawl, and I said, "Oh, okay."  But I managed to get through the oral, but I knew so many fellows who didn't, you know.  Particularly the men teachers, many of the men teachers at that time, and then after you'd flunked the oral say two, three times, at some point you might get over.  And then some fellows, Allen Collard [Allen P. Collard], you remember Allen Collard, Allen Collard never passed the oral; Allen Collard never became a regular teacher, you know.  Never became a regular teacher.
Speaker 2: Southern drawl, now that's interesting, 'cause you were raised in Chicago, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's exactly right, but I didn't know I had a southern drawl (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you don't talk any different from most Chicagoans, you know.
Speaker 1: Hey, I been talking like I been talking all my life.
Speaker 2: And you don't--you know really it's just a, I guess it's just a cultural difference in tone I guess, or inflection, 'cause it doesn't have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: There's no--I mean you don't, you speak perfect English.
Story_ID: 325103
Speaker 1: My mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] was a stickler on that sort of thing, you know, you could, what did she call it?  Split a verb (laughter)
Speaker 2: Bust a verb (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was almost like committing a crime if I said, "I is," or like I hear a lot of the kids today say, "I be."  Oh my mother would go nuts on that, you know, what do you mean, what, my mother.  Although my mother taught at Okolona down in Mississippi, but she was really a stickler for that sort of thing, the language.  At Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] we had, it was a school that I think had the largest male faculty of probably most elementary schools.  I wouldn't say in the City of Chicago [Illinois], but it was a large male faculty, and it was here that I met a lot of and associated with a lot of fellows that have since passed away.  But we really ran a tight ship, and many of the schools.  As a matter of fact one of the students whom I taught wrote a book and dedicated to me and she sent it to me while I was out in California.  Her name is Georgia she wrote, writes poetry, and she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Georgia what, let's see if we can get it all.
Speaker 1: Georgia Tribett [Georgia Tribett Reed].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think it that was her name then, it might be something else now, Georgia's married name, whatever that might be.  But she wrote this book of poetry and she dedicated to me as one of, a teacher that really inspired her you know.  Well when I was at Forrestville I taught language arts, seventh and eighth grade language arts.  And what I would do is, first of all I would have the students write stories, an experience that they heretofore had not even heard of.  Because they would tell me that I don't know how to write a story, I said, "Well I'll tell you what, tell me what did you do yesterday?"  Well what did you, "I didn't do nothing," I said, "How can you live without doing anything, what you mean you didn't do nothing, you know?"  "I didn't do nothing," okay let's see, did you eat, yes, did you sleep, yes, did you have a dream, yes, what you dream about, you know, and then we go.  I said, "What about your mother, your father?"  Now that was some dangerous areas in that particular technique, and I'll talk about those later.  Because when you establish a real good relationship with students, sometimes they'll tell you some personal things that're going on in the house that will blow your mind if you not familiar with all of the possibilities.  You know that take place down in a culture like that, but I would have them write stories and I had some over the course of time that I was there, I had some what I consider to be rather brilliant students.  Some of whose names I probably will never forget, as a matter of fact one was named Madeline [ph.].  And Madeline came to see me when I was president of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]; she was a minister, you know.  I had another one named Pamela [ph.]; I don't know what happened to Pamela.  They tell me she's a scholar somewhere, I had another named Geneva [Geneva Smitherman] who wrote a book, and she sent me a copy of her book, I have it back in the back on a bookshelf, you know.  A copy of one of the writings, one of the entrances she did in a book called American Lit- I think it's called 'Black American Literature,' [sic.] I have it back in the back.
Speaker 2: Not Geneva, she's not in Detroit [Michigan] now, not Smitherman?
Speaker 1: I think her last name was Cobb [ph.], I don't remember, I think it was Geneva Cobb, but I don't know what her married name is now, you know.  But I've had a number of students; they didn't realize the extent to which they really inspired me.  Because the transaction, it was an interesting kind of reciprocity.
Story_ID: 325104
Speaker 1: I got a great kick out of teaching, particularly on that level because every, every little slick way of trying to get over, I had done as a kid.  And it was interesting to identify some of the methods that had not become any more sophisticated you know.  Like writing the answers in the palm of your hand or down on the tongue of your shoe, or down on the floor.  Or you know all of that sort of stuff, you know you gonna have a test and you got (laughter) you, you got the paper on this fella's back.  You know you sitting here and the paper all the answers on his back (laughter) you know.  And it was really, I would really--that would invigorate me, as a matter of fact, you know as I would catch some of them I would say, "Now okay, we gonna take these answers and put them over here and put these over here, and give you another test."  And you know those kind of little tricks and whatnot that happened on that level in the learning and teaching environment sort of inspired me, and made my day very, very short.  I think we'd get there from eight thirty [a.m.], I think it was eight thirty to three [p.m.] then. You know eight thirty to three something like that, and I'd look and it was three o'clock like that, you know.  Because I had no idea that I really enjoyed teaching like that, I stayed at Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], well Forrestville had some other kind of elements.  One of the elements of course had to do with the camaraderie among us as teachers.  I had some, well like I said, I played music in high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], and what we would do, we, I had three or four friends over there.  One fellow played the piano, another fellow played baritone saxophone, I played the flute.  And sometimes in the morning when things got dull I would tell, I'd say, "Hey go up, you got your horn here, yeah.  Let's have a jam session in the lunchroom and see what happens," and we'd get down in the lunchroom and we'd start swinging down there you know, and the teachers would come.  And the principal would want to get the teachers back to the classroom, they'd say, "Oh, no, no, play another number, play ano-." "Say, hey the bell rang you got to get to the--."  "Hey, play another number," we'd get up, the principal would come and look, we gotta call this off.  I'll tell you what we'll do.  We had a principal named Dr. Zimmerman [Herbert M. Zimmerman], very nice, very nice fellow, as a matter of fact sometimes I thought he was too nice.  Because you can be nice when you got good teachers, but when you got some not so good teachers, you can't be nice you know.  Not really nice like he was, it was as though, well in many instances some teachers did not like coming to staff meetings.  And many of them would come, like staff meeting say might be from eight-thirty to nine [a.m.], they might come at one minute before nine you see?  They haven't heard anything, because they say, "Well the principal can't teach us anything anyway you know."  But what does the principal know, and in many instances that was true, a lot of the theory that was brought for teacher preparation and teacher training was totally irrelevant.  In terms of your application, if you, you'd have to translate it in such a way that it had some relevance to the community, you know.  So this Dr. Zimmerman, he was a nice fellow, I stayed with him until another principal came along named Margolis [ph.].
Story_ID: 325105
Speaker 1: And Margolis [ph.] was the impetus for me to leave Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] because he was the, oh it was at that time I, my two children [Shelley Pates Williams and Cyrus Pates], my first child; I had my first child, and then my second child.
Speaker 2: Now, now when did you get married, now did we talk about that last time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got married in '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957] I got married in '57 [1957] I think my first child was born in '59 [1959] second child born in--yeah first child born in '58 [1958] second child born in '60 [1960].  Okay now I had to have some babysitting and my mother [Amanda Beasley Pates] out there on 75th Street at that time.  My mother would babysit my kids for me, so I'd have to drive, and at that time I lived in the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] you know the Rosenwald building that has this great popular.
Speaker 2: Like 45th [Street] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Forty-seventh [47th Street].
Speaker 2: Forty-seventh.
Speaker 1: Forty-seventh Street, Michigan [Avenue] to Wabash [Avenue], big complex.  And I lived there and I had a little Volkswagen and I would have to drive the kids to my mother's house on 75th Street and then come back to 44th Street.  Well my mom usually would say, "Well don't bring the kids at least until eight o'clock."  Well if I take the kids at eight o'clock, I got to fly down the street to get back to Forrestville to be there at eight-thirty [a.m.].  Well I was never on time, always late, but I always had a superior rating.  Well the next principal comes, he's a fellow named Margolis, now Margolis, I have frequently wondered exactly what was a principal, what was a principal supposed to do?  Because especially when you have a very smooth running school, and at that time you have so many kids who are graduating and so forth.  And averages look good, what does a principal really do?  Well management of the school, particularly academic management because they were excluded from the engineering part.  Engineers had their own union, so you couldn't ask an engineer to pick up the paper on the floor, you couldn't ask him to turn the heater on.  He did that according to whatever the regulations were, you know.  So I never could imagine exactly what the cooperative relationship between the janitorial engineering staff so to speak and the academic (laughter), you know, the principal and so forth.  There was always this separation, that union is over here, and of course the teachers had their own union too.
Speaker 2: Well just a point here, the engineers in Chicago [Illinois] are fairly powerful for what I understand they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Extremely powerful on every level, whether it's in the, in every part of the public sector.
Speaker 2: And it's kind of a, is it like an inte- what, was it integrated then, in terms of--
Speaker 1: Oh you could count the number of black engineers, you could count them on almost one hand.  At that time, you see, Chicago has always operated very smoothly, what you read in the papers is very true.  You see in order to get a job you had to know somebody all the time, particularly if there were jobs on the engineering level and so forth and so on.  In the unions, you know, you had to know somebody they talk about the brotherhood of this and the brotherhood of that--
Speaker 2: Just one quick question before this tape ends.  What educational qualifications did, would you have to have to be an engineer?
Speaker 1: I don't remember, I think, I don't really remember, I know, I think at one while engineers were going to Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Now that's high school, right?
Speaker 1: That, oh yes, oh yes right, there was no college, there was no beyond high school, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We probably end--
Speaker 1: In terms of technical information you know, I know when I was president over Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] in order to become an engineer you had the air conditioning and you had to know something about air conditioning and heating and that sort of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, you had taken a course in that.
Story_ID: 325106
Speaker 1: Margolis [ph.], this principal came in at Forrestville [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And was he, did he change the standards of how things were done?
Speaker 2: Well here's what he--well we had a personal problem, and at that time, I wore a beard and many of my friends had beards.  And at that time I had hair you know (laughter), I had hair that communicated from here all the way down to my beard, you know, real hair.
Speaker 1: Communicated huh?
Speaker 2: And this was the time of the natural, and--
Speaker 1: So this, we're talking about 19--in the late '60s [1960s] now?
Speaker 2: No we talking about, we talking about it wasn't in the late '60s [1960s].  It was kind of like, this is like about '62 [1962].  I think I left there, well I left Forrestville in '68 [1968], so I had been at Forrestville, I had been at Forrestville five, six years.
Speaker 1: Oh, if you started in '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I left there I think in '60 [1960] no I went to DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] in '64 [1964] and stayed at DuSable until I think about '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went from Forrestville to DuSable?
Speaker 2: Went from Forrestville to DuSable.
Speaker 1: Okay '64 [1964], that's still kind of early for the Afro.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you, look because it was at that time, yeah we were wearing, we were wearing naturals, well I certainly had a beard.  And Margolis, okay, we came to the office.  When he first came it was very clear that those of us who had beards stood out, so one of my friends whose name I will not mention because he had a little misfortune.  I wore a beard, and when I would come in the office, "Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], I see you have a beard," I said, "Well that's obvious, you know."  So my friend had come in and he'd say, "Mr. X, I see you have a beard," and he was beautiful.  He said, "Oh, and I see you have dandruff on your suit coat," he said, "Why don't you concern yourself with your dandruff rather than my beard."  And they would, and Margolis was flushed red you know.  It was very clear that Margolis had a problem with the way many of the men manifested themselves.  And so now I would be late, but I was never late for my classroom.  So on one or two occasions, I'd see him standing by my door when I'd come in, and that was insulting to me you know, that was insulting.  I said, now I see, here's a man whose got this little micro administrative technique, he's gonna come in the classroom.  And look he would walk in, he would want the shades at a certain level, the window shades, well it never occurred to me to even look at the shades.  I don't think I even knew that there were shades, that's how irrelevant that sort of thing was.  He was a very picayunish kind of person, and as we started talking, a number of my friends, "Well, you know, he can affect your rating."  If he affects your rating, here it is, I got two kids [Shelley Pates Williams and Cyrus Pates] now, I got to work summer school now.  I said, "Well you know, maybe I better leave."  So one day he looked around and I had transferred--
Story_ID: 325107
Speaker 1: But I transferred because a friend of mine was opening what they called the DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] extension.  And he asked me, would I come over there and help him open it, and I said yes.  So I went over there and opened the new extension of the DuSable, which was also another extension, and it was called the DuSable Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois] you know.  That was an interesting experience that contributed also to my development because within the course of that experience I think there are two or three little incidents of note.  First of all, that was the territory of the Egyptian Cobras, the street gang.
Speaker 2: Now this is a street gang that doesn't really exist as such anymore anyway, I mean it's kind of transitioned into, I think there's something called the Mickey Cobras.  And there's some kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right, what happened was it transitioned into the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation], which, and Mickey Cogwell [Henry "Mickey" Cogwell].  Mickey Cogwell was one of the main twenty-one in the Blackstone Rangers, and I think they had, I think they even had a sub name for him, Mickey Cobras or something like that, Mickey Cobra Stones?
Speaker 2: Yeah they got some kind of, Mickey Cobras.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, it's named after him.
Speaker 2: A few years ago they got into a fight on the plane going to the Super Bowl, but I'm not going to get into that.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, that's exactly right, and that's where that name came from.  These, as you know DuSable over there, it was over there near Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and most of the students came from Robert Taylor, the Robert Taylor Homes.  And when I went over there, the school, some of the school had not been completed in terms of its construction yet.  So a lot of the classrooms were still being completed.  There were two or three, like I said two or three, first of all this was a very excellent administrative experience for me.  It sort of launched the administrative element in my career, so to speak.  We got a new principal of the high school, his name was Byron Minor, he was a colonel in the, I think he was a colonel in the [U.S.] Army.  I think they called him Colonel Byron Minor or something like that.  But anyway he was the principal, I think he was the first black principal of DuSable, I think he was the very first one.
Speaker 2: All that, all that time and the first one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh listen--
Speaker 2: In the mid-'60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Since '34 [1934], school came up I think in '34 [1934], '35 [1935] and he was the first--
Speaker 2: That's thirty years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In the, and that's the--
Speaker 1: That's exactly--
Speaker 2: Blackest, one of the, well Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and DuSable are the two black high schools--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: Historically black high schools here.
Speaker 1: Exactly right, DuSable came out of Phillips; as a matter of fact they used to call Phillips the new DuSable, you know.  And I think, and back at that time, I think because Harold Washington they had--it is reputed that Harold Washington met Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis] and all of them around that time.  And they were in that early graduating class.
Story_ID: 325108
Speaker 1: The management of the DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] environment, there was a lot between one building and the other building.  Where a lot of gang activity took place, a lot of threatening of students.  And this was the first time that I had an actual, almost had a physical confrontation with a student.  I would mention his name but he might still be alive now, he might be in the penitentiary, you know.  I remember one time, well there were two incidents really.  My experience as an administrator required of course that I kind of kept the environment workable.  Some of the, University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] had what they call the MAT program, the Master of Arts in Teaching, and the MST [Master of Science in Teaching] program.  And what they would do is send a flock, and this is very significant, a flock of white interns into DuSable for practical teacher training, it was called the Master of Arts, and the MAT and the MST, these were.  And they had this relationship with DuSable; well it was very interesting that these young white interns would come into DuSable, ehich is really an all-black environment, I mean, I don't think you even had a white person on the street, you know?  Well they would come in being mentored by what would you call it, a master teacher of a sort, but I'll give you an example of something.  And I'd mention her name too but she might still be alive (laughter) one of the white, we had a white, we had a basketball game, and DuSable had on the team a young man, I'd mention his name but he might be alive too. Okay, it was a long list of brothers and they were all very tall, very muscular, two of them played on the basketball them.  And one of them was kind of outstanding, but he wasn't too heavy here, but he was a good ballplayer.  There was a teacher named Mrs. X or Miss X, who came out of that MAT program, who decided that she was gonna stay at DuSable.  And she came down into the gym when the fellows were playing basketball.  And they were playing another school, very exciting game; I was in the gym you know, and watching the fellows play.  And the game got real tight, the difference in winning was like one shot, and who would hit the basket to win, but this fella, he shoots the ball, and it goes through the net and the school goes berserk, DuSable wins.   Miss Teacher runs up to this fella and hugs him you know, I mean 'cause he was all in the game.  She runs up to him and hugs him, well, he misunderstood that; now, he's a student, and she's a teacher.  So he waits for her, you know, he waits for her after school, and they have a talk, that's all well and good.  The following day he waits for her, he started stalking her, she lived out north around Sheridan Road up there.  And one day she comes back and reports that she thought she was going to have to make a police report out on this young man.  She and I started talking, I asked her, I said, "Let me ask you one question," I said, "did anybody ever tell you how to relate to the young men on the basketball team and all the rest of these young men up in here?"  Because you were talking about a young group of white women, I don't think, I think they were women, more women than men.  As a matter of fact, I don't remember the men in the program to tell you the truth, but I'm sure there must've been.  I said, "Anybody ever talk to you about this?"  Because you see you have to talk to all the teachers about this, not just--and if you coming from an entirely different background, entire different culture, these fellows are very expressive.  Not only will they do everything you say, if they like you, but they'll do a lot that you don't say if they like you.  And if you're honest in terms of how to express themselves you know.  So at any rate I had a talk with her about the relationship that she had, did not know that she had established with this young man.  Because she was talking to him all the time, and one of the teachers I see her over in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] so I know she's alive, I see her every once in a while  you know.  She's an older lady now, very tall, and she, I think she stayed at DuSable until she retired you know.  But that was just one incident I think that was aside from the learning/teaching environment over there.
Story_ID: 325109
Speaker 1: The other incident of course, or set of incidents was the kind of gang warfare that you would have across the playground and in many instances it was suggested to me, "Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], it seems as though the gangs are--."  Well what we had, we spent a lot of time knowing everybody in the environment, everybody.  Because we knew that you have to sense whether or not there's going to be some trouble.  And we had two police officers, I can't remember their names now, oh yeah, one we called Big Mack [ph.], he was about two inches taller than me, about 230 pounds.  We worked very well together because we agreed that the objective at DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] was to keep kids in school and not out, you know.  So then, therefore, what can we do to keep them in?  Now my final comment relative to the DuSable experience that I think was instructed to me also.  Young man, gangbanger was going up to, would play basketball and would cut class, would play basketball out in the yard.  And I saw him, so one, and I walked up to him and I said, I'll call him K, 'cause, well his name was Kenneth [ph.], I won't say what his last name is.  I said, "Kenneth what you doing out here?"  You know, just gave me this look.  I said, "You're supposed to be in class," I said, "I'll give you that much time to get in the class where you supposed to be."  "I'm really not supposed to be in class," okay good, I go back, I look at his program, I see where he's supposed to be.  I go to this class; he is climbing in the window; the class is on the first floor.  He is climbing in the window, the teacher is teaching, he's climbing in the window to get in the seat, I look through the door and I see him, so I open the door.  I look at the teacher to see whether (laughter) you know, the teacher's trying to say, "Lord, I don't wanna deal with this," you know.  In other words, I don't know how to deal with it, you know, here my student is and here's this acting assistant standing at the door, and here's my student climbing in the window you know.  I guess he figures that I would think that this is a regular pattern of behavior you know, how does a student climb in your window?  Does this go on, what kind of nonsense is that?  Anyway when he climbed in the window, I told him I said, "Come here," I said, "Let's go down to the office and let's chat."  So we get down, it was not my intention to suspend him or anything like that, my intention to have another man-to-man talk with him.  But when he, he was embarrassed, all the girls in the classroom were laughing because he had been caught coming into the window.  And now this is one of the gang leaderships see, so he's so embarrassed, he comes down.  And when he gets to the office, I'm sitting behind the desk; he's on the other side of the desk.  And he says, "Well I guess you putting me out of school, huh," I said, "Well I think we need to--."  "No, you gonna put me out of school."  And he dropped his shoulder; well you know I know that sign, I grew up with that sign you know.  So when he dropped his shoulder I came out from behind the desk because I'm not gonna let him jump over, I'm not gone let him swing on me and connect.  So I come back from behind the desk to put a little more distance between us.  So he has to walk around the desk to come at me, by the time he does that, Mrs. Gaines [ph.], I had another lady in the office, I said, "Mrs. Gaines."  I did like this, and she called my friend the police officer, Mack, well Brauner [ph.] charges at me.  I close the door, Brauner runs into the door I'm on the other side of the door.  Oh I just said his last name (laughter) he, I closed the door, he runs into the door.  Okay, then I open the door and Mack is talking here, Mack slaps the cuffs on him pow, pow, "Come on with me."  I said, "No, no Mack," I said, "no, no, no, no, no."  He said he's gotta go out of here, he said, "Anybody who comes at you, Mr. Pates, has got to go; he's got to go."  I said no, he said, "But you don't understand, if he comes at you, nobody's safe up in here."  Well that's almost the truth you know, and he said, and he went on to explain, well you know we got the gang [Egyptian Cobras] over here, he's one of the leadership and so forth and so on.  And all this is school now, we're not talking about--this is school, this is in school.  I said, "No, no, no, no," on the outside of the door, I said, "look we're not putting him out, we're not putting him out."  "Well, what's gonna happen," I said, I called all around to see if I can get him in another school.  And I was able to get one of my friends to accept him over at Tilden [Tilden Technical High School; Edward Tilden Career Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], which is over on 47th [Street], and I don't know whether Tilden is still there, 47th and Shields [Avenue] I think.
Story_ID: 325110
Speaker 1: Let's try to put it into perspective.  In the mid, in the early '60s [1960s], Chicago Public Schools were going through a conniption basically.  I mean it was a, there was a tremendous movement on the part of the community against the overcrowding of the black public schools.  Black people who had jobs couldn't move out of the neighborhood and so it resulted in the overcrowding of most of the black schools right?  I mean I, under Willis Wagons and all that?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna put (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That went on around that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Time where the concentration of population was so great that--
Speaker 2: Okay, what you're saying is absolutely correct, because at this time, one of the reasons why they had built the extension was because they needed more classroom space.
Speaker 1: And they called the extension the Willis Wagons, the temporary--
Speaker 2: Well, they had no Willis Wagon at DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], but they had them all over the community.  Now I was a part, me and many of my friends were, Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright], we were part of that movement.  It was very clear at that particular time, you could count, I think you had seven black principals.  At that time I think there was something like, I think there was something like what five hundred schools in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  And you had seven black principals, seven, and because I wanted to take the principal's exam myself.  And many, it was the word in the community was you'll never make it, you know, you'll never make it.  Because you can't get past the test, in other words if you got a thought going, you'll never become a principal.  That was kind of like the talk that was going on.
Speaker 1: So that oral test once again?
Speaker 2: If it wasn't the--yeah that's right, that oral test will wipe you out see because the oral test was fraud I think, it wasn't a test at all.  It was to determine whether or not you were, it seems to me and I'm sure I'm editorializing here.  But I do remember Mrs. Judge Green [Lorraine Green], Judge Green [Wendell E. Green] was one of the Democratic judges.  His wife was kind of like the conduit through which people got their letters in order to get into the hierarchy in the school system.  At that particular time, you had Mrs. Lewis [Virginia F. Lewis], who was not Dr. Lewis at that time; she was one of the principals.  I don't think her husband [Robert E. Lewis] was at that time, because it became Dr. and Mrs. Lewis, they became.  Well during the time, the Willis Wagons, the community was creating such a stink about the Willis Wagons.  At that time you had Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] and Jorja English [HistoryMaker Jorja Palmer].  You had CCCO [Chicago Council of Community Organizations], the organization, it was called, community organization.  I can't think of what the that acronym (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chicago Council on Community [sic.].
Speaker 2: It might've been that, Chicago Council of Community Organizations, but it was called CCCO.  And they were very, the organization itself and many of, and me and many of my friends were working with the organization against the Willis Wagons.   Because if you can build schools in other neighborhoods you don't have to put these, I don't think, I don't remember whether--yeah I think the Willis Wagons did have a little toilet you know.  But some of those Willis Wagons were down there in the yard of Saint--on 41st [Street] and, 41st and Cottage Grove [Avenue], the church where the priest, the black priest was on 39th Street.
Speaker 1: Father Clements [HistoryMaker Father George Clements]?
Speaker 2: Father Clements.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois], Holy Angels had the Willis Wagon for a long time, because I think they purchased it from the public schools.  And there might be on in the yard now that was an example of what, it looked like a trailer, it looked like a big trailer, it was like a demountable.  And of course Superintendent Willis [Benjamin C. Willis], he was, he was just absolutely was not vulnerable at all to any kind of recommendation from the community.  As a result there was a groundswell in the community to get rid of the Willis Wagons.
Story_ID: 325111
Speaker 1: Also that groundswell was also an opportunity to use education as an issue to attempt to elect some black officials too.  Because if I recall correctly, Senator Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.] at that time attempted to run for mayor, didn't get very many votes.
Speaker 2: Richard Newhouse.
Speaker 1: Richard Newhouse, Richard Newhouse attempted to run for mayor, a bright man, a bright man, but they were trying to get the black community to galvanize trying to get a political thrust.  While at the same time, trying to eliminate, trying to get black principals in black schools, you know there were no black principals in white schools.  In other words, if a principal is a principal, how come a principal, a black principal can't be in a white school you know?  Why are there no black district superintendents and so forth, why is that, why is there no black administrators in the system?  And there were, there were meetings in churches at night, Bethel Church on 45th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], Bethel A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois].  Very pivotal church in the Chicago [Illinois] political movement on every level, very, very pivotal.  As a matter of fact, Bethel Church, Liberty Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] also you know later down the line, right.  These two churches I think were really relevant, very relevant institutions in the community to hold meetings to deal with this question.  Now I don't remember in exactly what year, but in one year, I guess in about two or three years after the Willis Wagon movement and so forth, I think ten times seven I think all of a sudden seventy black principals were appointed.  You know all of a sudden you had a black principals being appointed--
Speaker 2: Could it have been '63 [1963] '64 [1964]?  'Cause I know I was reading '63 [1963] newspapers and heard about thousands being arrested in Chicago around the Willis Wagon.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was around in that time, it was definitely around in that time because it was around, it was around at the time that I kind of transitioned- Barbara Sizemore [HistoryMaker Barbara A. Sizemore] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Demonstrated, let me put it that way now--
Speaker 1: Oh yes--
Speaker 2: Thousands of people.
Speaker 1: Oh they were demonstrating, oh yes all out in the street and, and the stuff was all in the newspapers.  As a matter of fact, Landry, Lawrence Landry was the chairman of CCCO [Chicago Council of Community Organizations] in Chicago at that particular time.
Speaker 2: And what about Barbara Sizemore?
Speaker 1: Barbara Sizemore, when Forrestville [Forrestville High School, Chicago, Illinois] was placed over there, the new opening of the school, Barbara Sizemore was its principal.  And that's when they were beginning to initiate a whole set of new thoughts and whatnot regarding the direction education was going to take.   And as a matter of fact she recruited Andy to teach, to teach there.
Speaker 2: This is Dr. Anderson Thompson.
Speaker 1: Yeah Dr. Thompson, right.  So at that particular time, Forrestville was making, what they were trying to do is move set the tone for the new building which would ultimately become, I think it's what's it called now the Forrestville, I think it's one of those high academic achievement schools.
Speaker 2: Academies or something?
Speaker 1: Academy or something like that and it's on what is that 44th [Street] and Drexel [Avenue], forty, but it's a big beautiful school over there now.  But getting back to the Willis Wagons, getting back to the Willis Wagons.  After the Willis Wagons and the educational movement on that level, people began to then you know apply for principalships and whatnot.  And all of a sudden you begin to get black principals passing the examinations and so forth.  Then there was a gradual increase in district superintendents, Mrs. Lewis [Virginia F. Lewis], Dr. Lewis became district superintendent, she became deputy superintendent.  Then all of a sudden, I mean subsequent to that this was later on down the line, you had, you remember when Miss Ruth Love [HistoryMaker Ruth Love] came right?  And before, I don't remember whether the fellow came before her or after her.  I think he came after her, but heretofore you see you had never, it was inconceivable that there would be a black superintendent of schools you know.  Miss Ruth Love came from California.  Now at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Talking about '78 [1978], right, or '79 [1979]--
Speaker 1: That was in the '70s [1970s], yeah that was in the '70s [1970s].  But the '70s [1970s], I think the '70s [1970s] began to give fruition to a kind of I guess equality, equal distribution of black and white principals and so forth.  But still the whole question of integration, you know, I think was involved here too.
Story_ID: 324669
Speaker 1: I didn't slate this when we started, but we started at roll ten, this has gotta be eleven I guess, no twelve now.  And my name is Larry Crowe; I'm the interviewer for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].  It is the date, the current date is July the 10th, 2006, and you are Dr. Harold Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], right?  This is all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: And we're in your home once again--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As stated on the original interview.
Story_ID: 324670
Speaker 1: There was a director; I remember his name was Campbell [Clifford J. Campbell], and Campbell was the director of Dunbar Trade School [Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], around 1944.  I graduated from elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in '44 [1944], and Dunbar Trade School went up next to Forrestville, and they didn't put a principal in there.  They put a director, and his name was Campbell, because I remember that because it appeared to me--I graduated from elementary school when I was twelve years old.  And the bigger older fellows were taken out of the elementary school and put into Dunbar, and I came back and told my father [Squire Pates] that they were taking students out of elementary schools and putting them in high school, and they didn't choose me (laughter).  And my father told me he says, "No it isn't quite like that," I said, "But Dad that's what happening."  I said, "They're taking them out of elementary school and putting them in high school.  And I know that if anybody's supposed to be in high school, it's me."  He says, "You'll know some more about it later on," then later on I found out that they had really recruited students--it was kind of like the whole notion of a trade school then was something subservient to the academic.  And they, because at that time they were teaching shoe shop, they were teaching tailoring.  They also were teaching airplane mechanics, they had an airplane in the yard.  I remember those three, tailoring, shoe shop and airplane mechanic.  Because the son of a friend of my father's went there and opened a tailor shop on 47th Street, you know.  So they were teaching trades, now there was a distinction between a trade taught at Dunbar and one taught out at Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois].  'Cause you didn't get a, I mean there was no apprenticeship and you didn't get a union card and so forth and so on when you came out of Dunbar, you were just there on your own.  Whereas when you got, became a journeyman in the building trades, which were being taught at Washburne, brick masonry, carpentry, plumbing and electrician, four major trades you know.  You would get, you would apprentice, you became a journeyman, you got a union card and so forth and so on.  Dunbar was kind like a sub-level of what we knew the trades to be, and as we got older we discovered that you know it was very clear that this is another manifestation of Chicago [Illinois] racism and discrimination, you know.  Black kids are being recommended to go to Dunbar and white kids are going into the union brotherhoods as a result of being recommended by those fathers who came here from Ireland and Poland and so forth.  To sustain the European institutional craft structure right up in here, you know.  Oh yes, you talked about the engineers, in many instances we thought that those jobs were actually reserved for European immigrants here.  It was not unusual to go down in the boiler room and hear fellows speak that cockney that you hear among Irish immigrants?
Speaker 2: The Irish brogue.
Speaker 1: That Irish brogue, you know an Irish brogue.  I mean, some of them was so heavy, I can remember one was so heavy that you would have to look at his mouth to understand what he's saying, you know.  And of course as you were, it was very clear that the network was operative in the town as, as it has been.  And as is being revealed now in the newspapers and whatnot as they, as the Feds begin to raise questions concerning how people are hiring.  How people get contracts in the City of Chicago now, you know.  Briggs [Albert A. Briggs], Colonel Briggs, you were talking about Stephenson [HistoryMaker Richard E. Stephenson, Jr.], Briggs was also a principal of Dunbar.
Story_ID: 324671
Speaker 1: Seems like there was a move on the part of the board [Chicago Board of Education], we probably cannot verify at this point.  But to hire ex-black military officers or retired officers as principals (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Public schools.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Bypassing the rank and file.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, you would always, you'd say, well no wait minute hold it.  Perhaps they felt as though whatever you needed in the public schools if you were a black person he needed to have been truly tested.  You know as loyalties and so forth and so on had to really be tested by an experience in the armed services or something, or the reserve, or something of that sort.  Because heretofore now, most of your principals I think we can, I won't say most, but many of your principals were German.  They had German names you know.  And I think if we really took a careful research look at how there was kind of a nationalistic stratification of professionals in the public sector, you'd see some interesting kinds of what ifs, you know.  You'd be able to draw some interesting conclusions from what you saw.  Because you know they're telling everybody that come to America and work hard so that you could be successful.  Well you're talking about generations of the African descendent who been here long before the European immigrant, like in the what, 19th, early part of the 20th century.  Just coming here on the boat and receiving the opportunities that are given to them as a result of the absence of the African American in the labor force, you know.  And of course that raises another whole question about the stockyards and all the rest of the places that were part of the sociology--
Story_ID: 324672
Speaker 1: I stayed at DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] until, oh I had an interesting, oh yeah.  They brought a principal, okay they separated the high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] from the Upper Grade Center.  And they brought another principal, her name was Galeta Kaar, to the Upper Grade Center.  And that was the one over which I was kind of like the assistant, and I'll give you an experience that I remember from the bottom of my heart.  Miss Kaar was a large, a very tall woman, a white woman, and I don't know what her ethnic background might have been.  But she was very interesting, it seems as though she might've been sent there, and this is another editorial opinion, to achieve her pension.  So when she came, she was hardly interested in anything but a peaceful environment, so she recognized my authority on the playground and in the school.  And then everybody knew me and usually if there was some little problem a person would come to me and I'd straighten it out.  But she did not like the way I greeted her because I'd speak to her and leave, I needed her for no other purpose.  Because she knew nothing about the environment, and she hardly knew anything about the academic theory of, you know, learning theory and so forth and so on.  That might be applicable to the students if indeed you sat down long enough as the supervisor of an educational environment.  Miss Kaar called me in the office one day, and she took, and this is what she told me.  She says, "Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates]," I'll never forget this, I can almost quote her verbatim, she said, "Mr. Pates, I came here from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and I noticed that the black people, the black teachers on the West Side are different from those on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]."  I said, uh oh, here it comes, I said, "Yes Mrs. Kaar, yes, what?"  "I say something on the West Side to the teachers, they tend to respond immediately.  Those on the South Side tend to question me, and you're one of them."  I said oh, oh (laughter), you know I didn't laugh as I laugh now, I said, "Oh?"  She says, well I knew when she said that, see this is my signal 'cause I'm not changing and she is what she is.  And I have a history of understanding this much better that she understands where she is.  So I said oh, she said, "Yes, and it's going to take me some time to get the kinds of responses on the South Side that I had on the West Side."  Okay now this is what Mrs. Kaar would do, Miss Kaar lived about 7700 North, she would call me.  Now I had a friend who was also one of--I'll mention his name, his name was Childs [ph.].  When Childs taught, he was a fellow hadn't been here long from the country but had passed the exam, and Childs wanted to be a principal.  And wanted to be in the good favor of Mrs. Kaar, so Mrs. Kaar, like Mrs. Kaar would come to school and she would say, "Oh my goodness, I think I left my lights on in my house.  Mr. Childs, will you go to my house," and she would give him her key, now you know this is only imaginable, this sounds like a fairy tale, but it's true.  She says, "Would you take my key and go to my house and turn my lights out," now I would see this.  So when Childs would come back, I'd say, "Childs," I said, "you're a teacher, how is it that you let this lady send you on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] as though you are an errand boy?"  I said, how, and you know and some of my friends well they would look at him and they would call him uncle, you know.  And I, you know I what I would try to do is get him to his whatever he had in here to show him.  I mean she's making a--next thing you'll be out there fixing her flat tire or something, you know.  Here you have passed the teacher's exam, have gone to college presumably, or you had to.  And here you are running errands for Mrs. Kaar because she's the kind of woman she is, you know.  And so I would, it got to the point actually where I would talk to Childs personally.  I'd say, "Childs, listen, you can't do this; this is an embarrassment, and it hurts me to see you do this," you know.  Childs was bigger than I was you know, Childs was a big fellow you know.  I guess Childs, there might've been something else there.  She may have been paying him or something you know, or something I don't know, but anyway that's what he would do.
Story_ID: 324673
Speaker 1: So after a while of stomaching this, I decided, I said, "Well I'm gonna put my name, float my name out here."  Well it just so happens at that particular time, Andy [Anderson Thompson] and I were working in what they call the Upward Bound program at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  That was a bridge program for students out of high school, and they come on the college environment, spend the summer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did that, did that have anything to do with C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] at that point?
Speaker 1: Oh well, now the C.T. Vivian thing is another whole kind of, that's another whole kind of community; keep that name in your mind.  Because I'll tell you about C.T. Vivian because that, C.T. Vivian deals with 14 North Ashland [Avenue], which was another whole kind of activist movement.  That's where I first saw Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga], that's where, that's where 14 North Ashland, there was a big church [Christ Temple Apostolic Faith Church, Chicago, Illinois] there.  That's where Fred Hampton would come to speak, and that's where C.T. Vivian, along with other ministers were a part of a kind of a religious Christian Action Movement.  That was going to open houses, open housing and open opportunity in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay I mentioned it because I know he, when I interviewed him he talked about starting one of the first Upward Bound type programs in the country.
Speaker 1: Oh, was he a part of Upward Bound?
Speaker 2: He, I think he came up with the concept and, and it may not been in Chicago but somewhere he's it, maybe even in Atlanta [Georgia] when he started Upward Bound.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's interesting, because I knew he was a part of one of the Christian networks, you know.  I would go so far as to say in some, it had some relationship with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he was, he was a lieutenant of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, yeah, yeah.  'Cause when Dr. King came here, that was another whole kind of movement, we haven't gotten to that yet you know.  And we may not as I go in today (laughter).
Speaker 2: I hope so. We're about now we're about in sixty--in the late '60s [1960s] about '68 [1968], 'cause you left in DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] what?
Speaker 1: Yeah around that time.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were, that's right.
Story_ID: 324674
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this though, as we get into this.  Had the teachers, black teachers organized themselves in any type of way, I mean in terms of a formal organization by that time?
Speaker 2: Well they had the teachers union, and at that particular time Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright], Lorenzo Martin, Bobby Wright and Lorenzo Martin, Montgomery [ph.], I can't think of Montgomery's last name.  Oh boy there were about four or five others, they created a caucus and it was called the Black Teachers Caucus.  And it was very active--
Speaker 1: So it's the caucus of the teachers union?
Speaker 2: It was a caucus out of the teachers union.
Speaker 1: Chicago Teachers Union?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, yeah.  And as a matter of fact at that time, Dr. Bobby Wright was a truant officer; I don't think he was even a teacher at that time.  He was a truant officer.  And they organized what they called the black teacher's caucus, at that time, and around that time, Andy [Anderson Thompson] and I were also very active in orchestrating.  See we had created a kind of a black teacher gathering; we had not created yet the teacher--we, later on we had a kind of a teacher training institute that came out of the Communiversity you know.  But I'm trying to, I don't remember the time that we opened the Communiversity, I think that was around '68 [1968].  It was right after we did the associate, at AAAE, the Association of Afro-American Educators in Chicago [Illinois].  I'm trying to keep these things kind of linear here, and not (laughter) go off into the tributaries, because the tributaries can be their own line you know.  Andy and I, oh here's what happened, Dr. Barney Berlin came to DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], and he told me, oh yes, that Dr. Finch [ph.], who just died about maybe three or four months ago, had recommended me to him to work in his Upward Bound program.  After he explained it--and well Barney Berlin was in charge of Upward Bound grant at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  He was a young Jewish fellow at that time, he's an old Jewish fellow now (laughter) I guess, I haven't seen him in a long time.  But anyway, he came and he talked to me about the Upward Bound program and he told us that it was a bridge program.  And that he told us what its mission was, told me what its mission was, and asked me if I wanted to work at it.  I said, "Well I have no problem with it," it's an all day Saturday thing and in the summertime, it will afford me that job that I needed during the summer you know.  You live on the campus with the students and you work with the students and you create a curriculum in approach and so forth and so on.  Well Andy and I went okay, when I went to my first meeting of Upward Bound Dr. Berlin asked me if I knew of someone who could teach history.  I said, "Yeah, I know of course I knew," I said, "my friend Anderson Thompson."  So Andy and I went to the program and he hired Andy, and Andy and I became like A and B in Upward Bound program.  We were I think the two black components in the program, they, each of us had like he would pair a black teacher with a white teacher.  A black teacher with a white teacher, but he could only--I think we were the only two.  I worked with--
Speaker 1: You were the only two black males in the program?
Speaker 2: Two black males in the program, there was a fella named Dick Nugent [Richard Nugent], a lady named Faye Alexander [ph.], I think Faye Alexander was a counselor.  And there was one other lady; I mean one other fellow whose name, Ken, Kenneth [ph.] something, he and I worked together.  And we would teach and we would almost live with the students during the summer, except, but it was at Loyola.  They would live on the campus, and we would come on back home.
Story_ID: 324675
Speaker 1: And that was a very interesting program [Upward Bound], because out of that also Barney Berlin hired me to work with some of the teachers in the teacher training section at Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And I would go to at that time, that teacher training element was located at where DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] is located now.  What is that, Jackson [Jackson Boulevard] and about is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Between State [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right there.
Speaker 2: Where the Music Mart is.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And we would meet there and it was right around that time, yeah and I would, we would work with the--many of the white teachers who--teacher interns, those who were inspiring to teach in the public school system [Chicago Public Schools] we would work with.  It was during this time, I stayed in that program for quite awhile.  Now when was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] killed, in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], right, April 4th.
Speaker 1: Because that was the day, that was really a very serious day.  I was driving to the Upward program, no I skipped I guess a few years and I haven't talked about the community network, working within the schools between '64 [1964] and '68 [1968].  But in terms of my experience, I stayed at DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] a while, while I worked with the Upward Bound program during the summer and on Saturdays.  And it was at that time I think around that time--yeah it was around that time that I had a friend who was asking me if I wanted to accept a fellowship at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] for my doctorate you know.  And I said, "No, I don't wanna go to U of C because they tell me you can't get out, and I don't want to go to Northwestern 'cause it's too far (laughter).  And all you do is get a doctorate."  Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] was a very strong influence in that regard, Bobby Wright was at the U of C.  But I think this was like '70 [1970] yeah this was a little later up.  This is like in '70 [1970] and Bobby (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you were exploring it in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You explored the idea in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: I was exploring the idea, because we were actually out in the street at night working trying to bring some fairness, as Harold Washington would say, some fairness into the public school system; it was absolutely ridiculous.  One of the reason, as a matter of fact that I think is never talked about with respect to problems in the public school system, particularly in the black community is that the people who worked with the students have little, very, very little knowledge regarding their backgrounds.  They make assumptions that they're going to teach subject matter and not students, and you just can't do it in these most formative years.  From elementary school all the way through high school you got to work with the personality of the student, because they're nothing but personality.  You can sit in a chair in college and lecture, because all a person wants to do is take your course, pass the exam and go on to whatever is he is aspires toward being.  You can't do that with a high school and elementary school student, you've got to prove in many instances, particularly in that environment, that you are working in his interest and not only in his interest but that you are familiar with some, the values and the feelings.  And that every aspect of his environment, even almost to how he eats and what he's--and he eats and sleeps. Who his mother is and what are her concerns you know because you, in many instances you're talking about in the broad spectrum of things, you're talking about normalcy being in the context of difference.  Nobody is the same in this broad context, everybody is different, therefore, that's normal.  So, therefore, how you gonna work with John as distinguished from Mary as distinguished from, you know each one.  You got to work with, you got to perceive their individual sensibilities in order to get the academic material to them.  It might be different now, but I doubt it you know, as a matter of fact I think that this should be inherent in the methodology of teaching.  Particularly on this level.
Story_ID: 324676
Speaker 1: In '68 [1968] I was driving down the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] going to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in the morning.  And that's--it was, I don't know whether it was morning or afternoon I know it was in the daytime.  I heard on the radio that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had got shot.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: It was in the afternoon.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause he it was, I think they started announcing about two o'clock in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I was, it might've been on a Saturday as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: It was during the week, during the school week.
Speaker 1: Was it?
Speaker 2: During school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I was driving down the street and I had to pull over, I said, "What?"  So I turned the radio up a little louder, I was supposed to give a lecture to the teachers.  I pulled the car over, it was around McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], at that time the old McCormick Place, and I pulled the car over to make sure that I heard what I heard.  And then after the commentator repeated that Martin Luther King had been shot and that it did not look too good, you know.  As a matter of fact I do believe that he said that he was killed that he was indeed dead, you know.  Well, when I got, I could not give that speech, 'cause the more I stood there and looked out at the audience, I made the statement.  I said, "I just heard on the radio that Martin Luther King got killed," I said, "that's the end of what I was going to say today (laughter)." Everybody oh, yeah 'cause I, they didn't even know it, the people in the audience didn't even know it.  And it was about I'd say about two hundred people sitting out there you know.  I told them I said, "I can't, I can't pull this together, I can't pull together what I was gonna talk to you about.  Realizing what has just happened, I've got to digest this and do so something with myself," you know.
Story_ID: 324677
Speaker 1: So what happened in the black community I mean after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, I mean was there, now you couldn't make that speech that day.  But was there a rally, a gathering, memorial services, or?
Speaker 2: That day when I turned around and came back home and I asked my wife [Maxine Pates] I said, did you; she said, "Martin Luther King got killed."  And everybody around me was very angry, they said, "My goodness, if they kill him, they'd kill anybody."  They said, "They'd kill anybody if they'd kill Martin Luther King 'cause look who Martin is," you know all that kind of conversation.  But now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now part of that though I don't wanna get away from that too fast because part of it, there's a, from what I understand.  In those days the sentiment in the North especially amongst the black, urban black people was that Dr. King was, they respected him but they didn't wanna be him. And they didn't wanna be subjected to violence, I mean a violent out- I mean they weren't gonna be nonviolent in the face of the kind of opposition that he faced.  Especially after coming to Chicago [Illinois], having faced--
Speaker 2: Well that's very true I think what, see Chicago has been the seat of many race riots, you know from your history.  In terms of studying Chicago because remember now when I was a kid I lived on 46th [Street] and Evans [Avenue], Evans is the next street before you get to Cottage Grove [Avenue].  Cottage Grove was the dividing line between the black community and the white community.  If you went across Cottage Grove, you knew you were gonna have to fight, same thing is true over there in Canaryville [Chicago, Illinois] right now.  I used to play baseball with a, I used to play softball with a team called the Ravens.  And we used to play white teams and bet money you know, we'd go over to Canaryville because, but on the way out, we had to make sure.  Because there was like a Nazi element over there, recent immigrants like Lithuanians and Polish and so forth and so on, you know.  And mostly all Catholic, I think that's--because I think nobody really touches on the integration of the Catholic schools and the Catholic environments in the City of Chicago.  Because as we were talking, as we talk about integrating black kids into the Chicago Public Schools, you have to talk about the Catholic schools and the tra- and the difficult transition it was for black kids to go to Catholic schools.  For an example, integrating Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] down on 39th Street, quite an experience, integrating, well all of them, I don't know that I can call all of their names.  Although I know where they are, the one Columbanus [St. Columbanus School, Chicago, Illinois] I think it's on Woodlawn [Avenue] and sixty- oh, over then on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know it's on 71st [Street] some now, 71st near--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: West of King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] yeah.
Speaker 2: All of that, the parish and us tried, oh they created havoc, they created.  The kids were, the black kids were always in danger when they attempted to go to Catholic schools when the population was predominately white, and as you've seen, the white population obviously could never, I mean unless it's all white, they can't live there anyway.  So they, the moment you set in, they move out, and I can understand that now, I didn't understand it earlier.  But I understand it now, because the cultural assumptions are different; they actually are different.  You know Catholicism has its rigid catechistic system.  And by and large African Americans was less Catholic than they were everything else.  So then when I was a boy you had, well you had Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi High School, Chicago, Illinois], you had Corpus Christi and St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeth High School, Chicago, Illinois].  St. Elizabeth was a black high school that was put there, can't think of the cardinal's name.  And staffed by Franciscans, by the Franciscan order, which was an order specifically trained to work with African people.
Speaker 1: Yeah like missionaries.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think that's very interesting that there's a whole specific kind of training; you know one has to look at all of these kinds of, of generalizations and educational assumptions regarding how to approach different groups, particularly when you have an institution that is as authoritarian as the Catholic church system, so forth and so on, you know.
Story_ID: 324678
Speaker 1: But back to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], when you talk about how the city, you see Chicago [Illinois] was not necessarily nonviolent generally speaking.  You also had your ministers who were threatened by Martin Luther King.  Who created an environment of ambivalence regarding Martin's mission.
Speaker 2: These are the black ministers?
Speaker 1: That, oh yes that what I'm talking about and Reverend Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] in particular, the one down on 31st Street, who changed the address of his church [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] to the east-west street.  Rather than the north-south street, because when they named it [South Parkway] Martin Luther King Boulevard [sic. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], he said, "No, no, my, my church will not be 31 so and so Martin Luther King Boulevard it'll be so and so and so and so East 31st Street."  And that's how, why his address, the address on that church now I think is still on the east-west street rather than the Martin Luther King Boulevard.  Jackson was strongly against Martin Luther King, and so was old man Daley [Richard J. Daley].  Old man Daley said, "Why does he come to Chicago to create trouble, you know, he's nothing but a troublemaker."  So you had a lot of black preachers who created a kind of an ambivalence, well after all, because the active ministry challenged the orientation of the church amongst black people in the City of Chicago.  The question is, if this minister is here talking about the need to improve the conditions of black people, what is my minister talking about, you know?  Other than taking up collections.  So these were the questions I think posed among many of our people, and when Martin King was shot, now we'll go that very night, the fires started in the City of Chicago.  The fires that I am familiar with because I stepped out in the street to see for myself what was going on.  The [U.S.] Fifth Army, the Fifth, 63rd Street started to burn from Cottage Grove [Avenue] all the way to Stony Island [Avenue].  One of the reasons why (laughter) one of the reasons why you see the "L" [elevated train] was cut out of there and everything, because all of the businesses.  All the businesses were burned on 63rd Street; they didn't know, it was clear that they did not know in what direction that was going.  Fifth Army, which was located at that time on the lakefront and 51st Street, they situated a .50 caliber machine gun, right here in front of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  On the other side of the street pointing down 63rd Street because naturally the whole question was how in the world do you get, bring this back, get some order here?  Well the fires were so spontaneous on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], Madison Avenue, Madison Street.  Madison Street was burned; well, the office as you know of the Black Panther Party was over there too.  Madison Street was burned, and 63rd Street was burned, very few of the businesses on 87th Street, if any at all.  But I remember, I went to see for myself 'cause I couldn't believe it that such a--that's why I think the government at that particular time thought that this was an organized insurrection.  And as a matter of fact, when I read some of the COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program] information, some of the pamphlets I have here right now sort of suggested that there was, there was a sensibility as to whether or not this was an organized kind of thing that was taking place in the cities in the United States when Martin Luther King was killed.  But 63rd Street went up, and certainly Madison and many of the places on the West Side, there was lot of burning on the West Side.  But 63rd Street I think, 47th Street not much, but 63rd Street very, a great deal.
Story_ID: 324679
Speaker 1: Around this time, around '68 [1968], that's when I along with Andy [Anderson Thompson], oh, well there's one other thing.  I think one of the things that triggered me; I walked with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Okay's that's in '65 [1965] that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was that in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Yeah so you, you went down for?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, was there a Chicago [Illinois] contingent that went?
Speaker 1: Yeah, me and Wellington Wilson (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, before that did you go to the March on Washington in '63 [1963], did you go to that too?
Speaker 1: No, I was not at the March on Washington--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: But went down to Selma, that's the one that's excited by the Bloody Sunday--
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, that's exactly right, that's exactly right.  Now I learned a great deal, see I was born in the South.  And when they started talking about marching in the South, I wanted to go back and see for myself whether that foolishness that I had to come through as a young boy when I would go to my [maternal] grandmother's house [in Macon, Mississippi], and so forth and so on.  Whether that stuff still existed to the extent that it did, and it did you know it's, but the resistance because remember you had Autherine Lucy trying to integrate the schools.  You had George Wallace saying, "Never in this lifetime," you had Governor Faubus [Orval Faubus], I mean everybody.  The governors are saying, "This'll never happen," while at the same time you have to bring the [U.S.] Army in to get the kids into the school.  You've got a dialogue going on in the media, in the visual media on the one hand and in the written media.  All of which is moving toward how are we going to implement integration, what is integration?  And you got the you know you've seen the pictures of the white people standing up yelling, and trying to define that group that would--the officers who would be taking the kids into the school.  Well, Wellington and I went down on a bus, I forgot who sponsored that bus, but he--because Wellington had gone to school at Alabama State [Alabama State College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Was C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] involved in the, in the bus going?
Speaker 1: I don't remember who sponsored that bus, I know that C.T. Vivian was, yes he was absolutely involved.  But the particular bus and the group of with whom I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't really remember but I remember telling my wife [Maxine Pates], I said, "Hey listen, I'm going down here to Alabama," she said, "What?"  I said, "Yeah I'm going.  But you stay here, 'cause if something happens I don't something to happen to both of us."  (Laughter) But when we went down, it was very interesting to be reminded, because now I'm fully grown then, now I'm teaching school and so forth and so on.  And--
Speaker 2: And you told us in the first reel about the incident when you were about twelve--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Down in Mississippi where you were in trouble in that store.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  And you know with that kind of threat and whatnot and having been packed up and shipped out real quick by my grandmother, it was very clear to me that this--the South was direct and the North was indirect in how it dealt with us, you know.  The North would not let black people leave, the South would, and by that I mean would not let them get into the jobs and whatnot for which you know a black man on a police department, in the fire department.  The same then is as it is now, you know.  I can, black policeman, for an example, were only arresting black people you know.  And you read the story of Two-Gun Pete [Sylvester Washington], I grew up in the neighborhood, Two-Gun Pete would shoot a black man down in a minute, you know, he was notorious.  You had, they had a police car full of black detectives, one was Two-Gun Pete the other one was called Injun Joe [ph.], they called him Injun Joe.  And their whole mission was to keep the black community civil so to speak, you know.  And he of course owned that shack up there on 39th Street right at, that was his barbeque that was his building, his barbeque stand and everything, before it became whatever it is now you know.  But there's a book ['Chicago's Two Gun Pete: Not a Western, a True Story,' Jerry Jones] on Two-Gun Pete, you know.
Story_ID: 324680
Speaker 1: But we had you at the march [Selma to Montgomery March] now, you went down for the march, '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was interesting, here's the thing that I saw that I thought was noteworthy.  During the march I noticed that, okay, we would sleep at night on the floor in a church, I don't remember the name of the church.  And but when we got in the church we would notice that all the people doing the typing and so forth were whites, you know.  And the black people were bringing the white people the coffee and the rolls and the stuff.  And that was kind of interesting, because you say, now wait a minute, what is this march, what is all of this?  But you had to see that there was even segregation or kind of an interesting segregation and interesting series of assumptions of who's gonna run this kind of thing, operative at that time you know.  You saw the typing and whatnot; I guess the typewriters were furnished by white agencies.  And, you know, because there was a whole network of busybodies so to speak, and of course you had whites in the march and the white preachers.  And the marches were orchestrated, this was when you begin to learn something about sociology of the marches.  Who's gonna be up in front and who are the rest of the marchers going to be.  And what, at that particular time, I can remember the administration was talking about the communist input.  Because you know when you begin to wonder if you had thought, if you had read any political theory at all, what in the world is communism if every time you need the answer to a political question the answer is communism, you know.  And of course at the time Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] I think was, Hoover was active FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and everybody was being, well, according to COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program], I mean, they were, they had organizations listed as to the organizations they had or had a Communist influence.  And at that time you had the Socialist part of the white left, they had infiltrated also.  So you had a lot of strong white left people, SDS, let me see what was it, it was SDS, Students for Democratic Society [Students for a Democratic Society] the A-D something or another and the Socialist Workers [Socialist Workers Party].  There were a lot of left, white, left wing groups you know, and many of those groups saw that march as an opportunity to implement their programs too, you know.  Whatever they might've been.  And of course at that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, were you ever recruited by any of the--
Speaker 2: Oh yes I was recruited, oh my goodness, Crowe [Larry Crowe], I was recruited back during the days.  I was recruited when I was a teenager, I was recruited--Paul Robeson used to come to Bacon's Casino [Charles A. Hayes Family Investment Center, Chicago, Illinois].  Bacon's Casino was right across the street from DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], it is called now the Packinghouse [United Packinghouse Workers Union].  That's the Hayes packing house?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That used to be called Bacon's Casino.
Speaker 1: Was it a casino actually?
Speaker 2: Well I used to wonder why it was called Bacon's Casino, because I think what happened was the casino was, people gathering on the weekend to play, what do you call it keno and bingo?  What is keno, I don't know?
Speaker 1: Some kind of card game, I forgot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I remember the word keno all the time.  And but I knew what bingo was you know, and Paul Robeson would come to speak to the workers at Bacon's Casino.  And my dad [Squire Pates] would go up there, he and I would go, and he wanted to shake Paul Robeson's hand, but he could never get close enough to him.  Because the crowd was always very impressed with his speaking and what he had to say, the recruitment was always, they always, what they had was always a sign-in sheet.  And whenever you went to something where Paul Robeson was, you would sign in.  At the top of that sheet was usually a kind of recruitment paragraph of a sort of you know.  And one of my friends got in a lot of difficulty as a result of that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Signing one of those.
Speaker 2: Signing one of these sheets.
Speaker 1: I think we discussed this in the first part.
Speaker 2: Did we?
Speaker 1: But I--did you have any experiences like that in, during the march in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Not during the marches, not during the marches because I was so sensitive and aware of it, that I knew you know you saw a lot of people in a lot places there trying to get people, trying to recruit people for a whole lot of organizations.
Speaker 1: Signed petitions and.
Speaker 2: Signed petitions and so forth.  And I just, hey I went down there to march and be a part of the march and they put me about a block behind the march, behind the--
Speaker 1: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Front, you know.  But really that was closer than a whole lot of, because the march was tremendous; I don't know how many people might've been on that thing.  But it was far as the eyes could see, and you see the white people lined up along the highway and the roads jeering and you know.  Some of whom had signs and whatnot you know.  But that was one of the things that sort of sensitized me, when I came back from that, that's when my natural really started growing then.
Story_ID: 324681
Speaker 1: 'Cause I remember one time I went into a gym and Andy [Anderson Thompson] was in there and he said, "Hey man, look at your hair." I said, "Yep."  He said, and I think that influenced him too, and that's when we started talking about the need to do something in education.  So, oh yes, I left, I left DuSable [DuSable Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois], this fella Barney Berlin told a fella named Donohue [John P. Donohue] about me.  And he said that they need a fellow such as I to be the director of admissions at Loop College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois], which is one of, which is old Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: One of the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: One of the City Colleges.  And asked, would I come down and apply?  And I of course said I would, but I was not about to, you know the fact that I had two little, a boy [Cyrus Pates] and a girl [Shelley Pates Williams] at that time and so forth.  I was not about to give up the security of the teaching job to go into an insecure situation, especially an insecure administrative job you know.  So he sent me to meet a man named Jack Donohue, and Jack Donohue, he told me that you know I heard about you, I'd like to hire you at the college.  He was the dean of student personnel services, and we had a conversation, and I said, "Well sounds very interesting.  Only thing about it is, I don't know how the City Colleges pay, and you know I make what I make teaching and what I make in Upward Bound."  And I had another job, I'm trying to think of the other job, I think I was writing something.  So I had these three jobs, so I said, the only way that I would come to the City Colleges is that they will pay me, oh the summer school job too.  They would pay me what I make year-round in all these jobs, well they said, well we'll see about that.  So surely enough I went to meet this man Donohue and Donohue sent me to the president of the college, a man at that time named Dr. David Heller.  And we had an interesting kickoff experience you know because what I talked to him and told him what it was I needed to make in order to work for him, he tried an interesting little trick.  He tried to hire, I told him I wouldn't come unless I was on a tenure track as a faculty person.  But I'd work in administration.  And you know it's something that was an intuitive observation, I had a great suspicion that that was something that I needed to do in order for my own personal security.  So in talking to him, he was very nebulous about that because I would have been the first black person hired as a faculty member, but to work in the administration.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you mean Loop College at that point had no black faculty or at all?
Speaker 1: No black administrator, no black administrator; I was the first one, the first one, the very first one.  And an interesting set of experiences came out of that.
Story_ID: 324682
Speaker 1: Because now as I'm working at Loop [Loop College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois], I'm also active in the teacher movement in the City of Chicago [Illinois], and we're trying to reeducate black teachers to their own dignity, and to understand their own potential.  And black teacher caucus, we're meeting, at that time it seems to me that's around the time that the Institute of Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois] was beginning to formulate also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Third World Press and Institute [Third World Press and Institute of the Black World, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right.  And it was also at this time when you talk about C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian], C.T. Vivian along with [HistoryMaker] Jorja Palmer and Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], well I'll say Jorja Palmer 'cause I don't know whether Lu and Jorja were married at that particular time.  But Jorja Palmer, they were working also against the Willis Wagons and also trying to open up housing in the City of Chicago.  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had marched over in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois], and they had shot the firecrackers, they were all up in the trees, scared Martin Luther King and everybody else.  Because these firecrackers sounded like shotguns you know, and they had firecrackers that went off in rhythm, pow, pow, pow, pow pow, you know like some kind of machinegun or something (laughter) you know.  But it was very interesting.  Bob Lucas [Robert Lucas] was part of that march, if you remember Bob who subsequently became the leadership in the Kenwood-Oakland Community Organization [Chicago, Illinois], you know, KOCO.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that organization was also fomenting because it was trying to do something for the betterment of--most of these organizations--now while at the, while at the same time you had The Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois] trying to, trying to make sure that the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] had hegemony over all of Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] you know, are we, what?
Speaker 2: Just a signal we're running out, we're not out yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The University of Chicago, and Allison Davis was working, sitting on that board.  Allison Davis, what's the preacher's name over at Apostolic Church [Apostolic Church of God, Chicago, Illinois]?  I can't think of his name [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier] right now.
Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 1: This was the group that Alinsky [Saul Alinsky] put together, The Woodlawn Organization and subsequently Reverend, man at Apostolic.
Speaker 2: Sixty-third [63rd Street] and?
Speaker 1: Sixty-third and what's that, Dorchester [Avenue], whatever it is, right behind the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think much of Woodlawn, and how 63rd Street is presently configured and how the University of Chicago, as it said, was going to take the property all the way up to the graveyard [Oak Woods Cemetery, Chicago, Illinois].  Which it probably is in the process of doing, I mean they just do that gradually you know in order to guarantee its existence.  I guess as the University of Chicago in the geographical context within which.  Because actually when the University of Chicago speaks relatively to its building improvements and its expansion, it pretty much get, gets what it wants, you know.  I can remember having gone to one of the meetings of what at that time was called the Hyde Park Improvement Association [Chicago, Illinois].  That had as its purpose what it called managed integration, some of which leaked over into here, because when I first moved here, I didn't realize that I would be a member of this managed integration.  They had a team of white people come to see me to make sure, to ask me if I would be a part of their group to go and convince the white people that the people who were moving over here were worthy of living amongst them, you understand?
Story_ID: 324683
Speaker 1: Arthur Brazier [HistoryMaker Bishop Arthur Brazier] yeah, of the, he became director or the administrative executive of The Woodlawn Organization [Chicago, Illinois].  And he along with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], along with the professor, Allison Davis, they all sat kind of like--
Speaker 2: Leon Finney [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Leon D. Finney, Jr.], I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They sat and made decisions in the best interest of the University of Chicago, while at the same time, attempting to convince the community, and that of course was Brazier's responsibility, that the hegemony of the University of Chicago in terms of taking the properties up to the graveyard [Oak Woods Cemetery, Chicago, Illinois] was in the best interest of the community.  And that, I think that's where we are now because as you can see, Leon Finney came in with the housing development program.  And when you look down 63rd Street, there used to be a time when you could ride the streetcar, not the bus but the streetcar.  All the way to the end of the line, which was at Jackson Park [Chicago, Illinois], now, and the "L" [elevated train] also went all the way.  Well now as you can see they've eliminated the "L" and all the businesses are pretty much gone, and the land is there to be used in whatever way, it will be interesting to know how a person can gets a parcel of land there, you know.  What prescriptions they would have to subscribe to in order to get some of the land over there in the 63rd area, in what they called in the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] area now you know.  I'd like to know the extent really to which whatever the community organization is.  I suspect Leon Finney is a part of it, because I think Leon Finney later on became very active with The Woodlawn Organization, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I had a friend who worked for Woodlawn, his name was subsequently Dr. Paul Black, I don't know what happened to Paul.  But he and I used to talk about it all the time because he used to feel the necessity to defend the organization's thrust to work in the best interest of the U of C [University of Chicago] you know.  Now let's see now.
Speaker 2: And the same time the U of C was like working with, they had the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation] too, to fundraise, right?
Speaker 1: That's an interesting point because the public schools put in an institution called the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project.  Over which Barbara Sizemore [HistoryMaker Barbara A. Sizemore] was the immediate director, Anna Kolheim was the principal of Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And Anna Kolheim was a very spirited black woman who was very much in the interest of the students.  And she and Barbara Sizemore would work together in what they called an experimental, the Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project.  That was on the corner, I think it was 63rd and Kimbark [Avenue] if I recall correctly.
Story_ID: 324684
Speaker 1: Now at that particular time Reverend Fry [John R. Fry] was the minister of, I think it's First Presbyterian Church [Chicago, Illinois] over there.  And it's in First Presbyterian Church that they had Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation] actually; the Blackstone Rangers actually had the developmental seed.  As you know, the Blackstone Rangers developed out of a baseball club, they used to play baseball in the back of Blackstone Elementary School [ph.].  And they used to call themselves Blackstone Rangers, and then they of course developed beyond that.  Reverend Fry in an interest, in the--I guess in his attempt to amalgamate his church with the community, found that the young men had such great control over the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] area that he had to come at them.  He almost became a Blackstone Ranger, because, I'm trying to think of the foundation that gave him thirty thousand dollars.  For which it is reputed that the Blackstone Rangers bought guns and had them stored in First Presbyterian Church.  Now Reverend Fry wrote a book, the title of which is 'Fire and Blackstone' [John R. Fry].  And in that book I think you get his version, you get his version of how he worked with the Blackstone Rangers.  I did not, okay now Andy [Anderson Thompson] worked, Andy worked with the Woodlawn Experimental Schools program [Woodlawn Experimental Schools Project], Allen Collard [Allen P. Collard] also worked with.  I was a consultant to the Kenwood-Oakland Community Organization [Chicago, Illinois].  Now the Blackstone Rangers moved in the community with a degree of freedom, until such time as Jeff Fort declared war on the police.  And they shot, there it was a hotel on the corner where the Chase bank is now, called the Southmoor Hotel [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was in the Southmoor Hotel that the Stones would also meet and they kind of like had control with--the community was kind of affected by the gangs and people were afraid.  Because they used to play jazz in the Southmoor Hotel you know, they also had a tavern right down the street, I can't think of the name of it.  Where many of the Stones, Jeff Fort and many of them would sort of wreck or take.  The Stones declared war on the police department and they shot a policeman, whose name I can't remember now.  But it is at the time, and they boasted about it, they just killed this Italian cop, and they boasted about it.  Well at this time there were some names; one was Sengale [ph.], Jeff Fort, Bull [Eugene "Bull" Hairston], Chester [Chester Evans, Jr.], Chester.  Chester, it would be interesting to know where all these fellas are, I think Sengale kind of reformed himself, went out and took some kind of something or another in Washington, D.C.  Where Bull and Jeff Fort are in prison, I don't know what happened to Chester.  But I can remember also I think Chester had to leave town because they held him responsible for running up behind, and killing a gang member.  Shooting through the back of the bus, they, when the bus stopped they shot him through the back of the bus--
Story_ID: 324685
Speaker 1: Now I was a consultant to the Blackstone Rangers [Black P. Stone Nation], and there are two incidents I think are very important with respect to what it meant to be a consultant.  We were asked to attend a meeting to help abate the violence that was taking place in the community.  And because all of us were teachers and we knew a lot of the students, and these young men used to be students.  And you know they kind of gotten into the gangs now, but Fry [John R. Fry] and I'm trying to think of the foundation, it'll come to me in a minute.  But Fry was providing the Blackstone Rangers with weaponry they were buying guns.  Now at the time the dividing line between the Disciples [Gangster Disciples] and the Blackstone Rangers, I think was Dorchester Street [sic. Dorchester Avenue].  So the Disciples were on the other side, the Blackstone Rangers were on the east side.  Now the Blackstone Rangers also extended all the way down, all up into 47th Street and whatnot.  And all into the Kenwood-Oakland [Chicago, Illinois] because at one time, I think Cogwell [Mickey Cogwell] and Chester [Chester Evans, Jr.] was the directors and executive directors of the Kenwood-Oakland Community Organization's [Kenwood-Oakland Community Organization, Chicago, Illinois] project.  And they were supposed to be running tutoring programs, and like I say Andy [Anderson Thompson] and I and Sylvester Williams were invited.  Sylvester Williams taught history at Parker High School [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], were invited to go to a meeting, a conciliatory meeting to be held at the Central Park YMCA [ph.] camp.  And I don't remember where that camp was, I remember getting in my Volkswagen and we were laughing and talking Sy Williams and Andy and me as we driving.  'Cause it was raining cats and dogs, it was just pouring down, raining so we finally found our way.  Now at the meeting was a gang called the Black Box [ph.] which was located on, in the projects from 22nd Street up, it was called the Black Box.  The Blackstone Rangers took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not Ickes [Harold L. Ickes Homes, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: I think it is Ickes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And two other gangs was supposed to meet there for conciliation, and we were supposed to be the mediators, like the diplomats, to show them the benefits of not killing themselves.  Well the dialogue went back and forth and finally one of the gang members said, "We're not going to negotiate this particular point.  We're gonna leave," so Andy and I ran after him and said, "Hey, hey, hey, we don't want you to leave, let's sit down and see if we can't cover everything."  There's some give and take in this whole thing, he said, "No, I'm not doing it, I'm not doing it."  He said, "And furthermore I want you and Mr. Thompson to come with me," which we did.  We went up into the hotel room or whatever that room was on, in the camp, he said, "We came up in here because we knew you and Mr. Thompson.  And we know that that you all have really been looking out for us ever since we were little shorties."  He said, "You know when stuff gets rough, we have to be ready," and he pulled the closet door back.  It was more guns in there than you could've seen in an arsenal (laughter), we saw guns of likes of which we never seen before.  Hanging up like, look like machine guns and mortars and, I'm exaggerating with the mortars, but it was a lot of guns in there.  You know like they talk about AK-47s, it looked like automatic weapons.  And Andy and I said, "Well maybe this is non-negotiable, maybe you need another kind of force in here."  "But it would be a shame if you brought police force in here because that's the end of negotiations.  You can't do anything you, there is no talking with police in the room," and there were probably already police in the room you know.  So they agreed, they went back stayed about fifteen more minutes and then adjourned the meeting.  Andy and I jumped in the car and came back to chalk that particular experience up to our naivete with respect to the kinds of weapons.  We thought that the Stones and the Disciples were using pistols, but no, no, no, they were armed heavily, and this was back in the '60s [1960s].  I mean, the latter part of the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah '68 [1968] or '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: And that's one of the reasons why, you see I don't think it would be an exaggeration to say when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, the Stones decided to burn up 63rd Street.  I would just say that, but certainly I would say it was the Stones force and other forces like that you know, gang forces.
Story_ID: 324686
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Let me continue with the chronology here.
Speaker 2: I guess one of the things that you, it's about the time for the Association of African American Educators [sic. Association of Afro-American Educators] and, when does get--the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] starts up and Communiversity too.  And I don't know what, with this stuff (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now at this particular time, OBAC, the Organization of Black American Culture, the students were extremely active.  Black studies programs had come into being; the whole theory of the implementation of institutions to empower black people was getting intellectual foment from the students.  Students were coming back; they were asking for us to come and speak everywhere, we were doing that.  We were speaking everywhere; we were talking about the value of being a black student and what it meant to posterity.  And how important it was for them to understand who their ancestors were, and how important it was for them to understand that their fight didn't start with their birth.  But had been going on ever since having been, our ancestors were kidnapped from the homeland and so forth you know.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when you say we, you we you mean the Association of African American Educators or?
Speaker 1: Well, actually we had not formulated then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because here's what happened, when students came back, we were always at the center doing something at the, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies]--
Speaker 1: Center for Inner City Studies, Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's here on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: We were all there talking and whatnot, and students would come through, so I can remember the student body; we met at Reverend John Porter's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Kwame John R. Porter] church [Christ United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois], a large group of students, and I've forgotten how they got there.  But anyway student organizations met at John Porter's church which is over there in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they had a big meeting and they said what was needed was a black university, what was really needed was a black university.  And I'll tell you, one of the persons at the very founding meeting was Stan Willis [HistoryMaker Standish E. Willis], I remember him very well.  He was one of the persons of the very founding meetings.
Speaker 2: Now he's now an attorney, Standish Willis here.
Speaker 1: Standish, Miles Standish Willis (laughter) a very effective, very bright brother who came out of that movement.  So we went back and decided that there should be really a black student university which would be a combination of a university and the community.  And I don't know where that name from, came from, but all of a sudden someone said let's call it a Communiversity.  And that's the way the Communiversity sort of sprouted.  While at the same time Andy [Anderson Thompson] and I, see I was working at Loop [Loop College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] and I was a member of what was called the ACAC [sic. National Association for College Admission Counseling, NACAC], the American, I'm trying to think, now see what was that called?  The American, ACAC, I forgotten what it, but it, what it was, was an association of recruitment officers from around the country.
Story_ID: 324687
Speaker 1: But anyway we went to a meeting in Minnesota, and we were in Minneapolis, Minnesota, and this was National College Admissions Counselors [sic. National Association for College Admission Counseling, NACAC], that's what it was.  The national association for admissions counselors from all over the country.  And they were trying to figure out, how in the world do we recruit African American students to come to the colleges?  And at that time Silas Purnell, you remember Silas Purnell?  Silas Purnell was very, very active.  And because Silas Purnell was here in Chicago [Illinois] and we had a lot of, we were up there, but when we listened to the agenda, which was formulated without any African American input whatsoever. We listened to, we looked at the agenda, it was as though you started in a foreign land, as though African Americans didn't exist at all.  So about thirty of us went over into a room and said, "Look, why are we here?  This stuff is irrelevant not only to African American students, but to, if there is such a thing, to American students period.  And you can't talk about America unless you include us, even though they are excluding us."  So we got in the room and started talking about that, well one of the fellows said, "Hey look, let's have a caucus.  Let's bring all of the, all of the black African American recruitment officers into the room and let's create our own agenda.  And have our own conference, a sub-conference under this conference."  And also when we finish have a set of resolutions that will be presented to the national association declaring them persona non grata (laughter).  Understand that, that you just, I mean you got a national conference lasts five days in Minnesota, not talking about anything worthwhile.  Therefore, we cannot be a part of it, we had our own conference and these are our resolutions.  Now there was a fellow named David Kent [David W. Kent], very interesting.  When we went in the room to have our conf- have our caucus, David Kent, and I don't remember where he was from.  David Kent had a piece of paper in his pocket where he had already thought out in advance that we should've had a caucus anyway.  And he came up there for the express purpose of caucusing, he said look he knew that it was irrelevant in the first place.  And this is we ought to do, we ought to have a national African American educators recruitment meeting where we address the issues of education among African American people in this country.  Everybody agreed.  When I went to the meeting, I said, "Hey, this is a beautiful thing," so I came back and I started talking to Andy [Anderson Thompson].  I said, "Andy, this is a beautiful idea," and he agreed.
Story_ID: 324688
Speaker 1: We then begin to go around, we had what we call a planning meeting that was held at the Center for Continuing Education [University of Chicago Graham School], University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] campus.  This planning meeting brought in recruitment officers and interested parties from around the country, I'll tell you, Alkalimat [Abdul Alkalimat]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Abdul, he was Gerald McWhorter then.
Speaker 1: Gerald McWhorter then, he was at that meeting.  A dude named Al Vann [Albert Vann] who was president, well he was in the New York teachers union, Preston Wilcox.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who was from up there in New York somewhere.  These are just, as a matter of fact, I'm gone meet with a person so that she can--Myrna Adams who's vice president at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] now I think she's still there, myself, Andy [Anderson Thompson], Sy Williams [Sylvester Williams], Barbara Sizemore [HistoryMaker Barbara A. Sizemore].  These are just some of the names who were at that planning.  And we came together and said yes, we should have a national meeting of an agenda where we deal with the problems in education of African Americans.  Okay what should we call it; we should call it the national association, AAAE, national Association of African American Educators [sic. Association of Afro-American Educators].  And that's the way it formulated, now while at the same time, Andy and I, and Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright], Bob Rhodes [Robert N. Rhodes] and who else now?  Revis Sheree [ph.], Hammurabi [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb] was always at the door.  We were running the Communiversity at the same time, and at that time, the building was not, as you know you could see through the floor.  It had not been rehabbed, and you could see all through the panels in the wood and whatnot.  So when we had a meeting it was not unusual to disturb somebody next door because there was no door next, you know (laughter).  I mean you, we were just meeting, and the groups, the students were coming from everywhere.  The beautiful thing about the Communiversity is, while we were talking about contemporary literature, while we had scholars and visitors come from everywhere, you know.  Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] came, we had so many people, as a matter of fact I taped much of that on reel-to-reel and, and then trying to get my reel-to-reel together so I can hear some of it, you know.  And of course our orientation was, we were not Marxist, but at that particular time there was a great Marxist influence among African American students.  We had found that when we went around the campuses at that time we also okay, the Communiversity would travel around.  And I think that it was at that time that we met you [Larry Crowe] because we really came like as a contingent of the Communiversity.  To address whatever the problems were around the country the students were having in organizing the black student associations and their black student programs and also the writings.  At that time, I think the most popular of all the writings was the Negro Digest or the Black World of which Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] was the editor.
Story_ID: 324689
Speaker 1: And that's another whole story within the arts, because formations begin to take place at that particular time, Catalyst [The Catalyst], among the social workers, over which Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown] was.
Speaker 2: Useni Perkins [HistoryMaker Useni Eugene Perkins] and (unclear).
Speaker 1: And mind you, I'll tell you who was kind of frightened of us, the fellow who's on Channel Five [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] now.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders, Warner Saunders?
Speaker 1: Warner Saunders yeah.  He saw the foment and he said, I guess he said, "Let me get out of here real quick," you know.  Because Catalyst was, at that time, at that time he was executive director of an organization of the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] I can't think of its name now.
Speaker 2: Better Boys Foundation [BBF Family Services, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Better Boys Foundation, that's exactly right, Better Boys Foundation, Better Boys Foundation.  And so a lot of activity was taking place, now around the national scene of the Panther Party [Black Panther Party], which really was not founded in California.  I mean the Panther Party came out of the South, well the name came out of the South, 'cause I think it was called the Black Panther Party for Self Defense.
Speaker 2: Right, a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], Lowndes County [Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: Alabama organizing project.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.  The thing that went out to California under Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and the tall brother, the tall brother he wrote a book ['Soul on Ice,' Eldridge Cleaver], I can't--
Speaker 2: Bobby Seale, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, you know?
Speaker 2: Bobby Seale.
Speaker 1: Not Bobby Seale.
Speaker 2: Not him?
Speaker 1: The tall brother, and his wife I think still--
Speaker 2: Eldridge Cleaver?
Speaker 1: Eldridge Cleaver yeah, yeah.  Because you know that Panther Party begin to factionalize and it begin to factionalize, I think around the question of which aspect of Marxism are you going to be allied with?  While at the same time while [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga had Us [The Organization Us], which was a black cultural organization.  And they were kind of going against each other and if I understand, if I remember correctly there was some substantial friction that went on between Huey Newton and Maulana Karenga at that point and time, you know.  Kind of some thuggish kind of stuff.  But all of that was tightening the consciousness of the students, African American student bodies.  And they were demanding, up there at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], you remember those brothers took the administrative office and stood there with the shotguns, you know.  You remember the two brothers [Tommie Smith and HistoryMaker John Carlos] in the Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico], raised, you know, one raised his right fist.  The other one raised his left fist, after they had just won the, and refused the, no they took the medal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But raised the black glove you know.  This level of consciousness was permeating everything, you know.
Story_ID: 325112
Speaker 1: A lot of the formations that you named in the last reel are institutions and people.  It seems as though, just coming here from someplace else and observing what was here when I got here that a lot of the people in your generation were very concerned about building black institutions.  I know that was the function of The Catalyst, you know, Communiversity, a lot of that talk was about you know forming institutions.  To provide basic things like education and economic--
Speaker 2: Development.
Speaker 1: Development and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And okay, well the move (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Arts and culture too, the same thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.  First of all I think the purpose of that, the purpose of building institutions when one really reflects upon it, that purpose is obvious.  People cannot define themselves without institutions; they must first be very clear on their identity.  Because institutions reinforce every aspect of their existence and also provide for posterity.  If we say that we are African Americans or African people, we must understand that history doesn't begin with a birth of a child, and doesn't end with the mortal death of that child.  History, that story is the result of all of the building stones that preceded that birth and all of the results that will succeed from that birth.  This is what institutions do, they are like a pantry: they preserve the nutrition for posterity, without them, there is no pantry.  The person, what does it mean for a group to live a lifetime and not to make it through posterity.  And I think this is the--or not to make the kind of contribution that our posterity requires.  If we're going to exist beyond a decade or beyond a century or at all, we have to have the legitimacy of our very being, which is our culture which tells us who we are.  Our literature, our literature of course, someone might say that your literature is not valuable.  Well who is that, if he is alien to the group, who is that person to say that the literature is not a literature?  Even language, I think one of our great detriments in the African American community is that American English is not adequate to express the ontology of the African American community.  I think there are feelings and directions that African Americans have that are totally distinct from other people.  And I think, I think that is true of other people also, I think when we ask, when we ask ourselves well what is a, who is Chinese?  When you ask that question you must come with more than just the spelling of the word or a point in geography.  You have to come with a set of feelings, you have to come with a linear, you have to come with depth and breadth of the existence of a people.  Which contributes to when a child, and my having had so much experience with them, when they ask you who was my mama, who was my father?  You must say more than a name; you've got to say enough who, you got to respond to that with sufficient quality to make them understand their responsibility in terms of how they must function toward their future.  So in, therefore, you must say if you can, well let's go to the literature.  And let's see what was so that we'll know, so we'll have some reference point for what is.  And we might be able to, in some way infer what might, what might be without that.
Story_ID: 325113
Speaker 1: And I think this is, when you talk about the Communiversity, Communiversity seem to have been equipped with the kinds of sensitive people who have never felt, never had a feeling of racial or national inferiority.  Never had a feeling, it had to be brought to us in another institutional form.  You see we've been asking ourselves for a long time, what in the world is an American?  Because it seems to me that whatever America is, it provides everybody the opportunity to be who and what he is.  If that then is so, why is that not a prerogative offered to the African American also?  You know, because when we look at our--when we were coming along, my father [Squire Pates] had to tell me who certain African American great men and women were, my father had to.  I knew who George Washington [President George Washington] was, they told me George Washington chopped down a cherry tree, but they told me he never told a lie.  But now, they never told me that he had 260 slaves, you know.  Now once you understand that, you have to ask yourself, what is the process of making a slave?  Because they weren't slaves when they came here.  They had to be made slaves, how do you make a human a slave, how do you do that, well that, that is a process.  I can understand why that has not been included, that process has not been included in the information supplied in the American historical process.  The reason is, America would see itself a wee bit differently if it understood that it was also in the process of making slaves.  While at the same time, having these broad philosophical enunciations that all men are created equal and endowed and so forth and so on, you see endowed with human rights.  Now that been so you have, you have to have institutions that define life for you.  When we talk about economics, what does it mean for communities to be economically viable?  We find villages are that way when we go and take a look at a village, we find that here's a person tilling the soil and bringing the product to the market.  Here the people they come to the market and they barter for the product.  After they get the product, they make a special kind of food that has been a part of the eating of the village for years.  Even to the extent where the young person says, "Well papa, why do we eat those things?"  And the person responds, "Well you know because my father ate it, and his father ate it, and his father."  But it's natural to the village area, it's natural to the entire village context, it is natural.  Now what is made of this particular product, what do they do after they say peel the peelings, what do they do with the peelings?  And is there a cloth made of it and do people wear it, and?  You see all of that is the kind of, you see that's a cultural national reinforcement that goes with the people.  And supplies them with their strength, their intellectual strength and mental strength forever.  If you don't have that, you are fundamentally oppressed, and you are a victim of that person, if you don't have all the answers, then the answers will be given to you by someone who will create of you something that you are not.  And this is the case; you see those of us have looked not only the history of our people, but the history of other people and looked at the political design of the world, and who have seen how not just villages how nations come into being and go out of being.  And see how people are used and abused.  We're not talking about nations; we're talking about people who, who constitute nations.  And this is why the Communiversity came into being because we recognized that there was a whole universe of knowledge that our people did not have.
Story_ID: 325114
Speaker 1: You say economics.  Did they realize that every time--I can remember when my father [Squire Pates] would tell me (laughter)--someone would ring the bell when I was a little boy.  And I'd go to the door and he would say, "Who is it?" and I might say, "Well it's so and so, dad," he'd come to the door one way.  But if I said, "Dad, it's a white man at the door," my father approached that door very different.  You could see his whole protective image change, first question, what do you want?  So well, we'd like to know, you can't get that here, you can't (laughter) get information at all you understand, it was that kind of thing.  Now what is the reason for that, because they've been taught very early that you better protect yourself and you better create a village of protection.  But you don't have a literature of protection, there's not a literature that is available to you and your children that warn you and let you know that if you don't have the literature that speaks to your sustenance.  If you don't have the literature that defines you in the way that you really are, I'm talking about that fundamental positive ingredient that you want to communicate to your children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren and so forth.  If you don't have that, then you have to depend on someone else, so then, therefore, the Communiversity came into being realizing that there's a lot of work to be done.  And that the students, particularly the students of that generation who was so conscious, they understood that you needed to include the presence of African people in the world in everything.  Because guess what, it had been excluded.  Our mentor, John Henrik Clarke told us that how in the world do you call African people the third world when in fact, where do you think Europe got all this information from?  It would seem to me that you would apply to them a status that would be certainly more prior than the third world, perhaps even the first world, you know.  And then you have National Geographic coming out with rediscovering humanities ways, we discovering more and more humanity, more and more, what are you finding in central Africa and east Africa and so.  We finding we find a man in Europe who is five hundred thousand years old, or we just found a man in east Africa who is a zillion years old.  And you know in other words, and we know that knowledge changes.  But are the people, are the people, are those who are, quote, responsible for communicating knowledge, are they writing about it with a degree of say accuracy on the one hand?  And you know we talk about science, and that's another whole kind of question, because science changes, but the value that is communicated to our people is that science is exact.  And what in the world does that mean?  That means that we know this now until it changes later on, you know.  I think it might've been a science that the world was flat, maybe Columbus [Christopher Columbus] could've fallen off until he found that if he kept moving he might get somewhere.  So that is the reason the Communiversity came into being because the more we examine what we had not learned by having learned what we did learn.  We began to learn, we began to see that there was a need for another whole body of knowledge.  Now there's a great movement to eliminate that as you know or to come up and contest.  For example, we begin to talk about the Eurocentric version of historicizing reality.  Well what do we find now; we don't know, as a matter of fact the more the war is carried on, the more obscure the reality of the various people who are being fought will become with respect to our knowledge in world history.  So this is, that's the reason that the Communiversity came into being.
Story_ID: 325115
Speaker 1: Now the subjects discussed, I mean, we were touching on some of the subjects discussed and some of the personalities involved and--how long did the university, I mean the Communiversity last, and when was it its peak you think?  I know there's an article you showed me when we were here back in December that was, that you wrote.  Basically you and Dr. Thompson [Anderson Thompson] I think wrote for the Black World magazine about the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: About the Communiversity and how it got started and the rules how, the rules that, that governed the body who set the curriculum, who was there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Well what we did was the curriculum; the Communiversity was indeed a community involvement.  And as you know we met every Saturday and many, and in many instances, on holidays and special days where we would acknowledge say the hero or something of that sort.  Prior to every one of our meetings, we would sit down and make a decision concerning what we would call the subjects.  We actually had people in history and political science, we had engineers come in to speak, I mean technical, hard science people, astrologist, psychologist.  People who, as a matter of fact and we were examining all of the academic areas, because really we had a lot of, we had Inghani [ph.], do you remember Inghani?  Inghani was a, an African brother who came here from I think he came here from east Africa.  He was working as one of the ministers in one of the east African countries.  I don't remember exactly what it was, but he came here and gave us a speech concerning realism of east Africa in terms of its political arrangements.  And who in fact was drawing from the continent what.  Let's see we had oh, like on the contemporary scene at that time, you remember Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] came through on a number of occasions.  Brother who just died who wrote 'The Making of a Revolutionary,' ['The Making of Black Revolutionaries'] Forman [HistoryMaker James Forman].
Speaker 1: James Forman?
Speaker 2: James Forman.  As you know, James Forman went to school in Chicago [Illinois] as a matter of fact I think he graduated from DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois].  And then of course he became a member of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and as a matter of fact he was one of the executives in SNCC.  But we had, oh, Jackie Williams, who became a doctor and two or three other sisters, medical doctors.  As a matter of fact we had a number of medical doctors speaking about nutrition and health, even, you know from time to time.  So we took advantage of the resources that we had when they became available to us.  Andy [Anderson Thompson] and, Andy and I, Bob Rhodes [Robert N. Rhodes], Revis Sheree [ph.] and Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] was, were kind of like the nucleus that kind of like held it together.  And if you would recall Hammurabi [Frederic H. Hammurabi Robb] was always raising the fundamental questions of, if you don't know where you came from you don't know where you're going, that sort of thing.  And he would have these individual artistic maps that he himself created (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His calendar books, yeah.
Speaker 2: And his calendars, that's right.  And mind you another thing that was very important about the Communiversity was the opportunity to research the bibliography of authors that heretofore that hardly been heard of in the academic world.  And mind you those of us who had gone to colleges and universities, my having graduated over here at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I can remember--
Story_ID: 325116
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact let me give you an example of something I thought to be very interesting.  I studied under Sol Tax [at University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Sol Tax was an anthropologist; he asked me whether I wanted to get a grade out of his course or a satisfactory.  I said, "Well it doesn't matter to me," I said, he said, "Well if you want a grade you have to write a paper.  You'll have to do an anthropological study either indirectly by going through the stacks and reading the material or directly by going out and doing fieldwork."  Well I didn't have time to do the fieldwork, so I said, "I'll go through any books," and so forth and so on.  He says, "Well I'll tell you what I want you to do," he says, "the assumption in anthropology in Western anthropology is that you going to work among undeveloped people."  So I went to Mr. Tax, and I'm fully grown, I said, "Mr. Tax give me an idea of who is undeveloped."  And he said, "Well, perhaps you can do something in the Negro community," you know how well that went over (laughter)?  Mr. Tax and I had an interesting time, I said, "Well I tell you what I'll do Mr. Tax," I said, "I have discovered a group of Appalachian Irish people who have been identified as not yet acculturated.  And they earn their living in the Appalachians, like Gypsies, only they go around and they paint houses.  And that's the way--they have a whole culture and they're almost like Mormons.  You know they got their own everything, and they even I think do a druid like spirituality of some sort, you know?"  And when I read this, I was really kind of fascinated at that, I said oh, this is interesting, because nobody ever talked about, I don't--to this day I hardly know what a Gypsy is you know.  And I said, "You mean Irish got some people I can do an anthropology study on?"  I wrote up an abstract, brought it back to Tax, Tax told me, he said, "Mr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates], are you serious?"  I said, "Professor Tax, I'm too old not to be serious, I'm here to get out of here, you know.  And to that's the reason I took your class, I'm interested in anthropology," and he says, "Well this is unacceptable."  I said, "What about it is unacceptable?"  He says, "You have to deal with underdeveloped people."  Now I don't know even to this day whether he was telling me that nobody, no Irishman in America can be underdeveloped.  Because I would've found, when he told me it's got to be in the Negro community, my eyes went shut on that, I couldn't deal with that.  Because as I advanced to him, if we had been here longer than any of the immigrants, it seems to me that we had set the tone for culture in the United States.  We're not coming, importing Europe here, we were brought here and we created a culture.  And out of that creation came all the iron making in the South, many of the houses in the South, the building of Wall Street, the building of a whole lot of fortresses and so forth during the Civil War.  Now if you don't establish cultural legitimacy by that time, when then do you, you know.  You're playing and singing all the music, you know, so he and I could not come together on that, I had to take a satisfactory in his class.  'Cause I wouldn't back down off of it and he wouldn't accept it--
Story_ID: 325117
Speaker 1: Now the same thing is true with Edward Shils, Edward Shils wrote the book 'Center and Periphery' ['Center and Periphery: Essays in Macrosociology,' Edward Shils].  His main thesis was, and he's dead now, little fellow about, used to wear a scarf and walk with a stick, professor of sociology at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  He writes the book, he says that Europe is at the center of civilization, non-Western people are on the periphery.  Well you see that's something very Eurocentric, white supremacist about that premise, about that.  That can't be tolerated in the world; it just can't be tolerated.  In other words, civilization is going to be defined through Western culture, you know, whatever west is.  Because west is not a solidified amalgam anyway, you know, whatever the west is.  'Cause if you start, if you eliminate the other people, you'd probably find the west to be at each others' throats you know.  That's just kind of like the political reality.
Speaker 2: So, what the Communiversity is trying to do is to have a dialogue about intellectual exchange amongst the black people, basically (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well one of the, its missions, the other mission of course was to satisfy the thirst that the students had.  Because remember now those people who attended the Communiversity, were anywhere between high school and graduate school.  I mean they were young people, and they were looking for, I mean what this that we've been learning that appears not to be digestible?  Well, what they were doing was being told that your stuff, or here you are reading proofs.  But there's no, nothing behind it, here you are reading the great books of the Western world.
Speaker 2: But not the--any books of the black world?
Speaker 1: Not one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You have no authors, in other words, all of the African literature has been delegitimized, you know.
Speaker 2: So you all read, you read like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's we were blind--
Speaker 2: I know at one point you were like, I know people that attended Communiversity said you were really, they loved your analysis of Armah [Ayi Kwei Armah] you know.  One of the African writers, great African writers, 'Two Thousand Seasons' [Ayi Kwei Armah] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Most definitely, Armah, Armah, and you know Armah came here, but he didn't come during the time of the Communiversity.  But, I, we tried to get every literary person or every person who had done anything or any resource worldwide who was African, who understood the threat that our absence in the literary world created in the minds of our children, you know.  If you have no history, you don't exist, and that's true of a family history also.  If there's no history, you don't exist.
Speaker 2: You're really not important, huh?
Speaker 1: Well it's not a question of being important, you just don't exist, you don't exist.  And this is why you can go in the midst of, in you know and it think this is interesting.  You can go, and as we frequently me, many of us have done, we've gone in the midst of a white audience and asked, "Why aren't there some black people here?"  And they said, "Oh, we never really noticed that," that's a fact, that's a fact.  And I think that's an honest statement, you know, in many instances they never really noticed it, because it is impossible in America for black people to live without coming into contact with white people.  But the reverse is not true; you can live in Colorado, Montana, I mean I'm talking about in North America now, and never see a black person.  And that's an interesting kind of thing you know.
Story_ID: 324696
Speaker 1: You were at Loop College [Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] during Communiversity, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As director of admissions.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did you stay there as the director of admissions?
Speaker 2: I stayed at Loop, I think I stayed at Loop about, let me see, from '68 [1968], fifteen years, about fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so '68 [1968] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it might've been about thirteen years because then I went over to Malcolm X [Theodore Herzl Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] as dean of career programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then, then Malcolm X, okay.  What were the, the challenges in college administration and with the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?  What were the, I mean, you said well you were the first black teacher and administrator at Loop Col (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black administrator.
Speaker 1: In, yeah in Loop, did things, when did things change, really, really change over there?
Speaker 2: Well let me tell you, when I came to Loop, my office was on the eleventh floor, and I was given the clerical people who would be working with me, and so forth.  And as I began to do what I thought my job was and that was to recruit students.  I begin to concentrate on the African American community, because I had a lot of resource people located in schools all around the African American community.  Plus in all the rest of the communities also.  So I started getting on the telephone and the enrollment at Loop begin to increase.  But oddly enough the African American students began to increase.  A contingent of faculty people from the social science department came to me to tell me that I was recruiting too many African American students.  One person's name was Walter Falk, F-A-L-K, another person's name was Sylvia Glagov.  These two people came as representatives of the faculty council at Loop College to tell me that they were very interested in keeping a balanced ratio between white students and black students.  And because black students were now appearing to be disproportionally higher than the white students, they were concerned.  Well I thought this was very interesting, because this is a public college and I had never looked at the students as really being, especially black students--if a black student wanted to go to college, I'd say, man that is great, let me him on up in here before he changes his mind.  Because there are other more negative options in his community.  I thought it very interesting that the president, who was David Heller at that time, shared those sympathies. So he called me in one time and told me that I would, I might be doing my job too well.  And that it would look as though the school was becoming disproportionally black.  I didn't take that too seriously until I felt the threat that he was gonna try to initiate getting me out of there.  And thus, what I did was I made a tape recording of the meeting that was being held between me and the faculty council.  And I played that tape recording for the student government, at that time which was being led by black students.  And when they heard it, they, I'll tell you who wrote a very, very well-written insightful letter, Shay.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Shay wrote a very, 'cause he was a student at Loop then.
Speaker 1: Shay Mendrick [ph.], Larry Dawson was his name before, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right Larry Dawson.  He wrote, and the student body begin to organize in order to demonstrate in the Loop.  Well, you know what it meant to demonstrate in the Loop?
Speaker 1: Lot of attention now, I would think.
Speaker 2: A lot of attention, and it frightened the president, so he called me in.
Story_ID: 324697
Speaker 1: There was also a black faculty group that we had created comprised of about the librarian, an English teacher.  A librarian, she died, her name was Gloria Simmons [Gloria M. Simmons], an English teacher, Della Burke [ph.], she's out at--I think she's in Gary [Indiana] now.  She might be superintendent of schools or something you know.  Della, and there were about three, four or five others you know.  And they were very active as a black faculty student group in order to argue, to prevent my leaving Loop [Loop College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois].  That was just one occasion.  The other thing was I moved downstairs, and my office was on the first floor at Loop.  And that way I was able to learn because the board met right on the outside of my office.  I was able to learn all the inner workings of the City College [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] system, by listening to the board.  I was able to listen to some of the discussion given by Charles Hurst, who was invited to be the president of Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois], also Bowie [Maceo T. Bowie], who was the first black president of Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] which was, had been Wilson College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College] you know.
Speaker 2: What was Bowie's first name you know?
Speaker 1: What was what?
Speaker 2: Bowie's first name?
Speaker 1: Maceo.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maceo Bowie, Maceo Bowie was the president of Kennedy-King, the first black president.  Now I think it's very important also to understand that I was at the meeting that caused Kennedy-King to come into existence.  And also the meetings that caused Malcolm X to come into existence.  And they did not come into existence because, they came into existence--well they didn't get those names because the president and the chancellor wanted to give them those names.  Those names came into being because the student bodies fought for that particular kind of that identity.  This is why, you know I talk about, you see that's an institutional name that has a reference point that students can draw upon, both of them you know.  Students recognized that at the time, they used to meet to talk about 330 West Honore [sic.], was a little building where they used to meet and talk about the development of Malcolm X, and what its name was going to be.  At Kennedy-King they met in a church community center which is at 46th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue] the church [St. James United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois] where Jake Carruthers' [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] funeral was, it was in that community center.  And mind you, Oscar Sheppard [ph.], who was the chancellor at that time, had to come to those meetings with security officers.  Because those meetings were held at night, and the people were very adamant about those names.  That's why--and they're adamant about those buildings, and both of those buildings, both of those institutions came into existence under African American student struggle.  I mean it was really a struggle.  When Hurst came, Hurst gave his inaugural speech at, at I think Metropolitan Baptist Church [Greater Metropolitan Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] over on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  It was one of the most beautiful speeches I have ever heard, relative to a president's responsibility to the African American community.  Maceo Bowie was brought in by a student group also, some of the names that I remember now, one was named Ramie [ph.] the other one was named Peavy [ph.].  These were two of the leadership students at that time.  And we would talk all the time to formulate approaches and strategies to talk to the chancellor about making sure their wishes came into being.  The other issue I think in the City Colleges at my time, during that time had to do with the raising of the African American flag in front of Malcolm X.  The state senators tried to, they formulated serious objections to that.  They wanted to know, I mean what is this red, black and green?  And you know it, a long dialogue took place around that, and of course I think the flags, they certainly flew during my administration.  And I think they're flying in front of Malcolm X now, I don't know whether they're flying in front of Kennedy-King now, you know.
Story_ID: 324698
Speaker 1: Now that was during, now, I left Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and applied, I applied for the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: I mean I left Loop [Loop College; Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Loop, okay, to go to Malcolm X, right.
Speaker 1: I left Loop and applied for the deanship at Malcolm X, career programs.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is about 1981, I guess?
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981], yeah that perhaps might've been about '81 [1981].  I became dean over at Malcolm X and I remained dean there until, oh yes.  The president and I, the president, who was Jim Griggs [James C. Griggs, Jr.] at that time, and I had a difference of opinion.  And I decided to resign, not really to resign but to accept the position over at Kennedy-King on the counseling faculty, rather than continue to work at Malcolm X.  Because I did not like the style of his administration, Jim Griggs was his name.  Now, when I got to Kennedy-King that's when I had a lot of time, because around, what between '83 [1983] and let's see.  Around '83 [1983] or earlier we begin to, you know I'm still doing work in the community, we begin to talk about the possibility of electing Harold Washington as mayor of the city.  And as a matter of fact, I forgot when Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] died, but I remember Harold Washington spoke at his funeral--
Speaker 2: Think it was in '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Was that in '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Well the funeral was over there at the church on 48th [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue], between forty- yeah about 47th [Street], 48th and Dorchester.  And Harold Washington spoke there, Harold Washington was a very sensitive community oriented person, and he was 100 percent pro the interests of African American people.  At this time I had not thought about the presidency of any of the colleges, but as we had formed our various groups, we formed the group--well Andy [Anderson Thompson] and I formed a little operation over here in the 5th Ward, where we decided to work with who was then the alderman, Bloom [Lawrence Bloom], for the election of Harold Washington.  Until we discovered that the alderman was not working for the election of Harold Washington.  He was working for the election of himself, and using Harold Washington as a pivotal point around getting himself elected.  So we then formed a parallel office and, on 71st Street and begin to work for the election of Harold Washington.  And it was out that, outside of that, we had so many formations at that time, we had College Teachers for Harold Washington, Educators for Harold Washington, Teachers for Harold Washington, lawyers, everybody for Harold Washington you know.  And of course we were passing out buttons and doing every other thing to get Harold Washington elected.  We left Bloom because we discovered, like I say, that Bloom really, while he was the alderman in the 5th Ward, he really was not for Harold Washington.  And naturally when Harold Washington ran, and he ran against who was that, Epton?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bernard Epton.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he beat Bernard Epton, but it wasn't because many of Bloom's people worked for Harold Washington, as a matter of fact it's my understanding that many did not.  When Harold, naturally when Harold beat Jane Byrne, he beat her just flat out, you know for the primary, that is.  Now after Harold was elected, I think it is also important to mention that while I was an administrator at Loop, that's when I met [HistoryMaker] Wayne Watson, who is the present chancellor.  And he had come to the City of Chicago [Illinois] from Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], and he was not working.  And I called at that time Schappit [ph.], who was the chancellor, and told him that I was sending a man up there who had just been, who had just left Shaw University to meet him.  Because I thought he would work well in the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and that's the way Wayne Watson got into the City Colleges, you know.
Story_ID: 324699
Speaker 1: My presidency, I think I became president either in '86 [1986] or '87 [1987], I don't remember the exact date.  And that was a very interesting experience, the presidency of Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] because my orientation for the presidency was to make sure that the pres- that the school reflected of the community and its values.  And that it took the community to a higher level with respect to the offerings and with respect to, to--it operating as a resource for community development.
Speaker 2: Before I get, I just want to ask you did you, were you surprised when you became, when you were appointed, I mean did, you went after the job I'm sure.  But, but were you, I mean how, how was the lay of the land? I mean were you assured of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 2: --of being, of becoming the president at that time?  Did you have, was it a done deal or what?
Speaker 1: Well you know no, it wasn't a done deal. It was very interesting because you see there was, within the college, the faculty council had decided on another person.  I'm coming in out of the community with a community support, but also with the, with the support of the student government, who was both a part of the school and a part of the community at the same time.  Well, my coming into the presidency, when the selection committee, it just so happens that members of the selection committee, the president of the selection committee--now this just so happens, the president, the chairman of the selection committee was a fellow named Mayo [ph.]; I can't remember his first name, simply because we were in third grade together in elementary school [Forrestville Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and when he discovered that they were searching and that they were looking at me as the president, he came to see me.  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Harold Pates," he said, "do you realize that, do you realize how far we go back?"  And I begin to talk, I said, "Look, I remember when we were in elementary school." We started talking about--.  He says, "With your credentials," because everybody knew me in the City of Chicago [Illinois], you know, "you got to be the president over here." He says, "You got to be the president."  Well, I don't know what went on in the selection committee, but the student government chairman came out one day and told me while I was in the counseling office he says, "Now Dr. Pates are you ready to be president?"  I said, "Oh?"  He said, "Are you ready?"  I said, "Of course," and that's the way that happened.
Story_ID: 324700
Speaker 1: And when I became president [of Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], it was interesting, I had to make a kind of a set of alliances with the faculty.  Because you had many people in the faculty who were afraid of me, and that was many of the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] white teachers.  They were afraid of me; well they had no reason to be, nobody did except but those who had decided that they weren't gonna teach in the way that they should teach.  Only two or three of them left when I came and I think two of them went over to Wright [Wilbur Wright College, Chicago, Illinois], I had to get rid of one of the swim instructors, the swim instructor.  Because he kept the water so cold that the students wouldn't swim in it.  And when I made a simple observation, he said, he says you know, "I can't get a swim team because the students here will not swim."  Well I've heard that, I but see being a swimmer myself, I jumped in the water, I went like this (pointing finger up) water was so cold.  I said, "Well this is the reason why you don't have a swimming program," and we went through that.  Now the other kinds of struggles and whatnot that I may have had to do with the chairman of the board, who was Gidwitz [Ronald J. Gidwitz] after Nelvia Brady [HistoryMaker Nelvia M. Brady], that was right, that was after Harold Washington.  Because as you know, Harold Washington appointed [HistoryMaker] Reynaldo Glover as the chairman of the board, and they selected Nelvia Brady as the chancellor, whom I felt to be a very excellent person.  The only problem I think that she may have had, that she may have a wee bit naive concerning the ruthless politics in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  There is, you see when you understand the mayor appoints a board, and the board determines how contracts and whatnot are lent.  You have to understand the extent to which that becomes patronage authority, and you have to, in order to accomplish something in the academic realm you have to work with the political orientation in the city.  That's not changing, as a matter of fact it's brutal.  And the only way to change that is to do what's happening now, is send inspectors and federal investigators to see whether or not there's some corruption in office.  Well, when Nelvia Brady left and they appointed ano- they selected another chancellor, his name was Temple [Ronald J. Temple].  And at that time Kennedy-King I felt was at its pinnacle, it had a nursing program that was now one of the most premier nursing programs in the city.  It had become, it had never been nationally accredited and now it's nationally accredited.  And the only problem was the school was much, the community around the school, the population had decimated, you know, in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  And as a result you're trying to do an excellent academic job when you are in the geographical context of a lot of violence and dope and stuff like that there.
Speaker 2: Englewood is one of the, in fact at one time it was designated as the most violent community in America.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Around 1992 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Two [1992] or '93 [1993]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well you had gangs over there and all the other kind of stuff that comes with dilapidation in a community.  I can remember one time; give you an example of something.  Like I said, Ron Gidwitz was the chairman of the board, his father [Gerald Gidwitz] came over one time and was meeting in a community agency.  And he asked me if I would place in the school a program for training janitors, well you see what you just did?  I frowned on that, I said, I'd never heard of a college training janitors, as a matter of fact most people go to college to avoid being a janitor, you know.  I said but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, training is usually on the job.
Speaker 1: I understand that.  But he told me something that was very interesting, he had the opportunity to buy many of the courtway buildings in Englewood for one dollar.  And perhaps that he would, might rehabilitate them and then he would need janitors to service the building.  I said, "Well now isn't that interesting?"  That also taught me something about what it meant, you know this whole patronage--the patronage network, the political character that can sometimes work as an adversary to whatever a college is doing.
Story_ID: 324701
Speaker 1: I had--as a matter of fact, I had one of my faculty who was a friend of one of the news commentators on the television.  And I can't think of his name right now, the instructor at that time was Luckovich [ph.], and Luckovich was a friend of Avila [Jim Avila], Avila.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Avila came to me one time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went on to ABC, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He came to me with his camera apparatus and his notebook and his tape recorder, and he's going to interview me because the school, the corridors at Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] were kind of empty during school time.  Well most of the students at Kennedy-King came to school during the morning and during the evening.  There was a kind of little interim period at time when the halls were sparse, and the reason for that was because of the rhythm of the student population. You got morning students, and they go to work I guess, you got evening students, who come from work to school.  Now within you got a very sparse population that can use that say one to three or four o'clock time.  So that sparse population, Luckovich was trying to cast aspersions on my administrative styles.  Because he was a friend of another lady there who really tried to create a faculty backlash on me.  And when they brought Avila there, Avila, I was on television, "Speak to the issue of why there are no students in the building Dr. Pates [HistoryMaker Harold Pates]."  And I told him, I said, "If you want a story, you won't get it from me, you can make your story and draw your conclusions and say whatever you want to say.  But you won't get a story from me."  In other words, I see what you're trying to do.  The chancellor at that time called me up and she said, "Please would you speak to," because he called the chancellor.  "Would you please, would you please speak to Mr. Avila?"  I subsequently spoke to him very shortly, I said, "Well let me tell you one thing.  The halls are empty because there are few students here between one and five and that's the rhythm of the student body."  And he wanted more out of that, and he then came on television saying that Dr. Pates had very little to say or something like that.  But that tape is in ABC somewhere you know, trying to make controversy when there was none, you know.
Story_ID: 324702
Speaker 1: But we developed a lot of things you know culturally at Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], we established the Kwanzaa as you know the yearly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right the citywide Kwanzaa moved to Kennedy-King--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And was better than it's ever been.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  We, the theatre was jumping at Kennedy-King we brought in Muntu [Muntu Dance Theatre of Chicago], we brought in Chocolate Chips [Chocolate Chips Theatre Company].
Speaker 2: They came in as resident theatre company, right?
Speaker 1: Resident theater company.
Speaker 2: Right, utilizing the space.
Speaker 1: Brought them in as a resident theatre company, matter of fact I think they're still there, before they moved over to.  It was an attempt to bring in culture.  As a matter of fact what we were trying to do also is have regular--what we were gonna have is a jazz institute.  But I left, I had to retire before that could come into fruition, but we had created a number of things that were inviting and very constructive in the community you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah I don't know how many community meetings were held at Kennedy-King about one thing or another in those days.  I mean people would call up and want a space for a meeting in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], which we already mentioned was the most troubled community in the city, and they could get a space.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, as a matter of fact, it was a meeting place for the Griot Society [Mandingo Griot Society], it was a meeting place for all the community agencies that wanted to do constructive work at Englewood.  There were so many meetings, as a matter of fact, my day would begin like eight o'clock in the morning, and I'd get back home, I'd come home and eat dinner and then go back.  And then I might get home like about nine, nine-thirty every day, you know.
Story_ID: 324703
Speaker 1: See, I operated an open door policy, and you didn't have to formally make an appointment to see me.  Unless I was not going to be there.
Speaker 2: Now let me just ask you something about that, I mean, I often wondered you know when you became the president of Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], as we were discussing during the break and before the break.  Community groups could utilize the--there's a lot of classroom space that could be unoccupied during the day or the evening sometimes.  And I would just think that probably a lot of the community colleges have a similar situation, but you don't, people don't seem to have the access like they did.  They did at Kennedy-King, and in fact Kennedy-King is different now from what it was when you were the president at Kennedy-King.  I mean, the community just can't call up and say, I would like a space, and security will accommodate them, and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, and they have access to a place to meet, you know.
Speaker 1: Well there's another thing you see I also had a community scholarship committee that was chaired by my wife [Maxine Pates].  And the interesting thing about that is that they gave a function every year when they would raise scholarship moneys, and we'd give that scholarship money away at every graduation, scholarships for the students.  Now the reason I say that in response to your statement is because the leadership sets the climate and creates the culture of the institution.  The paintings, the artwork that was in that building was as a result of the kinds of sensitivities that were coming at me from various community people.  As you know we had an African market, we had an oppo- we gave the entrepreneurs, small time entrepreneurs, an opportunity to use--you see the building is so large and it's so capable of housing so much community activity, and it's designed in such a way that it invites creative thought regarding how the community can use it.  And as a result we would have the African market; sometimes the African market would be in the school once a month.  And the purpose of that was to train our people around coming to the community entrepreneurs to buy stuff.  Whatever little trinkets, you know, or earrings and this and that and the other, and they sold everything from clothing to jewelry and, at one while.  And as a matter of fact let me say this, the Koreans, the Koreans who ran the mall on 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street] would come there during Thanksgiving and give away turkeys in boxes to the poor people in the community.  They invited me to go to Korea with them, I should've taken them up on that invitation, I never did.  'Cause I would have greater political insight regarding the status of what's happening in Korea today.  But I never went with them.  But every element in the community that was serious about community co-existence could come in there and work out their problems.  And that is what a community college is about.  Anything, I mean people can talk about the academic character of the community college or its mission, but if you do not include community diversity not just in appearance, but in creativity--you see there's a lot of creativity going on in our community to which we are not really exposed.  Visual artists, particularly today when you talk about people who operate the technology, people are very creative now with technology.  And remember we had a radio station, we had a TV station, we had a TV studio, we had, as a matter of fact, through the Nelvia Brady [HistoryMaker Nelvia M. Brady] administration, I was able to upgrade our television and broadcasting resource to the extent that probably it was a better resource than you had at NBC, ABC and so forth.  As a matter of fact when I look at through the window of what they have down there, I think its Channel Seven [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois] on State Street now; our facility was much prettier than that.  And much more adaptive to the kind of flexibility that you might need in order to do anything.  Anything that you wanted to do in that kind of technology you could've gotten from Kennedy-King.
Story_ID: 324704
Speaker 1: And we were in, as a matter of fact, we were in the process before I retired in contemplating how to hold conferences via satellite.
Speaker 2: I, in fact I think you all did it.  You had one with Spike Lee's  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We did one.  That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: I remember that, I was at that one, right.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.
Speaker 2: That's one of the first ones ever, I know the first one ever held on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's exactly right, oh we were doing it, we, you see what we were attempting to do is to inspire the community to achieve its potential.  And in order to do that you have to set a standard and you have to be inviting.  You have to show, in our community you have to show what exist but you have to go beyond that, you have to show them that they, which they have access to what exist.  You know people are very quick to say, oh you can't do that, or we would do that if we only could find the facility.  And remember this, you could come to Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and build an automobile, I mean there was an automobile shop there that could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah James Warren--
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Down there.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  And of course air conditioning, and the automotive shop and the nursing program.  We had a food service, as a matter of fact, which I understand now, has transitioned into this food program that they have over here at the South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] now.  Which is a remarkable kitchen, incidentally I've been up in there and I've seen it, it's absolutely a remarkable facility, there's no doubt about it.  So it was my intention to make Kennedy-King the premier community college in the town, which it had to potential to be.  But it needed a kind of cooperation that would come, political cooperation because it was obvious that the mayor [Richard M. Daley] was looking for another opportunity to create jobs for those, for the trades unions.  So therefore, the question, first of all you indict the building, you say the building requires too much money to maintain it.
Speaker 2: Now the building, Kennedy-King for those who have never seen it, most of the people that listen to this probably would never have the opportunity to see how it gets.  But it may be there, though it's made out of reinforced concrete and it's--in the old days, the brothers at the Topographical Research Center [Black Peoples Topographical Research Center, Chicago, Illinois] said it was built as a defensive fortification against the riots by the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --federal, I mean by instruction of the federal government, I don't know how you feel about that but the walls are, it has walls that are like a foot and a half thick.
Speaker 1: It's a low maintenance building from the outside, the kind of maintenance that it may have required had to do with some of the shortcomings and vision of the architects.  Because you know, what does it mean to build a building that does not have the facility for you to add a conduit or something like that, you know?  Knowing full well that everything in technology is changing, build a facility that does not have a conduit for say an alarm system or even a fire alarm system within the building.  You see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're saying the conduits are encased in that concrete and you can't really get to the, you can't--
Speaker 1: No, you can't get there at all.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: They weren't there at all.  So then, therefore, you had to come back around and add, you are constantly adding to the building you see.  Constantly adding to the building and constantly going through some of that concrete in order to keep it at a certain standard.  Or keep it at the standard it should've been.  And particularly when we went to North Central [North Central Association of Colleges and Schools], matter of fact, we were the first college to get ten-year accreditation, under my administration, which was reduced I think as a result of a political move.
Story_ID: 324705
Speaker 1: Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]--you see somewhere on the map, somebody said that we want to take Kennedy-King out of here and move it elsewhere.  And I happen to have come in and I think during an administration where that was not about to happen.  And I think as soon as Daley [Richard M. Daley] came in they declared, okay we can do it now, and as a result you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just to be clear the plan in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], I mean the plan for Kennedy-King that's been going; it's been a plan to say now for almost ten years I guess is to build a new Kennedy-King College.   The promise of a new community development that would revitalize Englewood, this downtrodden community.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And it hasn't really, I mean the result has been to I think diminish the status of Kennedy-King without providing a new facility.  I mean a new facility (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Of course, I, of course.  You see to try to sell that to the community, our African American community was not born yesterday.  Our community has always had what we call mother wit.  If it has not had sophisticated schooling it has always had mother wit, it always had the feelers of impending danger, and impending abuse.  So it realizes that first of all Kennedy-King as it presently is situated is probably right now, the most beautiful of all of the colleges.  In terms of its architectural design, it has been in the architectural books.  Now to answer--every building, even your house, needs constant maintenance, I don't know, I can't imagine what the new Kennedy-King is going to cost, but I suspect, half of that, over a period of time could maintain Kennedy-King and keep it at a very high standard.  There's another thing, this Kennedy-King is right there at Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway], right there at the "L" [elevated train] station.  Of course the other one is going to go around Englewood and stop at the "L" station up above, that's going to be the end of the line.  This contribution say to the development of the city I was wondering about that, you mean to tell me the city cannot develop around the present Kennedy-King?  And you lose so much in the loss of Kennedy-King and its presence because the gap, the downtime in order to bring people back into an understanding of a new Kennedy-King.  It's gonna take some time, some marketing and promotion you know.  When they say new Kennedy-King I would certainly wonder what that means in terms of the constituency too.  To whom is the college being extended?  You know, the city is changing, the State Street corner's been wiped out, I mean you know, it's been absolutely wiped out.  Land is available I guess in Englewood for whatever it's available for, and when developers come, they come with acreage, they come, you know, looking for large tracts of land.  So I would imagine that there's another whole design with respect to who would be in attendance at Kennedy-King and the offerings that are going to be at Kennedy-King.  So it remains to be seen that just exactly what form that's going to take in the future, you know?
Story_ID: 324706
Speaker 1: You were president [of Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] until, was it nineteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 2: I resigned, I retired in '94 [1994] and that's sort of like, that has been it up to this professional point with respect to my participation in the public educational system you know.  I have not chosen to go beyond that because I guess now I'm trying to do some other things particularly with respect to trying to create a narrative that is more descriptive of some of the things that took place in the city from 1960 say to about 19--to about 2000, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay you mean a narrative you mean, you're writing a book or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, trying, yeah and it's included in that is also an autobiography you know, because it's in the computer and it's being worked on.  I just don't have the initiative to sit at the computer for long periods of time, long periods of time.  But it's been you know up to this point it's been an interesting sort of experience, particularly in the educational realm, in the public educational realm.  Because the one thing now, that I, that I very conclusive on is that when we talk about public education as far as we're concerned we're really not talking about education.  We're talking about schooling because when we look, now you see education--the purpose of an education is to create confidence in a person, confidence in individuals and remind them of what their obligations and responsibilities to each other are.  And that education is going to create within those values that sustain them in the present and also contribute to sustaining them in the future, education.  But what we've been receiving really is schooling; we're being trained to operate certain aspects, trained to do this and trained to do that.  And if we're not careful, our education will be a training that also brainwashes us outside of our own imperatives.  And I think once we get the schooling, we then might have the equipment necessary to go back and do with education what needs to be done.  Because actually I think we begin educating ourselves, after we've had the schooling.  We then begin to see that the deficiencies in what is offered to us as education can only be filled by our own initiatives toward educating ourselves.  The schooling doesn't do that, you know.  What does it mean for a kid to say, "I want to go to school to be a banker," what does that mean?  You see, being a banker is something that you facilitate in order to do something beyond that, that's simply a skill, being a banker.  Yes, you might be able to translate it in order to eat in this society and this economy, but in terms of creating confidence--you see if it is toward, if you're being schooled toward a valuable materialism, I think that has to be examined, because really we begin to perceive that as the ultimate value.  And it begins to take us away from our family unity, which of course contributes to a national unity and an overall global understanding of who we are.  So I think that's where we are, I think that's what we have to work on, and I think those of us who have gone as far as we have gone in the credentialing need to come back and examine.  Because you see we cannot interrelate with other people in the world unless we're very clear on who we are, because that's where the strength is.  If we aren't, then we become subject to people, to those who will give us direction as to who we are, that's extremely dangerous--
Story_ID: 324707
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about, there was a controversy at Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] when you were president that they had that speaks to this, I guess, what you just discussed on some level.  It had to do with the banners up around the school, you had, you know Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], despite all the difficulty, has a number of churches all over the place, you know proliferation of churches.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Reverends (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And taverns.
Speaker 1: Yeah and taverns, right, yeah, and gang hideouts too.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And such, but the Kennedy-King banner, I don't know what it was before but you put up the image of, it's an African image of this ancient Egyptian deity that stands for speech and wisdom.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Djehuti [Thoth].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And that was the symbol that you used when you were there, speech and wisdom you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It's--there was controversy in the community, they thought it was a symbol of the devil or something, can you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, that's how far we have to go when I talk about education, because you see many of our people--there's so many and it's profuse in the church.  Many of our people are so far away from where their ancestors were, they so far away from that body of material that makes a contribution to their own confidence, to who they really are, that they feel that information that comes from that period is spooky.  Or something you know it's like a--I can remember my own grandmother when it would begin to thunder.  Nobody could move in the house, if it was thundering you had to sit still in the house.  And I used to wonder why, you know, why?  Well my grandmother used to think it was thundering and lightning and you move in the house you would be, God would strike you, you know.  Well I got no problem with that as a kid, because I also believed in Santa Claus.  But in terms of being able to use something like that to bring a population to inertia, that's another whole kind of question you see.  And you have to look at that in terms of the kinds of teaching that we receive.  Now we're gonna live together, with other people we've got to live together eye to eye. We can't live top to bottom; we got to live eye to eye.  We got to look each other in the face, if I'm gonna sit across from a Gidwitz [Ronald J. Gidwitz] who's a millionaire, the only difference between him and me, he's got $350 million, and I've got thirty-five.  But guess what, if I cut him, blood comes out of him, he was born the same I was, and he's gonna go out of here the same way I'm going out.  Now these are kind of like little obvious observations that a culture of materialism does not instruct us on.  And we begin to think that qualitative distinctions and there's danger in that.  Because like I say, a person can say because of my material wealth, I can treat you different.  And if we gonna live, particularly in this country as it tries to achieve some, well I don't know whether it's trying or not, but as it struggles with these concepts and precepts.  That they put in their narratives and whatnot.  They got to struggle with the reality of these similarities and these commonalities.  And this is what I think education is, you know you got, it's not teaching people what to think, it's how, teaching them how to think.  Putting them in situations where they can apply their own cultural values to their own reality, you know.  Where they reinforce themselves and not reinforce others, anything other than that, you make a dog of a man.
Story_ID: 324708
Speaker 1: Tell me this now, when you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you had a chance?
Speaker 2: Not one single thing, you know that's the truth.  The only, if I had a chance I would wonder if I had had, well even as a--you see I'm very proud of the kinds of relationships that I've established over my lifetime.  I don't know that I established them; it seems to me that they established me, you know.  I don't know, you know how things come into being, you know when we talk about, how do things come into being?  All of a sudden--I was talking to my sister [Patricia Pates Eaton]; I said, "You know we're very fortunate to have had the parents [Amanda Beasley Pates and Squire Pates] that we had."  And she agrees you know because one thing about them they were together on, on everything.  You know you can go to mom and say, mom can I do such and such a thing, she say well ask your father.  So right away you know (laughter) if you haven't asked him already, don't come to me and try to play the game.  Well you see, what it took to make me the kind of person that I am are the experiences that I've had.  And it just so happens that I lived up to the point where I can talk about them.  Maybe I would do something differently, if I were not alive now, I'd say well I would not have done that thing that caused me to go out of here you know (laughter).  But I can think of very little that I would've done differently, given the opportunities that I had.  Now if I had a different set of opportunities I perhaps would've done a different set of things.  For an example, if I'd been placed in different positions of power because as I've told many, as I've told many of our friends, we argue about, on a certain political level.  But there are men such as we who sit around in nations, and they are, they constitute the national government.  Now what could you do if you were at the seat of the national government with the resources to be able to help the people?  Well that's another whole kind of thing, perhaps its better you know in today's world that you're aren't.  But you can't really tell, you know you can't really tell.  But given the circumstances, under which I was born, the fact that I came through them, you know.  'Cause that little experience down in Mississippi, I could've been up on one of those trees.  Given the amount of control that I had over opportunity, I doubt as to whether I could've done things any differently, you know?
Story_ID: 324709
Speaker 1: I know you addressed this already in a number of different ways, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they are in a number of areas.  One of my very practical, okay I think I'll go from the most imaginative as I see it to the least.  First of all, I would hope to see a day that we would be able to have international African transactions on every level.  I can remember when I was a kid they would talk about the strength of German education.  And you had a lot of people who would go to Europe to be educated, go to Europe to learn to sing, or go to Europe to learn to paint.  In other words, saying that if you really wanted the pinnacle of American culture, you would go to Europe.  So you had European opera, I mean most popular in America.  I would like to see a kind of stronger inclusive African identity, where we understand that there's a mutuality that contributes to community and family.  And once we understand that, we begin to understand the responsibilities that go with that.  Because essentially we may be even be struggling with what is the definition of manhood and womanhood in our communities.  We say that men and women should come together to have families.  By the same token, the experience of learning the difference between the two of them is never on the level of gradual understanding that develops into a mature acceptance of the differences between male and female.  So that when they come together, they come together with a complementarity.  I think that that can happen with stronger notions of what is important in the society.  I think identity is very important and the contribution that identity makes to community and family life is very important.  Out of that comes a sense of mutual responsibility you know, a, treat my brother as I would treat myself, sort of thing.  A value that was very prominent in the South when I was growing up, the responsibility that every family had for everybody else.  The whole notion, we understand that we are mortal beings, but while we enjoy that mortality we also have responsibilities to care for each other.  Now out of that also comes an understanding--you see, I believe that there are enough natural resources to be able to engage in barter, but that comes from a value.  I believe that you know something that I don't know, but the two of us can get together and complement each other in order to accomplish a task.  And it, I'm not too sure that out of that cannot come a viable sustenance, now I don't want to sound impractical because you know there's always the introduction in the political world of currency.  You know the question is what is your value as against my value, does what you have to offer, is that more important than what I have to offer?  Which means that you gain more.  I think what I'm getting to is this, what makes one man worth $35 an hour and another man worth 350,000, or what did they give this fella who resigned from Disney?  Wasn't it 460 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Eisner [Michael Eisner]?
Speaker 2: --million, something like that?
Speaker 1: Something, yeah.
Speaker 2: What makes a man get 460 million when another man can hardly make $460?  Now I would think that in the idealistic--you see we talk about a democracy, I would think in an idealistic situation, if we found ourselves able to function in an economic sense where we made mutual contributions to each other.  I think that that would be the beginning of greater solidarity within the family in the black community.
Story_ID: 324710
Speaker 1: Another thing, and I think we can do that even though we have the systemic oppression on top of us, I think we can do that.  Because in a practical sense, we are a nation within a nation, the only problem is the realization of that.  We are placed, interestingly enough, we are placed rather than given places, and there's a danger in that.  Because you can always make a leader for us, rather than our selecting the leader for ourselves, or whatever a leader is.  So I think these are some dangers that we need to watch, and I think that what I would like to do is be able to raise our student body, our young, people to a level of consciousness where they have a radar, a kind of a social radar that makes them very sensitive to their value, to the value that they have to and for each other.  I think this will make a better community existence among us, and you know you say, well this is very impractical.  Well it's impractical because of the regard that we give for the present circumstance and the extent to which we feel relaxed in it.  As a result there's no group apparatus, or group disturbance, that would tend to want to change that.  See, some time ago, the churches used to create concepts and help the family to understand its importance.  I'm talking about the family members to understand its importance, they were there to initiate you, bring you into the world and take you out.  And do ceremonies, and not only that, they had care centers for the elderly, even if the family did not have the facilities to take care of the elderly, the church did that.  The church buried them, and the church gave birth to them.  The community surrounded them and created, and reinforced the cultural dynamic where fun was fun for everybody, and agony was agony for everybody.  But everybody grew and matured through that.  I think this is something that you know it might sound philosophical but I think it's practical in a sense.  But it has to come; it has to be a realization toward which we come in order to engage in self-improvement.  Which of course would put anything that we create in its proper perspective, and I'm dealing particularly now with this thing called the hip hop culture.  I am not sure--see when I think of culture, I think of population reinforcement.  I think of things that I would love my children to know about so they could teach it to their own children.  And I think much of the narrative that comes out of hip hop culture is dangerous, is destructive, and it gives, it kind of flatters violence.  So therefore, when we give it, when we give it a label, when we give it a cultural label, I think we should be a little more scrutinizing about that, you know?
Story_ID: 324711
Speaker 1: You would disagree with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dyson?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Michael Eric Dyson and others.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I would substantially, I wouldn't do it in public though, but I'd sit him in a room, and I think we have--there would be a naturally a generation gap.  But I think as we'd begin to talk, and then I think that there's a political difference too.  But I think we can sit down and talk about these things without the glamor of an audience you know.  I think he's somewhat like a basketball player looking for applause and when you talk about things like this I think ought to be in a room when you begin to talk.  As a matter of fact, I remember like Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], he says, "How we gonna implement that stuff, what is it that we need?"  I remember the covenant, what is it the Covenant to America [sic. Covenant with Black America] or something like that?
Speaker 1: For black America?
Speaker 2: Covenant for black America, you know?
Speaker 1: Covenant meeting yeah.
Speaker 2: You see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The meeting that was on C-SPAN?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: When it first designed?
Speaker 2: Yeah and the book ['The Covenant with Black America,' Tavis Smiley] that's out now.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: The book that's out now.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's initiative, right.
Speaker 2: Tavis Smiley, you know.  I don't know that you can make a covenant with America.  I think the only way that you create covenants is when you're looking eye to eye, you know.  America still refers to us as minorities, right?  I mean what is a minority, what cultural national identity do you give to people when you call them a minority?  And it seems to me that is subjecting a group of people in the first place, excuse me.  And when you do that you destined them toward dysfunctional behavior, I mean you label a group of people a minority.  That goes beyond just the quantification of the people.  It kind of implies that here is the center and you're on the periphery, you know.  And I think that kind of manipulation, a social stratification, is essential maybe to the system within which we live now, in order to keep a certain segment of population.  Because now, you know of course I don't really want to get into this, but when you talk about a prison industry, you got to have somebody in the prison.  And you got to have, you create an industry and an economic circle of needs, and well it's an industry.  You know it feeds itself, it feeds others.   So that's something that I think we need to consider and I would certainly say that I think there are some ideas that we have that don't necessarily have to be ideals.  I think they can be ideas that can be implemented, but I think we've got to step back and appreciate each other more.
Story_ID: 324712
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now, I've heard you eulogize different members of our community and talk about what their contributions were.  But when you and Dr. Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] and Dr. Wright [Bobby E. Wright] and others but, when you look back what you done with your own life what would you consider to be your legacy at this moment?
Speaker 2: Well I think that I would probably be remembered for the kinds of teachings and the methods of teaching and fact of teaching.  I would probably be remembered more for that than probably anything else because as I've seen these two young ladies who send me copies of how--they've told me how I inspired them.  I would think that my orientation has been communicated, and it has been effective and inspiring, if two make the statement they're probably more than two out there who haven't.  So I would say that I have, I think I left a positive touch on just about everybody whom I've known.  I don't know anybody, of course you can tell me otherwise, but I don't know anybody that I dislike.  Neither do I know anybody that dislikes me.  I'm talking about in the black community you know.  And not that that means anything, but I'm saying that I know very few people from whom I have not felt a mutual contribution, and a mutual transaction.  And I think that has been my legacy, that we felt good together you know.
Speaker 1: It's interesting you should say that because I was thinking about two incidents, one I know about from personal history and then one I know about from what you just said today.  That was when the gangbanger, you know getting ready to you know try to punch you, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And then the security guard said, "Well if he'll punch you, nobody's safe (laughter)."
Speaker 2: Well that's true.
Speaker 1: And then the incident that--we play basketball you know, we've been playing basketball for years, and you're always an inspiration because you run the court and play defense and play all--and you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I'd always--
Speaker 1: And you caught a trashcan lid upside the head that effectively banned like a whole bunch of guys from the basketball, from the gym.  I mean they were banned because people felt that if they would hit you and they weren't really trying to hit you at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know.
Speaker 1: And they felt, if they would hit you ain't nobody safe (laughter) but it was--
Speaker 2: And I think that's a, I think there's a certain distinction in that you know.  I'll give you an example of something.  My father [Squire Pates] was a very strong man in the community and when he would come--my father never had a car.  And we would be playing in the street, maybe football or something.  And when my father would turn the corner, you would hear the fellows saying, "Hey, here comes Mr. Pates.  Hey man, straighten up, straighten up."  And I used to wonder, what is it about my father that the moment he comes around the corner can't nobody curse anymore you know (laughter) but that was a certain--he would always act as though, "Did you say that, did I hear you saying that?"  In other words his communication, "I didn't expect you to say something like that," you know.  Fellows say, well wow he didn't expect that of me, well maybe I'm more than I thought I was you know.  And that was a little technique that dad used to pull on fellows, and it was his own way of course I guess of keeping his eye on us too you know in the community.  But I think that's about the legacy because I think legacies essentially are non-materialistic, you know.
Story_ID: 324713
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family, and then I've just got one more question after that.
Speaker 2: Okay well, I'll go back as far as I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, not the ancestors but just what your current family consists of.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, I got a daughter named Shelley [Shelley Pates Williams], got a son named Cyrus [Cyrus Pates], he's got two little daughters.  One is named Demetria [ph.] by her mother [Rebecca Pates], and her name is Abioye [ph.], I named her.  The other's name is Alexandra [Alexandra Pates] by her mother and I named her Olu [ph.].
Speaker 1: Seems like you've got the Eurocentric and African centered split.
Speaker 2: Oh we must have that, you see in order, in order for grandpapa to communicate some of these meanings, there has to be the appropriate reference point.  And then there's my daughter who has a daughter and her name is Gerri [ph.], and I named her Isoke [ph.], and I refer to them by these African names.  Their mothers refer to them sometimes by their African, sometimes they get confused as to (laughter) how to do it.  But we've had, as a matter of fact I had naming ceremonies for them and gave them little certificates that they could keep.  You know, that gives them their name, the meaning of the name, the countries out of which they come.  The reason for the name and how the name requires of them a certain mentality, a certain approach to life.  A certain obligation with respect with how they treat other people, as life goes on.  And we had those ceremonies.  That's about--you know my wife [Maxine Pates] died and she died in '95 [1995], '95 [1995], right.  And essentially Jeannie's [Jeannie Dorsey-Pates] been my companion, and that's kind of like the extent of my immediate family existence you know.  It's, oh yeah well that's about it, because it's interesting.  It has a certain level of excitement, a certain, it certainly keeps me on my toes with respect to, to how I am used by those who--you see I've always said that the titles that we have, like father, mother, sister, brother, that they're not really titles so much as they are functions.  They are social functions, a father's not a father he's a function, a mother is not a mother, she's a function, you know.  People tend to--from where I sit, they tend to say well at the end of--I'm a mother, but they don't really give to that mother all of what it means to be a mother because of function.  Same thing is true of fathers, but I think the popular culture has done something with fatherhood that it hasn't don't with motherhood.  And I think we need to come back and reexamine that particularly with respect to the meaning of fatherhood.  I think the same thing is true of sisters and brothers, and sons and daughters, you know.  I think these are functions that carry with them rights and responsibilities, say, oh you're the son of so and so, yes.  Well what does that mean, oh that's my dad, no, okay good, what else does it mean?  Well how does it connect you, what does it mean toward the future, what do you--as many of the gang members, say what do you represent?
Story_ID: 324714
Speaker 1: You know, what contribution do you make?  And I think this is the statement that has to be made with an accompanying formula behind it.  Because, and the formula has to do with the values that have supported that function.  Excuse me.  And that name, that function and that name, to be a son, it's a title, but it's a function, rights and responsibilities.  To be a daughter it's a title, but it's a function, rights and responsibilities.  Not to make mention of fathers, mother, grandmothers, grandfathers and so forth and so on.  And there's one other thing that I think is so very important in our community that the culture of materialism is negating, and that's the value of the wisdom of the elders.  You see what you're doing now makes a great contribution to not only the information base, and there's no telling where this will wind up.  I would hope in some point and time it never becomes so popularized that you add some music to it and you see some people dancing behind it or something you know (laughter) or you know Coca-Cola ad (laughter) behind a Standard Oil sign or something.  You know, because that's, that's the nature of a materialistic culture, it takes, it materializes almost anything, you know.  There are people who sit back and wait for you to make one creative utterance so that they can expand that into dollars.
Story_ID: 324715
Speaker 1: But I look at the synthesizer with the musicians, you can take one drumbeat and it will last forever, thump, thump, thump, thump, thump, you know those synthesizers.  And I said, wow.  You mean you can take a drummer like Max Roach, one of the most creative geniuses in drumming?  Or you take an African drummer and take one stanza of his drumbeat and sell it around the world.  While at the same time, and I'll give you, and this is an example of my own upbringing, sell it around the world, and make all the people who sold it rich and the man who created it won't get a cent.  Because I watched this with Muddy Waters, I used to watch people throw coins up on the, I think I told you that, did I or did I (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I can't--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Muddy Waters used to come to the 708 Club [Chicago, Illinois] on 47th Street, it was called the 708.  I think it's a furniture store now.  And he would come there and he would sing, the white people would come off the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] on 47th Street.  And drive down, and they would sit there and listen to him and they would flip nickels, dimes and quarters up on the stage.  And when he left that was his pay; that was Muddy Waters' pay.  And it was interesting how long Muddy Waters had to deal with that before his name--I'm not too sure that he enjoyed five years of material wealth.  And when he spent so many days in scuffling, when you know people, it was almost like playing the guitar on the corner you know and singing.  And now he's looked at as one of the kings of the blues you know, they call them Mississippi blues, right.
Speaker 2: Speaking of music, now you still play.
Speaker 1: Yeah I still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You play the cornet now right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: With the groups?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm playing with a little group, as a matter of fact, I don't even know what we call ourselves to tell you the truth.  But we play like every Wednesday night, every Tuesday night, and it's a nice little gathering and some of the fellows are older than I.  Everytime I go away and come back, one of them has died (laughter) so that's something to think about too.  But it's something that I do because, there's something about our music that I think is very therapeutic.  And I have noticed that there are times in which I escape into it when I'm walking down the street.  And don't realize it, not really you know, but I've found it to be a very rewarding technique of relaxing.  Because I can be singing a tune in my head while I'm walking down the street that I just heard, that I really appreciate, played by one of our geniuses you know.  And that's something that, it's kind of like a little private thing that has been a part of me for a long time you know.
Story_ID: 324716
Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Probably not with a monument, a concrete monument.  It probably, I probably would be remembered by those into whose soul I have gotten.  They will remember me because of what I meant to them, and that means that it has nothing to do with how I might want to be remembered.  It has to do with how they translate my existence into their lives, and that is the way not that I would like to be remembered, but I will be remembered.  I will move into the ancestry as many of the ancestors have moved, having been remembered by having gotten into the soul of those persons who have felt as though they have been benefited from an experience with me.  And that experience can run the gamut because I have noticed people speak of the ancestor in ways--and my perhaps having known them personally in ways with which I would've disagreed, had they said it to me.  But you see, a memory is a very valuable commodity, and how, and it's a very personal commodity.  A memory belongs to a person just like his heart, it beats for him at the time at which he wants.  And you recall it at the time that it's convenient, and sometimes you can rest on it.  You can be walking down the street and you say, you know I need to call on that memory in order to relax more.  Because I can remember--and you break out in a smile, people look and say, what's wrong with him?  You say, you know, I was just remembering this that and the other and so forth and so on.  Because that memory belongs to you, and it's probably something that cannot be taken from you neither because it's an interpretation.  And it cannot even be challenged by any external factor, so I accept the realization of that as the reality of what a memory is.  And I would say I would, that's why I don't attempt to be anything other than who and what I am.  But I try to make myself as useful in the way that other people can use me if I am available in that particular way.  And I think that is the purpose, I think that's the purpose of individual personality, to be a stepping stone for persons who need you as a stepping stone, providing you are solid enough to be used in that way.  I think that's the way that I would, and perhaps I can be remembered for having made this statement (laughter).
Story_ID: 324717
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken by a Kodak camera, and that was in probably 1932.
Speaker 2: And that is who?
Speaker 1: And that's me.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates.
Speaker 2: That's pre-Ph.D., Harold Pates.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is June of 1948 when I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: From which high school?
Speaker 2: DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: This was a Bud Billiken Day Parade [Bud Billiken Parade] when I entered Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] in the parade, and decided to march in the parade myself.  So that was Bud Billiken--that was Bud Billiken Day which is usually on the second Saturday in August.  And that was on what is now Martin Luther King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Amanda Pates [Amanda Beasley Pates], my father, Squire Pates, my brother Henry Pates, my sister Patricia Pates [Patricia Pates Eaton] then, and me.  I think I was about sixteen years old then, I think my brother was seventeen.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Kennedy-King scholarship committee that was chaired by my wife Maxine Pates.  She's sitting on the extreme right, the co-chairperson was Miss Gloria Dietrich [ph.], and she's sitting in the middle.  No her name is now Gloria Cook [ph.], Gloria Cook, and that's when I was president, and that's the scholarship committee.  I think I remember the names of all of them too (laughter).
Speaker 2: This, these are the power swimmers, that's me standing in the middle, that's my friend Anderson Thompson on the right, that's my friend Yvonne Jones on the left, my youngest granddaughter, Demetria [ph.], Abioye [ph.].  My oldest granddaughter standing in front of me, that's Alexandra [Alexandra Pates], Olu [ph.], and the one in the middle granddaughter standing in front of Andy that's Gerri [ph.], Isoke [ph.].
Speaker 1: This was at the wedding of my son.  From right to left, that's me and my daughter Shelley [Shelley Pates Williams], my son Cyrus [Cyrus Pates], his wife Rebecca [Rebecca Pates], my wife Maxine.
Speaker 2: You giving something away free in this picture, look at all of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a picture of the members of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity; it was a meeting of the chapter that was at--Iota Chapter, this was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and I am the second in line.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're right here right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, second to right.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: This is--from right to left, that's me and my sister Patricia and my brother Henry, I don't remember what date.
Speaker 2: Oh, these are some of my scholarly friends, on the right is Dr. Conrad Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill], next to him Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] and next to him is me and next to him is Dr. Len Jeffries [Leonard Jeffries].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of my sister Patricia, and I'm in the middle and that's my wife on the left, and this was taken at Reverend--where we held the benefit, Princeton [Avenue], Princeton, 41st [Street], 42nd [Street] and Princeton [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Clay Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Clay Evans].  Clay Evans, okay.
Speaker 2: And this was taken and this was the night of the benefit that we held for Harold Washington before the primary when nobody would hold a benefit for him.  Patricia sang, the people paid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I did the program for that, remember?
Speaker 2: You need the program?
Speaker 1: No, I did it.
Speaker 2: Oh did you, you surely did, that's right, that's right, and we earned--it was the first benefit for him, we raised fifteen thousand dollars.  The tickets were ten dollars apiece and Harold Washington's entourage came by to pick up the money that night, they didn't, they were broke (laughter).
Speaker 1: That night, huh?
Speaker 2: That night.  And this was at my inauguration.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was at my inauguration as president of Kennedy-King College.  Dan Davis who was the coach of the basketball team, Thad Jones, right to left, Dan Davis the coach of the basketball team, Thad Jones who was in the business department.  Rose, Rose Brown who was in the math department, and I'm standing there next to Rose Brown and this was the president of the student government whose name I cannot remember now.
Speaker 1: And there's some kind of mask you have.
Speaker 2: Oh yes I have those; those were masks that were given to me by the inauguration committee that I had on my wall until I retired.
Speaker 1: Johnny Weissmuller trunks now, I see.
Speaker 2: These were the good old days when swimming trunks were made out of good material.  This is my--I'm on the left, that's my brother Henry on the right, and we were out at Washington Park's [Washington Park, Chicago, Illinois] swimming pool and I was about, that was about 1937.  I was about, yeah about 1937, and swimming trunks at that time were made out of pure wool.  If you walked a block you'd be chafed red you know, that's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Pure wool.
Speaker 2: Pure wool.
