Story_ID: 192420
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Quintin E. Primo III.  Q-U-I-N-T-I-N, E, period, Primo, P-R-I-M-O, third.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in--on March 14, 1955 in Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a real estate investor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're the co-CEO of--
Speaker 2: I'm co-chairman of a company called Capri Capital [Partners LLC].  Which was founded in 1992 by my partner--co-founding partner, Daryl Carter and myself.  We currently have a portfolio in excess of $7 billion, which represents 5 billion of loans that we have made into the market and $2 billion of equity investments that we've made.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date (laughter)?  Today's date is January the 12th, 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my office at the John Hancock Center, 875 North Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 192421
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask.  They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: First one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 1: Favorite food?  Pasta.
Speaker 2: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: Black.
Speaker 2: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: Summer.
Speaker 2: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: Southern California.
Speaker 2: And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: No, not really.
Story_ID: 192422
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Okay.  Let's see.  Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo.  Winifred is W-I-N-I-F-R-E-D, Priscilla, P-R-I-S-C-I-L-L-A, Thompson, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N, Primo P-R-I-M-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was March the 24th, 1920.  And her place of birth was Nassau in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how much do you know about her side of the family?  I mean how--her ancestors, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Pretty far back on the-- on her mother's side certainly.  Her father was Irish.  And I believe was a magistrate of some sort in the Bahama Islands.  It's a little less--it's a little more sketchy on his background.  She actually grew up in Florida with her grandmother.  And don't ask me her--her grandmother's name.  I can't--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: I kind of know it but I can't--I think it's like Olivia [ph.] or something like this.  But nonetheless, she had an interesting childhood.  Was raised by her grandma.  And spent many years in the South where she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What part of Florida did she grow up in, or what--?
Speaker 2: Southern Florida.  I wanna say Coconut Grove [Florida], that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Say-- you don't know much about her father's side of the family and--
Speaker 2: No, not too much.  We'd like to know more.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --not too much at this point.
Story_ID: 192423
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo]--about her life and, you know what--you know what she did--what--what she's like and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother who is now eighty-three, going on eighty-four, is a very proud, highly intelligent, very strong woman.  She--because of her white father she is very fair and unless you would know that she was black or African American she would appear white to you.  Very thin, sharp features.  But she, as I said, very strong, very strong-willed.  Very beautiful woman.  Certainly in her twenties and thirties she was a knockout.  She, as I said, had been raised by her grandmother.  So a very strict household, given the two generations senior to her kind of calling the shots at the home.  I believe that she only was allowed to go out with my father who was a Episcopal priest, or the son of an episcopal priest at that time.  Because his dad was the minister of the church.  So very religious, God-fearing folks.  She is primarily responsibility for my diction, my writing, many of my technical skills that I picked up from my mother who was a real stickler for detail.  One story I do recall is that when I went off to college my father asked me to write my mother once a week.  Of course, I didn't do that in college, but I would write her from time to time.  And she kept on me about my use of grammar and misspelled words and the like, and so finally she started to prove her point sending my letters back to me corrected (laughter).  So she--she finished college.  She most notably was a school teacher.  And she obviously specialized in English.  But taught primarily elementary school kids.  And she's still teaching me to this day as a matter of fact at eighty-three.  She has all of her facilities. She's very sharp.  And someone who I love, obviously, very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where--where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to St. Augustine's College [later, St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] which was one of the first, if not the first black Episcopalian college in the South.  Thought it was in North Carolina.  I believe my father also went to the school or attended at some point.
Speaker 1: Yes, in Denmark, North Carolina, I believe.
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: I believe it's in Denmark, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: I'm not a hundred percent sure but it's definitely in the South.  And a very small school.  I actually went back to the school--went to the school for the first time, visited a couple years ago and it's small.  And it's a historically black college [HBCU].  But they've churned out many a great man and woman in this country.
Story_ID: 192424
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Well, it's the same as mine only with a junior at the end.  Quintin E. Primo, Jr.  And I think I've spelled it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was born in Liberty County, Georgia which is essentially Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in 1913.  And passed away a number of years ago, five--five or more years ago.  He grew up in the South.  His daddy was a minister, an Episcopal minister as well.  Quintin E. Primo, Sr.  My father followed in the footsteps of his father.  Back when my dad was coming up clearly there weren't--there wasn't a great deal of opportunity to be anything you wanted.  Being a--a pastor was a safe--safe thing.  Pastor, teacher, that sort of thing.  Business man was probably out of the question at that point.  But nonetheless my father, also highly intelligent.  A very outgoing, a very serious--
Speaker 1: Now his father, Quintin Primo--
Speaker 2: Senior.
Speaker 1: --senior.  Was from Guyana, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct, Guyana, British Guyana.
Speaker 1: British Guyana.
Speaker 2: And that's kind of where the Anglican Church came in.  Both the Bahamas and British Guyana at the time were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do--do--do you know much about that side of the family?  Can you--
Speaker 2: We are--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Can you trace 'em back--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Further than--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: There are--there are quite a few Primos in Guyana.  In the--the--the-- top of South America there.  We have a--you know, we're still--my older sister has done a fair amount of work, Cynthia Primo Martin, has done a fair amount of work in tracing our roots in Guyana.  And there's a tradition of--of religion, in music, and scholarship from what we have determined thus far.  But like many black families I--it's tough, it's tough to trace to go too far back.  Given how we came to this continent over--over many years ago.  But my grandfather, Quintin Sr., originally wrote to the Episcopal Church, I believe, and my Aunt Margaret and Cynthia know the--and my mom [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] know these stories much better than I do.  But originally wrote to the church requesting to be brought over as an Episcopal minister, wanted to study to become an Episcopal minister.  And apparently there was no interest or no room at the inn at the time.  And--so I think for a period of time he was a Baptist minister in the South and then eventually switched over to the Episcopal--Episcopal Church.  But my grandfather now was a great entrepreneur.  And his partner, his--his wife started numerous missions.  Started a school.  But--but again was entrepreneurial within the confines of being an African American in the South in the 1800s and early 1900s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was, I guess, active in the late 1800s well mostly, I guess, in terms of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My grandfather died when I was probably three or four.  So I believe before 1960.  I was born in 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But lived a very rich life.  Was a musician as well.
Speaker 1: What did he play?
Speaker 2: Well I think everyone in the family, most everyone plays piano.  That's kind of the mother instrument that we've all had to learn how to play whether we liked it or not.  So but he--he also may have played one other instrument.  I wanna say trumpet but I can't really--I can't recall.  I can't remember.
Story_ID: 192425
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] became an Episcopal priest basically because his father [Quintin E. Primo, Sr.] was one?  Was that the--
Speaker 2: Well--boy, these are good questions.  You know I never really asked my father why he became a priest.  Certainly he was very much at a fundamental and very sound belief in God.  Again there were--there weren't too many opportunities.  Like my father actually went to Lincoln--I want to say Lincoln.  I think he went to Lincoln College [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania, again a historically black college.  I wanna say that he was--he may have gone to seminary school at Lincoln.  I cannot recall.  Either college or seminary, I get it all mixed up.  But nonetheless my father was very academic.  He's known to this day as--he was the hugging bishop.  He was very outgoing and he embraced people whenever he met someone he always would embrace them.  And very gregarious and very well loved.  But he was very scholarly.  He kind of masked his--his basic academic excellence.  And he actually was--studied Greek in school.  Because I think, again I've never spoken to him about this when he was alive, but I believe that--that given that much of the Bible was translated from Greek and ancient Hebrew, he sought to study these languages to understand truly what was the written word.  But I think that--that my father was --was very--he was very subtly ambitious.  And I think that he viewed the--the--the church as a vehicle for him to excel.  And clearly he had a dad that had been in the church so he was very familiar with what it took to run a mission or--or a church.  But I thought--I think that this was his vehicle to lead--to lead people.  My father was a natural leader amongst men.  And when one runs a church--again it's very entrepreneurial.  You have to basically sell a concept that you cannot see.  You must create a vision for those to follow you.  It requires marketing, sales and marketing.  It requires finance.  There's never enough money.  It's always about raising money to do--to execute the plans that you have, both operating and capital.  There is an operation that's involved.  And--and all these things that what I do in my business today he has done in the churches that he has been in charge of and ultimately the dioceses which is much more administrative.  But nonetheless, so to answer your question, again, I think that--that this was--he saw the ministry as a--a--his vehicle to lead men and women.  He saw it as a vehicle to be very close to God.  Which he was.  And I think thirdly he saw it as a means to follow in the tradition, the tradition that was established not only by his father, but again by our family in [British] Guyana that was very religious.
Story_ID: 192426
Speaker 1: So you're saying, I guess, if I understand what you're saying, this world was more negotiable than the outside--I mean the world of the Episcopal Church he [Primo's father, Quintin E. Primo, Jr. ] saw it as one that he could navigate you know.  A lot more--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes, I think--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: A lot kinder than the outside world.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the--yes and no.  I believe that the Episcopal Church let's just say on any number of occasions was--it was not as welcoming to blacks as other churches have been and are.  Certainly the path of least resistance would have been more of a Baptist in the South.  Southern Baptist would be certainly a lot surer bet.  As you know, the Episcopal Church is one that is predominantly white, Caucasian.  It has been rightfully or wrongfully associated with the upper middle classes and the upper classes of the country.  And many presidents, many chief executive officers of corporations have been Episcopalian.  It is also a religion that's heavily associated with the northeastern part of the United States.  So Boston [Massachusetts], New York [New York], there's just a-- you know a plethora of Episcopal Churches in these areas.  And much less so in the South.  So my father also enjoyed a--a good challenge.  And I think that he had clearly a role model in his father [Quintin E. Primo, Sr.] as someone who effectively fought oppression and discrimination and bias and prejudice and racism and all the other isms.  But he-- also again enjoyed a good challenge.  And I think that my father was very much of a maverick.  He went places where others feared to go.  And he was really a small man but absolutely fearless.  And I think that--that he viewed again just rightfully the Episcopal Church as giving him an extraordinary opportunity to lead in the face and in the teeth of what was--what was not good about all of America now certainly was embodied in the Episcopal Church.  And I'm happy to say that if this is what he was thinking he--he performed excellently.  And indeed lead both black, white, male, female, straight, gay --all types of people.  And very effectively and got them to understand God and how to be closer to God.
Story_ID: 192427
Speaker 1: Now, he [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] was--was he involved in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  No question.  He--I don't remember, I was real young, years ago, but he--he coordinated various activities of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] in Wilmington, Delaware where we had lived--we lived for about five years.  But was just outspoken.  He was president of the local chapter in Rochester, New York of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I'm sure he had been involved in the Urban League.  He started something called the Union of Black Episcopalians.  Which was not welcomed by the [Episcopal] Church for a lot of reasons.  But he--he, again it was just a man who--who was highly principled.  A warrior, but one who had tremendous compassion for those in need.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there's a lot of history with the Union of Black Episcopalians with--Canon Ed[ward W.] Rodman and your father--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That's right.  My friend, Ed.
Speaker 1: And right.  And now the--there's an annual gathering of hundreds of--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --black Episcopalians who, you know, affirm you know their place in the Episcopal Church and in world now.  They fight for causes of--progressive causes and so forth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It's---and it's been a battle.  My father authored a book a number of years ago and spoke to many of the challenges that he faced, not only as a priest, coming up but even as a bishop.  For instance, he became bishop suffragan of the episcopal diocese here in Chicago [Illinois] in 1974 or in 1972.  And that was--he was-- he was in the Episcopate between '72 [1972] '84 [1984], I believe.  But during that period of time you think of the--the early '70s [1970s] you like to think that that was a bit more of an enlightened period relative to the '50s [1950s]. But there was at least one church that refused to let him officiate.  The diocese consisted of 200 or more churches and he and his superior James--Bishop James [W.] Montgomery, bishop of Chicago my father's bishop suffragan or assistant bishop.  But they divided up the churches each Sunday and they split it right down the middle and each would go out and--and officiate and preach and confirm, conferments (ph.) across the diocese.  And at least one church somewhere in the suburbs refused--once my father showed up and along with my mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo], refused to let him give communion.  Refused to let him lay hands on the conferments.  And obviously it was illegal according to the canons of the church but nonetheless the amount of the racism that the Chicago area and the country was steeped in at that point in time, even in the '70s [1970s] it was very evident.  So he in founding the Union of Black Episcopalians, I believe that he realized that, first, we as black people must come together.  And get past any petty differences that we as a people have with each other.  And before we can do anything great or accomplish anything of--of significance first we must communicate and we must lay down our swords and we must not necessarily all agree, but we must have consensus to move forward.  We can agree to disagree.  But we must have consensus.  And certainly that is something that I--I know that I learned from my father was--would expect that--suspect that this was also a basis of the founding of the Union of Black Episcopalians.
Story_ID: 192428
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?  I think they met in association with the [Episcopal] Church, but as you referred before but (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Again you're pushing my knowledge and if my mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] or my family ever sees this they're gonna say see that [HM] Quintin [E. Primo, III] you're--you're always focused on you and your business you're not focused on the family.  But nonetheless they, I believe, they met in Florida.  And again my mother and her grandmother, my great-grandmother attended one of the churches that my father--my grandfather [Quintin E. Primo, Sr.] was pastor of.  And my mother is seven years junior to my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.].  I think when he first met her she was probably somewhere in her teen--teen years.  But I think my dad had--I think actually if I can recall I think he was--he was in the process of studying for the ministry when they--when they first--when they first met.  And he was quite--he was quite taken with her.  I think that he actually may have even taught a class that she was in as a young--as a--as a teenager, and he as a--early in his twenties.  And he was--he--he felt that she's clearly one of the smartest kids in the class.  And she was just absolutely outspoken.  I think my mother was--was valedictorian of her school--of her-- high school.  The high school couldn't have been more than thirty or forty people (laughter).  But nonetheless she was--she was--she was valedictorian.  But they met--they met essentially through the church.  And eventually they got married and had the three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have--there are three of you?  There's--you--you have two sisters?
Speaker 2: Two sisters, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: An older one Cynthia [Primo Martin], who's eight years my senior, and a younger one Susan [A. Primo], who's four years my junior.
Story_ID: 192429
Speaker 1: Who do you take after the most, your mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] or your father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] do you think?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  I have to say that, you know, half and half.  Certainly my--my technical skills, my ability to write and to speak, communicate, the ability to play piano and other things that I do really was my mother on me at all times.  And--and my--my perfectionism which is a fault.  My mother was a perfectionist and certainly I, unfortunately I am as well.  My--my tremendous faith in God, my ability to lead people, challenge them and to get more out of them than they believe that have in them is my father.  My father was a risk taker.  He again was fearless.  And he was able to take people to places that they had never been nor did they feel that they could ever get there.  So I would say that running a business with $7 billion in assets, having started that from a company with two people and zero, twelve, thirteen years ago and now having an organization of over a hundred people with--and in four or five cities across the United States, in terms of offices, major offices, to get from there to here has taken every bit of the traits and characteristics that I've developed from my--from my--from my parents.  My father--little did people know, certainly the church, my father had quite a temper (laughter).  But he never--he rarely displayed it (laughter) outside the home.  But let me tell you, you did not mess up in my home or you got it (laughter).  So I think--I think I have a temper like my father.  I have very little tolerance for those that are unruly or not--or rude.  Or those that do not treat others as they would like to treat themselves--have themselves treated.
Story_ID: 192430
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about growing up?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up.  Well, I was born in Rochester, New York.  Which is in upstate New York.  So that meant there was always lots of snow in the wintertime.  And I have very fond memories of snow drifts being taller than myself.  And having to burrow through, you know, creating caves and all sorts of things underneath this--this heavy snowfall.  We clearly were a very religious family with a father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] that was a pastor.  So therefore we were in church every Sunday.  Got dressed up to go to church every Sunday.  The whole family.  Ultimately I became an acolyte.  And my favorite thing to do was swinging the incense.  I think that's a thurifer.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You walk down the aisle.
Speaker 2: Walk down--lead the--lead the entire procession swinging that incense and I had--I was quite a flamboyant swinger too.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: But the smell of incense always takes me back to my childhood.
Story_ID: 192431
Speaker 1: What church was your father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] the pastor of in Rochester [New York]?
Speaker 2: In Rochester it was St. Simon's.  I believe it's St. Simon Cyrene.  It's a merged church now downtown [The Episcopal Church of St. Luke and St. Simon Cyrene, Rochester, New York].
Speaker 1: Simon the Cyrenian, right.  He was a figure in the Bible who was black.  He was Ethiopian who helped Christ, I believe.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you--you know better than I perhaps.  But that sounds--sounds right (laughter).  But nonetheless I think you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But St. Simon's was a church that couldn't have had more than yeah 200, 300 members.  You know, not a large church even by today's standards a very, very small church.
Speaker 1: Basically black church, all black?
Speaker 2: It was--it was certainly if not all black mostly all black.  And what--what has happened a number of times not only through my father's history but just the church's as--as a whole but there's been a trend to merge traditionally black churches and that have life and ministry to them.  But no money with traditionally white churches that have endowments and the like and certainly my father oversaw the merger of St. Matthew's and St. Joseph's in Detroit [St. Matthew's-St. Joseph's Episcopal Church, Detroit, Michigan].  And posthumously has--actually it's said before he died.  But and he's not directly involved but certainly spiritually involved in the merger of St. Andrew, I think St. Mark's in Wilmington, Delaware.  St. Matthew's, I'm sorry.  St. Andrew's and St. Matthew's his church was St. Matthew's in Wilmington and they merged [Episcopal Church of Saints Andrew and Matthew, SsAM, Wilmington, Delaware]--which is a black church, merged with St. Andrew's, they had a great--nice endowment, but a very aging membership and the like--
Story_ID: 192432
Speaker 1: But nonetheless the--I attended an all-white school, elementary school [School 22-Lincoln School, Rochester, New York].  There were very few, in fact there were no black people that lived in the neighborhood in which I lived in Rochester, New York.  And this was a recurring theme as time went on.  Because my parents [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo and Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] very much believed in education.  And unfortunately the best schools were in the white areas.  So as you might imagine they were quite the trendsetters.  And there was no such thing as open housing, back in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] early '60s [1960s].  So they continually upset the apple cart by moving into neighborhoods that were mostly if not entirely white or Jewish.  And that had the one characteristic--two characteristics, good housing and good schools.  So in Rochester, New York at 128 Empire Boulevard which I lived, there were absolutely no African Americans in sight.  So I was quite the--quite the thing of interest in school.
Speaker 2: Did you experience any negativity or--
Speaker 1: Oh, of course.
Speaker 2: --resistance personally from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, of course.  You know I can't remember anyone ever calling me the N word.  But which I--which is good.  But there was--I think there was more curiosity than anything else.  I had my hair was nappy and my skin was dark.  My features were broad.  And--but I have to tell you that I never experienced any overt racism.  I--now, my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] as I said became president of the national--NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And was involved in the Urban League.  And clearly was quite outspoken.  And, you know, raised the ire of many a white government public and private citizen and official in the City of Rochester [New York].  And certainly moving into an all-white neighborhood I recall the story of--of--and this happened almost--this would--this would routinely happen where a car has been parked in front of the driveway so the moving van can't get in (laughter).  You know that sort of thing.  So, but again as I said earlier my father was just a fearless man.  And along with my mother, who's not quite as fearless but goes along with the program.  But didn't deter him in the least.  So I grew up in-- white neighborhoods.  And had fast friends that who whereas initially viewed me as a bit of a curiosity.  Quickly went past--looked past the differences, physical differences.  And had great, great friends.
Story_ID: 192433
Speaker 1: When you were in school [in Rochester, New York] did--did people make reference to Frederick Douglass?  I know he's one of the historic citizens of Rochester [New York].
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, not once.  You know it was certainly in--in teaching--if it was it was--it was glossed over very quickly.  But no, it was a very politically incorrect (laughter) certainly politically correct at that time version of events historically.  And that's why I have a very bad memory.  And I--I can recall not too much you know of my childhood, but I remember it--having a great sense of security and never being in fear of--of rocks or bricks being thrown through our front window or fires being set or crosses being burned and nothing like that.
Speaker 1: So there was resentment but it never took a physical--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --form or never really got out of hand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultanoeus) You know and after--after people got to know my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] they loved him so dearly.  You know they--they cried like--like babies when we left Rochester.  So it just goes to show you that--the power of an individual to change lives and attitudes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the family wound up in--you were born in Rochester, right?
Speaker 2: Well all these siblings were born in Rochester.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your family arrived in Rochester as a result of an appointment by the Episcopalian church or something (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I'm sure as most--most processes go within the Episcopal Church.  The church for whatever reason has a pastor and minister that is departing or has departed and they create a search committee to go out and find a new minister.  And I'm sure my father went through this process and was selected as the minister they want.  And accepted the job and came to--came to Rochester.  Which typically, and I'm not an expert in this, but typically what you usually see is that ministers with ability and vision and ambition will--will move a number of times to get greater responsibility, to move up in the church.  It was never my father's goal to become a bishop.  But you look at his history he became associated with larger and larger churches--churches.  And has gotten greater and greater challenges and ultimately he was recognized by the national churches as someone that would make a good bishop.
Story_ID: 192434
Speaker 1: What were you like as a young man growing up?  What was your personality like?  Were you outgoing or--
Speaker 2: Well, I was--I don't know if I'd call myself entirely a bad kid.  But I was--I was somewhat mischievous.  And I did not--I was kinda the typical preacher's kid.  I did not let my father's [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] station in life in any way shape or form constrain my fun (laughter) as a child.  But as a kid growing up I knew better than to talk back to my parents.  Certainly my kids don't follow that (laughter)--that--they don't adhere to that philosophy at all these days.  But we didn't really, we--you know, relatively strict environment.  My mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] actually really raised us.  My father was rarely around given that he obviously had to work during the day.  He often times made sick visits in the evening, giving the general age of the Episcopal Church is a little bit older.  He was writing sermons on Sunday and preaching--or Saturday and then preaching on Sundays.  So, I don't recall you know playing too much baseball in the backyard in--with my father.  But his presence was in spirit was very much felt in the household.  But, you know, as a child I was very curious.  I--you know I did what most kids did.  I enjoyed sports to a certain extent.  I liked to play.  But I-- was somewhat gifted academically.  You know I -- doubt if I got straight A's but you know, I-- certainly appreciated school and as I--as I grew up later on I honed my skill in school and appreciated why it was so important.  My parents certainly hammered education into me.  In all three of us, from the day we were born.  Education was not an option.  It was something that you must--we must go to school.  We must attend college.  We certainly should attend a post graduate program.  So education was a big thing.  And--and it was--it was very much a household that was full of love.  My mother and my father let me get away with murder.  And I turned out okay in the end.  But it was--it was definitely a loving, very loving household.  Having the--the three kids and my sister [Cynthia Primo Martin] being eight years older than I was and my younger sister [Susan A. Primo] being four years younger.  It was--it was quite a span.  My sister left the house, you know, at eighteen to go off to school and I was only ten.  So yeah, you know growing up we were not as close-knit a family as we--rather the siblings because of such a space between all of us.  But we're certainly close now.
Story_ID: 192435
Speaker 1: You got a sister [Cynthia Primo Martin] that much older would have a lot of I suppose a lot of responsibility--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in helping to raise you, too.
Speaker 2: No question.  And she, you know I asked her the other day as I thought about teaching my own daughter [Francesca (ph.) Primo] how to play piano and how--how much time it takes and how you have to sit down you know after work with her.  And--and I never--I never recall my older sister sitting down with me and helping me with piano.  But I'm sure she had to.  Because she was quite a gifted pianist and went to the Eastman School of Music [Rochester, New York], studied there.  And certainly being eight years my senior I know she sat down and helped me with my scales and things like that.  But again I have very little recollection of it.  What I have always focused on is--and it makes my wife [Diane Jones Primo] and everyone else pretty mad is that I'm always focusing on what can be.  What-- can and what will be.  I'm-- very--I'm certainly in the present.  I don't spend much time at all thinking about the past.  But always focused on what--what will happen.  What should happen.  What can happen.  And so that's my daydream.  That's--that's--most of those thoughts consume--consume my thinking.  So, and I think as a kid you know as a child I--I had a great imagination.  Which manifested itself in telling tall tales.  I was quite a fibber (laughter).  I wasn't always good but I had a very vivid imagination.
Speaker 1: What kind of fibs would you tell--
Speaker 2: Oh, God.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous) make up stories?
Speaker 2: Jeez, my.  I can't even recall (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Can you give us one?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I just--let's just say I was a very adventurous as a kid and often times got caught doing things I shouldn't be doing and I'd make up all sorts of stories as to why--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --certain things happened.  But you know I've--you know we lived on a major thoroughfare, Empire Boulevard [Rochester, New York] was I believe had to be like a four lane--four lane you know two--total of four lane highway.  And we used to throw snowballs (laughter) you know at the cars and (laughter) you know--you know hit 'em hard and then go run (laughter).  And then of course getting caught.  I said, "Oh, no that wasn't me who threw that snowball."  But, you know, just, you know, classic kid things.  Thank God I've grown out of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 192436
Speaker 1: So you went to school in Rochester [New York] but--you started grade school in Rochester and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did--did--you finish there or did you--
Speaker 2: I went through--through the third grade.  We were in Rochester for eight years.  So this would have put us in '63 [1963].  I was born in '55 [1955].  We then--my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] took a position with St. Matthew's Church in Wilmington, Delaware.  Where we spent five years.  And there I-- was--was in fourth grade through eighth grade in--in Wilmington, Delaware.  And then we took yet another position in Detroit, Michigan.  And I started my junior high school, ninth grade there.  And then left after my junior year.  And then we moved--he was--he was consecrated as bishop in the Chicago [Illinois] diocese.  And so spent my senior year in the Chicago area.  And then went off to four years of college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and two years of post-graduate [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now--now in grade school and high school who were some of the teachers that influenced you?  Were there any particular--
Speaker 2: Ha.
Speaker 1: --teachers that influenced--
Speaker 2: I told you I have a bad memory. Let's see grade school and high school.  Wow.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school in Rochester?
Speaker 2: Let's see well, oh, man.  I haven't a clue.  I think it was Lincoln High School or excuse me Lincoln Elementary School [Lincoln School No. 22, Rochester, New York].  My mother could tell you.  Give her a call.  But Lincoln Elementary School in Rochester.  And then--roof--then I went to Friends at Wilmington, [Wilmington] Friends School in Wilmington [Delaware].
Speaker 1: That's a Quaker school?
Speaker 2: It's Quaker, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a great--great school.  And that's fifth through eighth grade.  And then [Sidney D.] Miller Junior High School in Detroit [Michigan].  I think Joe Louis was a graduate of.  And finally Cass Technical High School, Cass Tech [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Right, Cass Tech.
Speaker 2: In Detroit.  Great school.  Eight-story downtown factory.
Speaker 1: That's the famous Cass Tech (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, the famous Cass Tech.
Speaker 1: So many people went to Cass Tech (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no question.  No question.  That was a--that was a tremendous school you know.  Then finally Homewood-Flossmoor High School in Homewood-Flossmoor--in Homewood [Illinois].  I think it was it was in Flossmoor, Illinois.  So let's see I have to tell you I had to say that I believe it was Mr. Rogers [ph.] who was our bandleader in ninth grade that I remember most.  I once ran away from home I think I did that more than once but I think it- once that I did it in ninth grade I ran over to his house.  And he made me call my parents [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo and Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] and obviously I had to go back home.
Speaker 1: So you didn't run that far away?
Speaker 2: No, not too far, but far enough.
Speaker 1: Now why did you run away?  Can you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, because I was you know my bad temper and my mother had made me mad.  You know.  And I think they wouldn't let me do something that I wanted--really wanted to do.  So I decided that I would just--I think I wanted to play in a band or something you know and they didn't--they thought that that wouldn't be a good thing.
Speaker 1: Were you playing keyboards?
Speaker 2: Piano and trumpet.  I picked up trumpet but I started on piano in --when I was five.  Four or five.  And practiced that for--studied that for five years.  And then at ten or so, nine or ten, I picked up the trumpet and did well at that.
Story_ID: 192437
Speaker 1: Well, Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] is famous for music.
Speaker 2: And I was a music major as such at Cass.  But Mr. Rogers [ph.] was he was a big, big, man.  African American.  And he's really my first role model.  He--he really--it's no coincidence that I ran away to his house (laughter).  Because I thought he was a model parent.  And he was kind of--so he was very strong and big and talented and he very much--I very much admired him.  So he was a teacher that definitely helped me focus on--on excellence and performance and my studies.  He accepted no excuses.  No compromises.  You did well with music, you did well throughout.  And you--and you led, you do not follow.  I would say another teacher that was really influential I think again music at [Wilmington Friends School, Wilmington, Delaware].  Mr. Guest [ph.]  was our director of the bands.  And he drafted me at the tender age of ten.  I was in--let's see I would have been in fifth grade.  I had been studying trumpet since the--I think just for one--since the fourth or third grade.  Let's see I started--let me get my dates here.  I played for five years and then I take that back.  So I was--I was--would have been I'm sorry.  I would have been in eighth grade.  I'm sorry.  So yeah I started studying trumpet when I was ten.  And this would have been when I was thirteen.  Around--around there.  Yeah, yeah, ten to thirteen.  Nonetheless I was quite young.  And I was--I attended Wilmington Friends in fifth through eighth grade.  In fact it was earlier than that.  But actually I so I'd started studying--I started studying trumpet when I was in third grade and that would have been eight.  Hmm. I had forgotten that.  So eight to ten.  So by the time I was ten I was in fifth grade, more--the point of all this is that when I was ten or eleven, Mr. Guest put me in the senior band.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was at ten, possibly eleven.  And I was in the senior band that comprised just you know juniors and seniors.  Because I was very talented.  And I sat third chair on the trumpet section.
Speaker 1: In the senior band?
Speaker 2: In the senior band.  Okay.  Clearly I was very talented.  I mean I--family, music, everyone playing piano or some instrument.  A mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] that was always on me to practice but I--I naturally picked up the trumpet.  And I--that natural embouchure as it's called.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, I was playing third chair in the senior band at the--now in fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Now that's at--at what school?
Speaker 2: At Wilmington Friends, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wilmington Friends, okay.
Speaker 2: We toured.  We made a tour to Canada.  We toured a--a number of places.  But it was quite--he--he had great faith in me.  And, of course, needless to say, I was the only black person in the whole band, you know.  But--but he exposed me to--he-- challenged me.  And I performed well for him.  But I-- he clearly was someone that I can--and then I wasn't you know I didn't know him that well, but I can--I admired him greatly.  He appreciated my ability and-- he challenged me to be better.  He challenged me to be excellent.  So I'd have to say those two--I've never been asked the question quite frankly.  And this is the first time I've thought about it in thirty or forty years.
Story_ID: 192438
Speaker 1: Now did you get opportunities to expand on your music training?  Did you ever go to Interlochen [Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan] or any place--any of those summer programs or--
Speaker 2: I--well Cass [Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] had a extraordinary music program.  Extraordinary program.  We were exposed to classical music.  Bands, symphony orchestras.  Jazz, just all forms and all types of--of music.  And with classes--you know, class--you get a class to study jazz in high school.  This is kind of unheard of but just an extraordinary program.  And that in conjunction with private lessons ultimately propelled me to apply to a number of conservatories in music when I moved to the Chicago [Illinois] area and it's time to go to school.  And ultimately a little story and that is that I again was very talented and I could play more than one instrument.  And thought that probably if I was gonna go into music which I wanted to do, when I was senior.   That I should pack up my bags and go live in New York [New York] and play jazz in New York.  And not go to school.  I really didn't see the point of going to school.  Okay.  Well given my earlier comments, you might guess how that went over in the household (laughter).  Okay.  Well my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] never really kind of dropped the dime on me so to speak but he--and I remember him coming to my room and he said, "Now son," you know he said, "Hey you are going to college okay."  And this is after one of his friends had filled out seven or eight applications for me.  I didn't even fill the applications out for college.  Cause I, you know, I was kind of procrastinating and the like and my father's friend realized the talent that I had and wanted me--wanted to get me into one of--the-- these conservatories--the excellent--the fine conservatories of music.  And in the country like.  He--we applied--he applied for me I just signed--Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts], Juilliard [School, New York, New York], Peabody [Institute, Baltimore, Maryland], Baltimore, Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  And others.  And again I was very indifferent about this whole process, you know.  And so I was accepted academically but then I had to perform.  But nonetheless I decided, forget this school thing.  I am going to be a jazz musician and go to New York.  Which is logical.  I mean its--if I did not--if I was not raised in the family that I was raised in that certainly would have been an option and I would have gone I'm sure and done very well.  But my father came into my room one day and said, "Son you know you are going to school."  And I mean--he never really talked to me like that before.  I mean it was my mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] was always the heavy.  But he said, "You know you are going to school."  So just--there's no choice here.  "And if you don't wanna go into music, you can be a doctor, you can be a lawyer.  You know, you can be a banker you know.  You can be anything you want, but you are going to school."  So, knowing that it did not make sense to mess with my old man--'cause he was not--again a small guy, but you--you just didn't mess with him.  Okay.  So, there was only really one school that I applied to that actually had--you know, that was not simply a conservatory of music and that was Indiana University.
Story_ID: 671392
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, did most of your social life revolve around music or did you have like a--
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It sure did.
Speaker 1: Okay. Band--
Speaker 2: Increasingly people are beginning to notice this about me but many--there's still many who don't realize that I was a very serious musician.  I-- certainly am a successful businessman, but often times many people can't-- understand how I moved from music to business.  And we can talk about that later.  But the--many of the skills that I developed in music, in studying music, in practicing.  I--I'm creating, I applied directly in my--business activity.
Story_ID: 671393
Speaker 1: Was the move from Detroit [Michigan] to Homewood [Illinois] here in the Chicago [Illinois] area traumatic?  I mean or disruptive in any way?
Speaker 2: Well, a little bit.  I mean my senior year, you know, like you know how lousy is that?  It was not something I really wanted to do but again my father [Quintin E.Primo, Jr.] laid down the law.  And we did whatever we were supposed to.  But also on the flip side, of course, was that my father was about to be consecrated as a bishop of the diocese of the church.  You know and this was a--this was a historic thing.  There were very few black bishops at that time.  And--
Speaker 1: In fact there's-- a poster of them now--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All the black bishops of the Episcopal Church--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: With your father's picture--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And starting with Bishop [Martin D.] Holley and going all the way through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep.  There was probably--there was [John Melville] Burgess, a few others New York, [Washington] D.C., Mason [ph.] in Michigan.  Probably three or four bishops.  He probably was the fifth or sixth you know bishop consecrated, black bishop.  Certainly the first in Chicago diocese obviously.  But--but it was a bit traumatic.  But we were--we were very--we were very excited, you know.  When your dad's a bishop you get the first row in the church for crying out loud (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean this was like, woah this is serious stuff.  And you know, the relationships and access to things was tremendous when your dad's a bishop.  And just the, the notoriety.  It's--my father was such--so--so genuinely loved by the diocese that--there's very few places that I can go, and I have the same name, that people don't come up to me and say, "Oh I remember your father," or "He, he confirmed my daughter, my son" or "He was a great man," or this or that because he just--he truly, truly was loved--
Story_ID: 671394
Speaker 1: So it was a--you know certainly the transition--eh, a little tough and you know I was moving--I was moving from--I was transitioning from a mostly black but interracial and integrated multicultural school, tremendous, tremendous school at Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] to again this primarily all-white you know--great facility at Homewood-Flossmoor [High School, Homewood, Illinois], but you know there was some trepidation.  But as always I developed very fast friends.  And friends that I still have to this day.  And I also finally was able to play in a band.  You know my mother [Winifred Priscilla Thompson Primo] had been, you know, nixing you know my playing in bands throughout my junior high school years and finally I got to play in a band and sure enough we became very popular in the south suburbs.
Speaker 2: Now what--what kind of band was it?
Speaker 1: Oh, a rock band.  You know.
Speaker 2: Did you play the trumpet (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And piano.  Yeah, both.  But we--we--
Speaker 2: What was the name of your band?
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Do you remember?
Speaker 1: It was prize fighter back I think in the --the '20s [1920s] or the '30s [1930s] Bojack, B-O-J-A-C-K.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And--and again I was of course the only minority member of that group.  And I gave it the rhythm and the funk (laughter).  You know but nonetheless we were very popular.  We played at the prom and the whole nine yards.  So it was a--it was a transition, more trepidation.  More anticipation than actual--the actual reality of things and again moving around so often made me extremely adaptable, you know. If I wasn't able to make friends quickly I was in trouble.  So it exposed me to many different cities throughout New England.  The East Coast.  And the Midwest.  And to this day, you can--you can drop me in just about any locale in the country, anywhere in the world and I know that I will be able to survive and moreover thrive so it's a--and again in being an entrepreneur is about venturing out into areas whether expertise or geographic or what have you that you are not familiar with.
Story_ID: 671395
Speaker 1: Now when you were thinking about going off to New York [New York] and becoming a jazz musician on your own--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --who were the musicians that you admired?  Did--did you have a role model for this kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Miles Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: The beginning and the end.  Alpha and Omega (laughter).  Miles was my man, and was my idol (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s] he was producing the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Jack Johnson album.
Speaker 2: Right, 'Bitch's Brew' and all the kind of the--the--
Speaker 1: Like 'Bitches Brew'
Speaker 2: Fusion.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fusion, very experimental--experimental music.  But Miles, wow.  [HM] Herbie Hancock certainly another tremendous influence.  Freddie Hubbard.  But these are the--these are the guys that I absolutely idolized.  And patterned myself after.  So unfortunately my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] certainly appreciated Miles and others but he also knew Miles had a bad drug habit (laughter).  You know that nearly killed him.  And probably eventually did kill him.  But you know it's you--you just as a child you know as a teenager you have no idea.  It's very romantic, you romanticize it.  But they were absolutely right in directing my talents ultimately elsewhere in a more productive--certainly formal music education versus just kind of hippity hoppity you know off to New York and--and playing in clubs and making no money and getting to drugs and who knows what else.
Speaker 1: It sounds like on the surface it sounds like the script of 'The Jazz Singer' (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Preachers son or--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the other cleric's son goes off to become--
Speaker 2: Absolutely
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And believe me I had a real knack for you know for experimenting (laughter).  You know so I'm sure I would have gotten in all sorts of trouble.  But the bottom line I was very talented and again the--the skills that I had acquired through music have kept with me over these years.  And are a--have been a key, key determinant of kind of where I am at this point.
Story_ID: 671396
Speaker 1: Tell me about Indiana University.  That's in Bloomington, right?
Speaker 2: Yes indeed.  Bloomington, Indiana.  IU--Big Ten school.  Much different than all those small little conservatories in New York [New York] and Boston [Massachusetts] and Baltimore [Maryland] and Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] and everywhere else.  But I really had identified myself--wait gotta finish the story that I started earlier.  And that was that I decided to get out of music.  I became just disillusioned with it.  I--I--if I couldn't go to New York [New York], if I couldn't have my way you know screw it.  I've--I've practiced two, three hours a day.  I've done everything I've could and you know maybe it's just time to try something else.  And I have no idea where this came from but clearly it was meant to be.  So I reapplied to Indiana University which was the only school that truly had really exceptional other schools.  And I decided to make a long story short.  I decided to go into finance.  I decided I wanna be a banker.  Like an investment banker, international banker.  I--the Rothschild family was a--a family that I'd read about and was very interested in.  And many of the old banking families out of New York and London [England], Paris [France].  You know I wanna be rich, too.  You know I wanna make some money and I thought that this was probably the way to go.
Speaker 1: It seems like quite a departure from becoming a jazz musician.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: How did--what--what influenced you to make this switch (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All I can say is it must have been divine intervention.  That kind of God reached his hand down and you know and gave me a good shake.  And kind of woke me up.  But I thought about you know various other professions, other than music.
Story_ID: 671397
Speaker 1: As I began to reflect on music, I realized that I was really, really, really, really very good.  But I still had limitations and I practiced and I practiced and I practiced and I couldn't crack some of these limitations.  For instance, the way that I'm physically constructed, I don't have a great deal of endurance.  I had tremendous tone and technique on the trumpet but I couldn't--my--my chops would wear out.  You know after you know a full day of playing.  And to be a professional musician you must be able to play infinitely.  You know session after session after session.  And ultimately I'm sure this could have been corrected but there was--there was this limitation that--I mean I practiced hours and hours, and hours and hours and hours and hours a day.  In a week, in a month, a year.  So I became, I couldn't do my jazz thing in New York [New York].  I started questioning my ability my-- is this being--is music being the road to great wealth or success.  And as I've gotten older I decided that I wanted to make money.  That I knew when I was eighteen.  I-- wanted to make money.  And definitely ministry was not (laughter)--I was not cut out for the ministry.  And my-- and my father and my mother would have loved if I'd be the third to have gone into the ministry and been a bishop like my old man or maybe a presiding bishop you know at some point to keep ascending.  But they--
Speaker 2: What was about it that you knew you weren't cut out for it?  You didn't think that you could do it?
Speaker 1: Well, because I-- hate to say it again I was very capitalistic.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know I very much wanted to make money.  I knew that there was no money in the ministry.  Certainly not in the Episcopal ministry.  And you know my father they--they--we were raised in the very nice suburbs and we're exposed to you know people of great wealth and influence and power and how can you not covet you know those sorts of things.  I was raised in a very popular culture you know in the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], and the '80s [1980s] and so I decided that I really, what I really wanted was to be successful.  I even told my dad [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.], that dad you know playing trumpet I'm gonna become a millionaire by playing the trumpet.  And they used to just to laugh (laughter).  You know but this is my route to becoming a millionaire, play this trumpet.  You know and I --I was just so good, but they just kind of chuckled you know because that's the--that's one of the least (laughter)--effective ways to--to accumulate wealth and net worth.  But this is the driving force, you know, and I guess I was a kid you know I was kid of the you know of the really the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s].  So I decided that--that it was gonna be another vehicle and--and I've always--I've never been one to--I'm not frightened of change.  And you know I was only eighteen I thought I'd try something else for a little while, see what happened.  And so even during school I still played in bands and things like that.  But decided that I didn't wanna be a doctor.  You know, didn't really wanna be a lawyer.  But again this concept of banking and finance.  I was very good at numbers.  I was very good at math.  And I liked people.  Worked well with people.  So people you know money, you know math, statistics it all seemed to go together.
Speaker 2: So this is 1973 you're talking about or--
Speaker 1: This would have been 1973 when I graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Star- so this would have been late '72 [1972] or early '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 671398
Speaker 1: So I entered Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] as a student in the business school.  I think officially I--for the first year I believe I --obviously took a very general course assignment but ultimately was admitted into the school of business.  It was very unusual for me to focus only on academics and not have music and--
Speaker 2: So you didn't play at all?
Speaker 1: Some, you know, I got in bands some but not really no it was no two, three hours of practice on my own.  A night-- that ended.  I started to just focus solely on the books.  And to make a long story short.  I began to excel.  I had always been a good student, but I really was--my--my passion was--was the trumpet and piano.  But I really was focused on the books.  And being away from-- the house, being on my own.  It was I mean quite a--quite a challenge and a new and different experience.  But ultimately I got it.  In my first semester, you know, I sort of was feeling my way around and maybe got like an, I don't know high B or, excuse me, a high C low B average something like that.  Next semester I kicked it up.  Bs and finally it was basically straight As.  And I moved into--I then got turned on to the honors program.  And someone tipped me off that you know there's this honors program that you can be as a junior and senior but you've--you've gotta apply and it's a great program.  You take all graduate classes, you know.  And so I got into the honors program had the grades.  And junior and senior so I took graduate courses and I basically I had an M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] in four years.  I had all the course work done.  So my--all my friends from Indiana University are all grad--they were the graduate business school to this day my friends in the Chicago [Illinois] area and elsewhere they were all the graduate students.  And finished and decided to--I could go--it was a five year program so I could go one more year and get the MBA officially but I would just be taking elective courses and that sort of thing.  But I decided to again take a challenge, change, and I applied to a number of business schools Stanford [Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], Harvard, [University of] Chicago [Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], Wharton [School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and others and I got accepted at all of them and I decided to go to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  And to kind of--as kind of a finishing school.  And so I did that for another two years and then finally came out and then went into banking, finance more of what I had studied.
Story_ID: 671399
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people or teachers or--that influenced you at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]?  Were there any?
Speaker 2: Ahh, boy.  I'm gonna get these names totally wrong.  But my finance professor, I believe his name was Goldberg [ph.], he also was my thesis advisor, consultant, I worked and wrote my thesis under him.  He then went on he--ultimately stopped being a professor years later and worked for Fannie Mae, and Fannie Mae's one of our largest clients and did a modeling statistical type things for Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].  But he really--he really challenged me in writing the thesis which was on currency arbitrage between the [BMO] Harris Bank [N.A.] half its clients and the international monetary market which is part of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange [CME Group Inc.].  And don't ask me what--what it was about other than that.  But (laughter) that was the title certainly basically we analyzed the--we--we created --an equation that--that exemplified the--the relationship, the trading relationship between the CME and Harris Bank and currencies.  But nonetheless he really just got me going and I--and I was able to go places and achieve things that I did not believe I was capable of.  I mean even--to this day I read the--I read my thesis and I have a dissertation, I have no idea you know what--it's--it's so technical I don't even understand it (laughter) you know at this point and I wrote it.  You know.  It's just, it was an original piece of work.  You know.  But I just it was a function of him, really.  Get--getting me going.  Boy.  Other individuals in college and you must appreciate it that I'm a very strong-willed individual and again I'm always focused on--on the future.  And I kind of--I just plow through the present to get to the future.  And that school was nothing more than a means to an end.  Remember I'm focused on accumulating wealth and being successful and having influence.  These sort of things.  So--so school was just a means for me to get there.  College, Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]--and I--I wanted to get done with them as quickly as possible so I can get into the work force.  So it's--it's just kind of a blur.  And I--and I did well but I--I did not have other than for the one professor at IU there was not--there was not--I--I did not seek out relationships with professors.  I did my work, I got the grade, I moved on.  That was it.  And you know whether that's good or that's bad I don't know.  But it's a--I'm very--I pick, I determine a goal I think about it and determine a goal and I aggressively go after that goal.  No excuses for not achieving a goal, a real life goal that I've set.  So, again it's my school years are just--they're absolutely a blur.  It's a--there's-- not very little recognition of things.  I just recently started getting back involved in--in Indiana University.  The chancellor's office.  And it has been wonderful to return.  To help raise capital and money for various things.  And--a project I'm working on right now is--is the whole concept of diversity.  And--getting--African Americans alum to actively get involved in the affairs at the university.  And the flip side also contributing.  Which is of, of critical importance.  And having, creating vehicles that, that make it easy and meaningful for us to contribute philanthropically to an organization like IU to make it a better school and reflect better on us as time goes on.
Story_ID: 671400
Speaker 1: But did you get involved in fraternities or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope.
Speaker 1: --any of the social life--
Speaker 2: Nope, my--I was just a, just a very determined student.  I felt that--my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] was a [Phi Beta] Sigma [Fraternity] you know, but I certainly in high--at Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] I was a pre-Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  They had pre-Greeks (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: You know pre-Alpha, pre-Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity], and you know it's--at Indiana University of course that was the--the Alpha chapter of the Kappa, Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.  But I had no time for that.  I just--I didn't disparage it or look askance I just simply had no time.
Speaker 1: You were focused then?  You (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I was--believe me I'm like a Mormon on a mission.  And I became a resident assistant [RA] my junior and senior year so--I had a floor.  But and got--got somewhat involved in student government.  But I was just determined to get the highest grades I possibly could.  And-- move on to other things.
Speaker 1: Were--were there any other black students in finance?
Speaker 2: In the graduate program yes absolutely there were quite a few.  I mean Indiana did a great job of recruiting African Americans.  Even way back then, great job.  And--oh, yeah.  Many--I still have many friends to this day.  And they--they will all tell you the same thing.  I was a little nutty in my--in my determination.  I was known as someone that would study for hours, and hours and hours.  I'd be at the library until eleven o'clock every night.  And--this was self--self-motivated.  And--but I just--I was determined to ultimately sit in this office.  You know.  In Chicago [Illinois].  You know on this day having controlled my own fate.  So I did what I had to do when I wanted to be a musician I realized I had to be the best musician and so I practiced and practiced and practiced and practiced and practiced, you know, and--and, you know, excelled.
Speaker 1: About the time you were really focused on finance people in the mid '70s [1970s] focused on Indiana University as a basketball capital of America-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  With [William] Quinn Buckner and Scottie [Scott Glenn] May and all those guys. Yeah.  Needless to say I didn't go to many basketball games.  And to this day it makes my partner --'causes my partner, co-founding partner no amount of grief that I have little or no interest in sports.  I love participating, but I--I just didn't have time, you know, to go watch a basketball game or a football game.  I had very little interest in it whatsoever.  But you'll have to edit this out (laughter).  In case my business associates see this.  But I was much more interested in just keeping the eye--keeping my eye on the prize.
Story_ID: 671401
Speaker 1: Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], now this is a, this is a school that you said could have finished your master's at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five years--
Speaker 1: --Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  But you--you chose to go to Harvard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep.
Speaker 1: --because of--because of the prestige at Harvard (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course.  I mean the Harvard Business School, for crying out loud.  You know and I--I demonstrated excellence.  And I was ready for a change.  So I applied as--as I said got in.  And Harvard wasn't really a school.  I thought it was a school.  But Harvard really was a business.  And a funny story is that (laughter) black students were asked to come a week early.  The black students, African American Student Union [AASU] suggested well, come a week early let's get you acclimated to the university 'cause it's--it's a difficult place.  We actually went through a couple of cases, we had some course work you know to show you what a case is how it works, the importance of open discussion and communication in class.  And there was a cocktail party one evening.  A few days before class began and coming--I was one of the few students that came straight out of undergrad--most students that eighty-five percent of the student body roughly eighty-five percent, all had work experience.  And then there was fifteen, twelve, at fifteen percent of the student body of the 800 students that were admitted annually.  They came straight from undergrad.  Well obviously since I had you know--and majored in finance and done very well, the honors program the whole nine yards.  And--and certainly there was a great interest in affirmative action and getting matriculating the students of color in the school at that time.  It was--it was a natural for me to--to come straight out of undergrad go--go to school.  Well, back to this cocktail party.  It was in Baker Hall [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] or some place like that.  So I figure, that oh this is like just go to the social.  It's like a social get together.  You know probably have, you know, some beer there something like that.  Maybe even a keg (laughter).  Well, I show up to this cocktail party in my favorite Hoosier overalls, (laughter) a T-shirt and earth shoes.  Which laughter back at the time I don't know if you remember earth shoes but there were kind of wacky looking shoes (laughter).  So I show up to this cocktail party and these brothers and sisters are dressed to the nines.  They look like I look now (laughter) with suits and ties and jackets.  And I have on overalls.  Okay.  Well, (laughter) it was at that moment that I realized Harvard University was a corporation.  Okay.  And I was going to work.  And there was no--school was over.  You know.  Fun was over.  And needless to say as time went on and we began our coursework which basically consisted of three cases a night with a discussion during the--during the--the day.  That you know when you were discussing finance you had in the classroom highly accomplished investment bankers or financiers from all over the world.  I certainly had a conceptual knowledge and an academic knowledge of finance and operations and organizations but to be in a classroom where--in accounting, you're in a classroom where there are ten CPAs [certified public accountant] (laughter) you know it's a, let me tell you it was, it was an interesting (laughter), interesting endeavor.
Story_ID: 192439
Speaker 1: You were telling us about the rarefied atmosphere of Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and the lessons that you learned there.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And again, two key lessons, one, that there is never one right answer to a problem.  That there can be a series of equally good and brilliant responses to a problem.  And the world is an extremely diverse place and its--I think it falls down to hubris for when I think that there's only one way to do something and there's only one right answer.  Now that's foolish.  And the Harvard Business School taught me that.  Because we had a series, we had eighty students in the classroom, many of them brilliant, all approaching the problem from different angles.  From different perspectives.  And--and producing elegant and novel solutions and effective solutions to problems that had been posed in our daily case work.  Secondly, the second lesson learned is that to never, but never accept no as an answer.
Speaker 1: So no is never just no?
Speaker 2: No is never no.  No is a deferred yes is what it is.  But it's through sheer will, determination, focus, and excellence you can turn just about any no into a yes with time.  And those great entrepreneurs, those great businessmen and women and statesmen and women, have often--and are--are regularly told no.  Or your ideas are crazy.  Or whatever the case may be.  And it's just through--through those things that I've mentioned that one overcomes a negative reaction or response to something that you know in your heart is right and should be done.  So I--Harvard Business School was very much a finishing school.  I had all the technical knowledge.  Having been matriculated in an excellent business program at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  But Harvard Business School gave me the confidence to--to go out there and--and achieve.  And whether I'd gone to Harvard Business School or not certainly I felt--I feel that I possess characteristics going into the school and to this day possess the certain characteristics in spite of the school.  But I think that--that the Harvard Business School polished one.  It's polished me and it's given me again the confidence undisputed unassailable confidence to achieve the goals that I've set forth for myself.
Story_ID: 192440
Speaker 1: Who were some of the personalities at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] that you remember that are of note?
Speaker 2: Only one.  Only one.  And that one was a professor by the name of James Cash [James Ireland Cash, Jr.], Jim Cash.  And Dr. Cash, who has since retired.  He's not that old, but he's since retired.  Was a professor of accounting.  In fact, he--that may have been his first year as accounting professor, possibly in '77 [1977], '78[1978].  But nonetheless he was the only African American professor to my recollection at the school and very much we all--all of us black students had such great pride in the fact that he was a professor in a very technical area.  And was a very much loved professor by both black and non-black students.  He--I felt, even though again I've never been very close to any of my professors, really close.  He is the one that I felt the strongest bond for.  And bond with.  And his--and it was very much a role model for me.  He is a big man.  Very soft spoken.  Never raised his voice.  Also used his intelligence to meet a challenge as opposed to screaming or getting irate.  And the students very much respected him.  So he stands out in--in really all my education as one that--I remember distinctly.  And felt very close with.  And in certain respects modeled certain aspects of my behavior after him.
Speaker 1: Did you ever run across Charles [sic, John]Kenneth Galbraith at all?  I mean--
Speaker 2: You know I think I had one, I think he spoke to us once.  But he was a pretty--he was a pretty major league guy.  He was over--he was across the [Charles] River.  The Harvard Business School is in Boston.  The Boston [Massachusetts] side of the Charles [River].  Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] the undergraduate programs, economics, et cetera. law school, they're all on the Cambridge [Massachusetts] side of the Charles.  So rarely did the (unclear) meet.
Story_ID: 192441
Speaker 1: The business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] is separated from the main campus [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and did you--does it--
Speaker 2: It was an island unto itself clearly.  It always used to make us so mad that you know in law school you know--this is the--probably a misconception but in law school, you know, you didn't always have to go to class.  You know, you studied, took your tests and the test probably represented, oh, you know, certainly two-thirds or eighty percent of your grade.  How well you performed that written--written test.  You know the undergrads of course--it was so funny walking across the Charles [River, Massachusetts] into Cambridge Square [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That we would have to pass dorms, undergraduate dorms.  And yeah, you passed--you walked passed these dorms and there's music playing and after we're done with our studies at ten o'clock at night, eleven--there's music playing you hear voices everyone just seems like they're having a good time, you know, all sort of smells wafting out of the (laughter) dorm.  And this went on except for one time, one time during the year and that was I think the month of January, it was called study period.  And it was quiet as a-- church (laughter).  You know in there.  You know they were quiet as mice.  But then back, you know, in February back to the music and carrying on now.  So at the business school all that to say--at the business school we were given three cases a night to study.  And it was too much work for any one person to do.  So you had to do it in a group setting.  You know.  They assigned you--you had to voluntarily put your--put a group together, a team to tackle the issues at the end of the night.  You may have--you may be an accountant and really can nail the accounting case but have--know-nothing about marketing.  Well on your team you could have a marketing specialist and give kind of give you the upper edge on the--on the marketing case and so forth and so on.  But the following day, you had discussed that case openly in a classroom, and I forget the percentages but something like, you know, a third or more of your grade was determined by classroom participation.  I think it actually--it was actually more, I mean forty or fifty or some percentage.  But you must discuss, you must have read that case every single day.  And worse you could potentially get called on by the professor.  You had no idea, you know, what would be the format the following day.  You could get called on, you could volunteer, but if you got called on, and you could not intelligently discuss that case whatever the class may be organizational behavior or statistics, accounting, finance, marketing, whatever it may be, if you could not intelligently and effectively discuss that case before the class, you would essentially get little or very low marks on--in classroom participation.  Which would really harm your grade at the end of the--end of the-- semester.  So there was this constant pressure and also you're gonna be the ridicule of your peers.  So you were given way too much to--work to do every night.  You had--you could only really focus on one or two cases.  You couldn't focus on three cases, it's just too many hours.  There's not enough hours you can--you'd have to--you'd have to not sleep.  To effectively tackle these three major cases.  And then be able to intellectually discuss them the following--and you had to work through teams, and we stayed up late you got up early it was just a horrible existence.  And then on top of that you know they were very secret societies and things and students were getting elected to things you didn't even know about.  It was just a--I mean the relationships being developed with professors, I mean it was like it a corporation.  As I said it was a corporate existence.  And it was quite frightening as a twenty-one-year-old, you know, coming out of school.
Story_ID: 192442
Speaker 1: That raises an interesting point.  That when I thought about it--I knew we were going to be discussing finance.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now that's the-- black people basically as a group, you know, are on the outside of that financial world.
Speaker 2: Woo.
Speaker 1: And having been on the outside for such a long period of time you're probably one of the first generations to even get anywhere close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --to the inside of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: So--so there are traditions that are established, relationships established business is are--is about relationships.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Long-standing relationships--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: --and having assets to be able to participate in that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: This spanned generations.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's--you know the business that I'm in right now, the--where we advise pension funds on their investments in the commercial real estate market.  The whole money management business, the whole pension fund advisory business, I have a degree with honors and high distinction from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  I have a degree from the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] with a specialization in finance.  I didn't know about the pension fund industry.  Truly know.  Until I had been working for the world's largest bank for five or six years.  Because it was a big secret.  It was an industry that one only got into through family, school, and other relationships that black folks just did not have access to.  My kids will understand clearly what I do.  And the fact that there is a six or $7 trillion industry out there of pension capital that invest in all sorts of things from manufacturing companies to stocks and bonds and private equity funds and real estate and a whole host of things, every--everything imaginable, hedge funds.  But this information rightfully or wrongfully never made it to an accomplished student of color.  An accomplished employee at a large financial institution.  I remember hearing something about well Copley Real Estate [Group, Boston, Massachusetts] is a pension fund advisor.  I said, "Oh yeah right."  I could--I could like recite oh Copley, you know, real estate is a pension fund advisor.  But I had no clue that the pension fund--the--the accumulated pension funds in this country represented at that time four or more trillion dollars.  This is a source of capital that again I had no real familiarity about it.  If you had told me in school, "Listen young man, there's $4 trillion of capital in this segment of the economy.  Don't you think it would be a good idea for you figure out how to get into that industry?"  I'd say, "Oh my god you me that's bigger than all the banks put together."  Of course I would say yes I need to be--I need to be in that industry.  "My-goodness I--thank you for letting me know."  But in all the finance courses, and I've taken many finance courses, in all the groups, studies, and all the cases this--this--this--this very large industry was obviously very closed.  And unless you knew what was going on, you know, you would not think to enter it.  I thought I knew about banks and insurance companies, who by the way were big managers of this capital, but I thought of of lending, of loans of the bank or investments from insurance company.  I--I had no clue that they were investing on behalf of others.  This huge industry.  And not only the large banks, but there were small firms that--whose principals became extremely wealthy and whose sons and daughters became extremely wealthy from the management of these funds.  So that was a real shocker, you know, for me.  And exemplifies your point.  Then I don't know if it was that there's this secret capital source was, it was done malevolently or it may simply have been inadvertently left out.  As certainly the pension industry is subject tremendous regulation.  And you know one can easily manage pension fund capital.  It's--it's a registration process with the [U.S.] Securities and Exchange Commission.  You are overseen by the [U.S.] Department of Labor.  It's a very regulated, you know, business.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it kind of got left out of the coursework.
Story_ID: 192443
Speaker 1: We were just talking about the--however it happens--I guess it's through, you know, I guess all of the political problems that blacks folks have had in the United States coming in educational problems, being shut out of this and that and the other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Coming down to when the--when we talk about the real core money in the U.S. we're really not in it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it would be hard to know about certain-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean even--
Speaker 1: --this that and the other.
Speaker 2: --even to this day--even to this day the percentage of assets, managed pension assets, managed by minority-owned concerns--if it's 1 percent, I'd be surprised.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: If it's a half a percent, I'd probably find that more reasonable.  It's a very small percentage. Yet, you know, in many of these municipalities the retirants make up forty, fifty percent or more of the beneficiaries.  So it'sthe situation is still poor.  And it's--it's changing, certainly.  For my own, I mean we're--we're a sizable firm.  But there are too few of us.  There's too few of me in this business.  And it's because we are systematically, consciously, somewhat subconsciously kept out.  Real estates another area that is kind of secret, you know.  It's only of late that you know you have real estate programs at schools being developed and students talk about getting into real estate.  Again, when I--I decided to get into the commercial real estate sector or the industry the same way that I decided to get out of music and go into finance.  Just one day upon reflection--upon, you know, pursuing this goal of--of accumulating wealth, and really making the world a different place.  A better place for my being here.  I felt that just one day real estate was gonna be the vehicle that I was gonna do this.  And--and I was just walking--walking on campus at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] I had to declare a major, think about you know an area of specialization what I'm gonna do after I get out of school and it just kind of came to me.  And I have--and no clear idea other than in the math, people, I very much loved architecture.  And so real estate, but I naively then went and got into the business.  And thank God there were programs like that at Citicorp, with these large banks and insurance companies training programs that allowed students like me to--to get into and learn business.  Unfortunately many of those programs do not exist today.  But real estate was an industry that you know certainly the banks the lending organizations, to a certain extent and very modest certain extent the investments banks sorta, kinda had sort of programs.  But to go work for a developer out of Harvard Business School--forget about it.  Unless either A, you had a family member that was--owned a firm or working in the business.  Or B, you had some close family tie or friend or school friend that was in the business and invited you in.
Story_ID: 192444
Speaker 1: Inheritance plays a big part in all this.  Inheritance and who you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not only financial, but cultural and you know inheritance.  I mean its--the ability it's--access to information and opportunity on an unleveled playing field.  That you uniquely will have because of your family, friends, etc.  That unfortunately--and not only that you have but you will not share outside of your--your acceptable group that you know we know, we know [HM] Quintin [Primo, III] because he's part of our--he's part of our accepted groups and therefore we're gonna let him in.  We like him.  And this if I were white.  And we like him, we want him in our--we want--we want him--I want him working next to me.  You know, I knew his father.  I knew his grandfather you know and so forth and so on.  And the real estate industry has heretofore for many years been a private industry.  Only until recently in the last effectively, the last ten years or so has it been a publicly--a publicly held industry.  Traded on the New York Stock Exchange or NASDAQ [Stock Market].  And with-- trading on an exchange comes transparency, you know.  Comes regulation, comes oversight.  But when you're private, you're primarily largely a private industry you can do things privately.  So you can bring your nephew, your cousin, your daughter, your son into a business and you own the company.  Do what you want.  Okay.  A publicly traded--publicly held real estate investment trust, you can certainly bring your cousin or your daughter or your son into the business, but it's much more of a meritocracy.  And there--there better be a very, very good reason why they should succeed you as--as chairman or chairwoman.  And so--or be a senior partner because of the view this nepotism that's not--that's viewed unfavorably in corporate America and it's viewed unfavorably in publicly traded real estate investment vehicles.  So, real estate as the industry has changed significantly over the years.  But its--and these are--these are, pension fund industry-- these are examples of industries that are huge.  The real estate industry, commercial real estate--the institution of commercial real estate industry is between 3 and $4 trillion of market value.  Yet there are maybe, possibly, 200 black professionals maybe working--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --in the industry.  Those numbers make no sense.  Okay.  Pension fund and let's try maybe 1 percent or less of what is now 6 to $8 trillion of capital.  In fact these days I think there are more like $10 trillion--when you add up all the 401ks and everything else, more like 10 trillion dollars of capital.  Maybe 1 percent, maybe 1 percent is managed by a minority-owned firm.  So, you know, things are changing but there's still, there great discrepancies, there's great inequalities, and in my firm here we are the largest minority-owned real estate investment firm in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that ain't saying much 'cause there are very few of us out there doing this.
Story_ID: 192445
Speaker 1: What did you do when you came out of Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]?  What did you do immediately (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That's about 1979 I guess or--
Speaker 2: It was 1979.  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I-- in 1978 I had worked as a summer associate at Citicorp [later, Citigroup, Inc.] real estate.  So I went into real estate that summer.  Between my first and second years of business school.  And then when I came out in '79 [1979] I took the job they offered me.  And I worked in New York [New York] for a few years and transferred to Chicago [Illinois].  And worked in the Chicago office, and eventually ran a chunk of it years later.  So that would have been officially 1979 to 19--late '87 [1987].  Is my--my years at Citicorp.  But again, Citicorp had afforded me and others a--a window in to the commercial real estate industry.  God only knows why, you know, I decided real estate.  Again I felt that you know wealth accumulation, ability to do things, was best in this fragmented private industry.  But I didn't know that for a fact.  So, at Citicorp I was a young analyst.  And again I was determined to eventually have my own firm.  So, my methods were to work my behind off and excel.  And with the help of a few mentors at the bank I was able to do that.
Story_ID: 192446
Speaker 1: So you got involved in real estate investment and--
Speaker 2: Right.  My--
Speaker 1: So you're at Citicorp [later, Citigroup Inc.] now, I think--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --in the chronology.
Speaker 2: It's--at Citicorp my primary function was to make loans to major commercial developers and owners of real estate in the Midwest region of the country.  I worked in the Chicago [Illinois] office eventually and ended up running one of the teams that lent capital to the market.  But it was--it gave me--I learned the business.  I learned the business at Citicorp.  I had the opportunity to learn the business.  And I worked at it.  I-- didn't have much personal life back then.  I actually still don't today.  But nonetheless it was a tremendous opportunity to meet people.  Real estate is essentially a relationship business.  People do business with those that they know and trust.  Another reason why African Americans or other minorities have such a hard time getting into the business, because unless I know your dad, your mom, or relation or what have you, or have done business with you for many years, the risk that is posed in doing business with you is--is high.
Speaker 1: Yeah and then but there aren't many African Americans with real estate either.
Speaker 2: No it's--
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: It's-- just it's--
Speaker 1: Kind of keeps you out of the--
Speaker 2: But it's again--it's changing.  And it's my-- fellow bankers and investment bankers are slowly matriculating into the industry as entrepreneurs.  And really--and accomplishing really significant things.  There are certain trends going on in the industry today that i.e. the redevelopment of urban America kind of a domestic emerging markets.  I think will be a--a propeller of African American entrepreneurship in the real estate industry during the course of the next ten years or so.  Various trends I think will help change the complexion of the business.  But still it's primarily a Caucasian and Jewish business.
Story_ID: 192447
Speaker 1: I think in the early '80s [1980s] I guess when you were getting started in this--the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois] was being purchased by a number of developers, you know, and the properties, you know, seemed to just lay fallow for a long time before they were actually developed.  And they set for a while.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so you have to be patient I guess in some--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Now you look at the South Loop in Chicago--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it's-- dynamic.  It's-- booming.  The housing, thousands and thousands of units that have been developed.  The entire landscape has been completely changed.  Now following the housing, you have retail outlets.  You know the IKEAs, and Walmarts and the major chains.  The grocery stores, and the night clubs.  It's--it's all--the fancy restaurants.  I mean it's--it's an amazing thing to watch.  But it's-- something that's going on across the country not just in Chicago.  And empty nesters move back downtown.  As the echo boomers start renting and owning properties on the other end of the curve and they're primarily urban dwellers as opposed to suburban dwellers.  So you have a true renaissance of downtown areas in major cities throughout the country.  And again this is, in my opinion, gonna be one of the drivers of having greater minority involvement in the industry.  Certainly you can go over to Pilsen [Chicago, Illinois] and do all the development you want, but, you know, being Hispanic American yeah could help.  Being from that area and Hispanic American is even better.  But the trick is accessing that capital.  And--and increasingly as major institutional investors start running out of opportunities in suburban America, they are going to increasingly turn to urban markets.  And again if we play our cards right, we can be major shapers and governors of what goes on and how that capital gets deployed.
Story_ID: 192448
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois], we have a dynamic where the black community is being affected on the low end by the displacement of the projects and the closing of the big high-rise projects of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] which is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which has a location that's adjacent to the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Which--which could make it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In real estate: location, location, location.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what Arthur Rubloff always used to say.
Speaker 1: And the other--and the other--who used to say that?
Speaker 2: Arthur Rubloff.
Speaker 1: Oh, Arthur Rubloff.  Who--who
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --was a man that bought up most--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Basically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Then they--they have the like corridor along State Street [Chicago, Illinois] too--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where the Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] had been.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Knocked down and--
Speaker 2: All part of the transformation project of the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] which has been funded both by the city, and heavily by the federal government.  And to a certain extent by the State [of Illinois].  But Housing and Urban Development, Department of Housing and Urban--HUD.  Is plowing hundreds of millions of dollars essentially into these communities to allow a partnership with local players to correct that experiment that went awry in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] and that is--primarily '60s [1960s] with the early '70s [1970s] with--with public housing.  It--it was a, you know, it was an experiment that turned out horribly.  And that--yeah.  Well, specifically what's going on with the transformation project here, is unquestionably part of the urban phenomenon of the new urbanism that is taking place across the--across the country in its major markets.  And clearly there are gonna be losers, no question.  And I think the Chicago model has been a good one in attempting to find homes and apartments for those displaced.  In scattered site locations throughout the city.  In attempting to, secondly, necessarily have mixed use and--and mixed income housing in these footprints that are being redeveloped.  With the idea that combining affluent and poor will help bootstrap poor folks up by giving them you know role models, so to speak.  And giving them access to things that they would not normally see as simply residents of dilapidated public housing.  This--this experiment may--may not work.  But the--the inevitability of the redevelopment of Cabrini-Green is--is clear.  With that location.  With--a move of empty numbers--empty nesters into the Chicago area, with the growth of young people being attracted to the Chicago area, with the heavy heretofore immigration--foreign immigration, again favors urban markets over the secular period.  So that you have all these forces causing revitalization of the urban market place.  With a location like Cabrini-Green that's the only--that's the only--where the Gold Coast can go.  You know Lincoln Park can go is Cabrini-Green.  So it's--it's inevitable that whether fair or unfair that these areas will be reclaimed now.  Again the CHA and their transformation project are doing, I think a great job in attempting to making the disruption for the residents as low as possible.  But as I said, there will be losers.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's no question--
Story_ID: 192449
Speaker 1: What's your analysis of the--of why the public housing experiment failed and I mean it--there was an article I think in the [Chicago] Tribune [Chicago, Illinois] Sunday about the success of public housing when it first began.  The Ida B. Wells [Homes, Chicago, Illinois], management by Robert Taylor and other people you know of--of that property.  And the federal money that was put in to maintain it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: I think a lot--a lot of reasons.  I'm not an expert in any way, shape, or form.  But, basically you stacked a bunch of poor minorities on top of each other.  You did not invest in these areas the necessary infrastructure, whether it be street cleaning, police, fire, what have you.  And most importantly schools.  You--you could not create an environment whereby jobs were being created.  You found that jobs were fleeing and employers were fleeing to the suburbs, yet these residents could not flee with those jobs.  So you have high unemployment.  Lousy schools, lack of investment.  And I think you know, not surprisingly, that you are a product of your environment.  You know it's a very complicated issue, there's no question.  But you better believe you know--I mean this in all due respect, but you better believe if the mayor's [Mayor Richard M. Daley] mom lived in the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority], and the projects, that project would be in good shape.  Okay.  And--and it's--it's a testament to the mayor that he moved from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] into the city--CityPlace project I think that's what it's called.  Just in the South Loop and that area has you know very--it was a bold move.  And but it's-- a prime example of those with children now out of the house coming and living closer to the hip--you know, city where before then would the area that he now lives and his family that was a run-down factories old--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Old housing--
Speaker 1: People called it Skid Row--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Absolutely.  A lot of bums.  I'm sure some prostitution.  But now it's a gleaming--it's like--like the city of Oz.  You know it's beautiful.  You have the futuristic Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] right across the way.  You have museum campus.  I mean it's just an extraordinary revitalization of--of an area.  And the mayor kind of put his--what's the expression, kind of let his feet do the walking.  But he-- so was encouraging of this area and he decided to live there.  Yeah so it's--it's a--an area like that development is mixed use.  As many of the elements that are--are critical to the successful revitalization of an inner city in run-down--historically run-down areas.  And it's an experiment that is working right now.  Clearly, having black folks and people of color living on top of each other with many, too many people in an apartment, no investment truly in the infrastructure and the like.  No real control, no real self-determination or governance, you know.  I don't care who it is eventually it's gonna be a self-fulfilling prophecy.  So again it's very complicated.  There's no question, but we're attempting that model is dead.  Right, wrong, who knows what the reasons were really.  It's dead.  It's over now.
Story_ID: 192450
Speaker 1: Are black people gaining anything from some of this transition from all this movement you know there's opportunities, I guess, so--
Speaker 2: I hope so.  I hope that in areas like the Gap [Chicago, Illinois] and--and others on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and West Side [Chicago, Illinois] that--that as--as areas improve economically that means prices for properties go up.  And of course there are gonna be those families and individuals that sell and run.  To the extent they even own.  But I--I'm very--I'm very optimistic about the ability of people of color to harvest some of the benefits directly of their areas improving.  I think that, I think it's-- it's a natural that schools will improve.  The job situation is always a challenge in the city there's no question.  But there are various things being done by this administration [Mayor Richard M. Daley] to improve the schools in the city of Chicago and I think--I think that they are genuine and they are sincere.  And this well help those that own property in these areas.  I think again values will rise.  This will allow families to refinance their homes and now at very low interest rates.  And take out capital for rehabilitation of their homes or for savings, or what have you.  But I think it is--that we will necessarily, as a people, share in, like we haven't shared before in the past.  In the--in the redevelopment of urban America.  Certainly there are going to be those, you know, white carpet baggers and others that come in and steal away all the economic benefit of an area or a project with little or no minority involvement, no jobs, no nothing.  So at the end of the day, you will have a retail center that was built by a white developer owned by a white owner, leased to majority white, you know, public health stores.  But the good news is that, have those stores that are being built that retail center that's built 87th and Stony Island [Chicago, Illinois] that's to serve a minority population.  To provide services and goods that historically these areas have not gotten.  Do we need another retail center, another you know 500,000 square foot retail center in Barrington [Illinois] where I currently live?  No.  Do we need one you know at Kostner [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and Madison [Street, Chicago, Illinois] on the West Side?  Yes.  Because you know in Austin [Chicago, Illinois] for instance often time the residents have to get on the bus to go buy a pint of milk.  Okay.  That area needs major retail.  However it is difficult to do.  It's difficult to assemble land.  The land is typically tainted with chemicals or, you know, it's some kind of browns field in nature.  So it's--it's not easy.  But nonetheless to answer your question, I sincerely believe that black and Hispanic people will, this go around, share in the economic benefits that will accrue to an area, revitalizing.
Story_ID: 192451
Speaker 1: Is there--as the present looks futuristic in your thinking are you looking at a particular area for investment that you can talk about I know (laughter) it's all sensitive stuff so may be no--
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: That you're looking--'cause I know like [Arthur] Rubloff you know spotted the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois] I guess early on--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --before anybody else and he bought up as much as he could.  I mean is there--was there a particular part of town that looks like it's--
Speaker 2: Well, what we--what we do is not so much target particular parts of  town as much as we target opportunities across the United States in-- the top twenty to thirty metropolitan areas.  So it typically our--our financings and our joint venture equity investments--we are typically brought opportunities by the developers and owners and prospective joint venture partners in both urban and suburban markets throughout the country.  Like in these major twenty to thirty markets.  We secondly have a natural specialization in multifamily.  We like the multifamily apartment markets.  Of our $7 billion in assets that we control on behalf of institutional investors, probably, you know, 90 percent--85 percent--80 to 85 percent of those assets are multifamily investments.  So it's--it's a product type.  It's a property type that we very much like.  Again there are a host of reasons why we--why we like multifamily better than office or hotel or industrial or retail for that matter.  But we would typically be doing multifamily investment--investments in multifamily property.  Whether urban or suburban throughout the country.  Now, increasingly we are investing in urban markets, increasingly.  In Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], LA [Los Angeles, California], San Francisco [California], in New York [New York], northern New Jersey, Boston [Massachusetts], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], southern Florida, Dallas [Texas], Denver [Colorado], and so forth and so on.  Seattle [Washington].  And we like these markets.  If we're--we've not done as much in Chicago as I would have liked.  Because Chicago is a very slow growth community.  And the opportunities are very--are very hotly competed against.  And we tend to like to avoid competition you know.  We like to do things that are more unique.  That have more issues to them.  Which allows us to apply our unique skills and abilities and achieve higher returns given that property may have some issues for our--for our investors. But we've been very successful at what we do.  And we hope to continue to do it for quite some time to come.
Story_ID: 192452
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]--real estate in Chicago is really hotly contested and I mean it's--there are cities where it's amazing to go to a city like Detroit [Michigan] or Columbus, Ohio and see a--programs where the city will give you a building for a dollar--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.  That doesn't exist it here [Chicago, Illinois] does it?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah to a certain extent.
Speaker 1: Does it?
Speaker 2: There are a number of programs that you can get--a homeowner can get all sorts of subsidies and programs, incentive programs to-- develop or to--to prove to the--rehabilitate their home.  And also, you know, there are all sorts of city, county, state, and federal programs available to--to--for the promotion of economic development and rehabilitation in--in markets like that are targeted to be an enterprise zones, empowerment zones.  All sorts of tax policy and other things that are done.  So if-- you want to, if you want to seriously improve a neighborhood, if you wanna you know--the mayor hates a--blighted areas or empty you know empty properties that have no development on them, just empty blocks.  And there have been programs over the past that you can pick up those properties for little or next to nothing.  For their taxes.  For their, you know, for their delinquent taxes.  Tax sales that occur all the time.  So it's, you know, there is, there's definitely--there's definitely a--a concerted effort by polities or political entities in this city and state to get those markets--to get these urban areas stabilized and redeveloped.
Story_ID: 192453
Speaker 1: You went into business for yourself in--with--
Speaker 2: In 1988 originally.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had been at Citicorp [later, Citigroup, Inc.] for what would have been eight years officially.  And at that time, as I had mentioned, I always wanted to be an entrepreneur.  And again don't ask me why.  I--I can give you a whole bunch of reasons but I'm not sure any of them are really the true reason.  But, suffice it to say, I had very much wanted to control my own destiny.  When I left Citicorp I had a number of opportunities that I looked at.  One was becoming commissioner [Robert Mier] of economic development in the [Mayor] Eugene Sawyer administration.  Working for a gentleman by the name of Robert Meir [ph.] who was kind of a--a super commissioner.  I think he may have been the mayor's chief of staff at that point.  Secondly, I had spoken with a--a major investment banking firm, Goldman Sachs.  A good friend of mine who I went to [Harvard] Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] with, ran the real estate area and he invited me to come over and--and join him.  Which was very--very appealing at that time.  In the Chicago [Illinois] office.  Thirdly, I had found a partner and he had encouraged me to kind of make the move, get out of Citicorp, and let's do some business together.  Let's--let's form a firm.  And I decided to do the latter--with this gentleman.  I started a company called Primo Herring and Company.  To make a very long story short, when I went out to seek capitalization for this company my partners really didn't like my partner and--for a number of reasons.  And in fact, my--my mentor, and lead investor was a gentleman by the name of Marshall Bennett.  And Marshall is a--a legend in the Chicago real estate and national real estate industry.  He's--he's very old now but he still has all his facilities and he still is lively and is still doing deals well into his '70s and early '80s.  And my partner at that time was a gentleman by the name of Tom Herring [ph.].  And I--we went in to see Marshall.  And Marshall had been introduced to us through our accounting firm, who had given us free office space.  My good friend, Howard Shapiroand I can't recall the accounting firm at this--the name of the accounting firm it changed a number of times, but he--he--I worked with him at--on the board of Chicago Sinfonietta.  He felt I had talent and promise and he said, "Listen, you need a place to going get started--please--we'll give you free office space just use us as your accountants."  And I said, "Great."  He said, "I have a friend that may be interested in doing something with you--you are seeking capital, he's a rich man.  Why don't--he's one of the clients of the firm. I'd be more than happy to introduce you to him."  And we said, "Certainly, Howard, we'd love to meet him."  Well that man was Marshall Bennett.  And we sat down, my partner and I sat down with Bennett and he had read the business plan that we had put together and, you know, and he said, "Well, fellows," he said, "I just got really, you know, it looks like a good idea you got here, well documented.  It looks like you--you can make some money, do well."  He says, "What--and I just got one question, and that question is, what happens if I give you a 100,000 bucks and you lose it?"
Story_ID: 192454
Speaker 1: So he [Marshall Bennett] asked me one question (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: One question, right.
Speaker 1: And basically again, that if I invest a hundred grand which you've asked me for, as your lead investor, and you go out of business and I lose that entire $100,000 what are you gonna do?  And I turned to my partner at that time and Tom [Herring (ph.)] said, "Well, you know, it's a risky world out here.  You know it's--it's an equity investment and you lose your money, you know.  I don't know what it is we can do, you know.  Such is life."  He turned to me and, "[HM] Quintin [Primo, III], well, what--what would you do?  What are you gonna do if you lose it--if you lose my money?"  I said, "If I lose your equity investment in my firm I will consider that equity investment a loan and I'll pay it back, every penny.  Irrespective of what time it takes me to pay you back.  Because I am a man of my word and no one loses money on me."  And that was the right answer.  Albeit a foolish answer, (laughter) but the right answer (laughter).  Tom was a little older than me and much wiser.  But nonetheless we proceeded to lose all my--all Mr. Bennett's money.
Speaker 2: Did you lose it really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We went out of business.  We--we started in '88 [1988] peak of the market and rode the economy--rode the real estate markets down to the worst real estate market since the [Great] Depression.  In the early '90s [1990s].  And Marshall later confided to me after I went out of business in '90 [1990]--'91 [1991] he--he confided that he said, "Listen don't feel so bad."  Later, much later he said, "We all experienced the same thing.  We all lost money.  I just had,"--this is Marshall speaking--"I just had a lot more zeroes, a couple more zeroes the money I lost, than the money you lost."  But--I--that was years and years ago.  And I never forgot my promise to Marshall Bennett.  And I'm happy to report that this year in 2004 should be fourteen is that excuse is that, that's a sixteen years, sixteen years later.  I will make my third installment of a contribution to Marshall's--one of Marshall's favorite charities.  Basically actually, it's not a charity, it's a school, the Roosevelt School, Chicago School of Real Estate [Marshall Bennett Institute of Real Estate, Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], where I made a substantial contribution to have that school established and under Marshall's guidance.
Story_ID: 192455
Speaker 1: And at this point Marshall [Bennett] and I are just about even.  So Marshall told me that not only was he impressed with the promise that I made way back when in 1987, '88 [1988], but that even more impressed how I behaved when the chips were down.  And I experienced some horrible times in the early '90s [1990s].  I was flat broke.  I didn't go bankrupt, but effectively was bankrupt.  I lost my house, my wife and I lost our house.  Lost a couple hundred thousand, my wife and my money.  It was horrible, a very terrible thing and it was represented an--an absolute failure on my part.  But Marshall says to me I-- handled myself with great dignity, and integrity and had no idea how I was gonna ever pay him back or, but we came up with this idea, why don't you know--why don't I support this school that's so important to you, Marshall.  Why don't I write you a check over time about that same amount?  And which I have.  And so he is--continues to be one of my strongest supporters and mentors.  And in this business, supporters or mentors are very, very, very, very important.
Speaker 2: That's a way of getting in this network I guess is to have those kind of relationships.  You have to have 'em--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And the--you can't--they don't happen overnight.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It takes tremendous time.
Story_ID: 192456
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the--how you launched Capri Capital [Partners Llc, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Capri, after picking myself--dusting myself off and starting all over again as my daughter [Francesca (ph.) Primo] tells me, we put together a business plan.  I got permission from my wife [Diane Jones Primo] to do this one more time.  I was a die-hard entrepreneur and I felt that the economy got the better of me, you know, the first go around.  Plus I made some really foolish mistakes.  And I wanted one more chance to do this.  And my wife agreed.  My wife is a graduate of Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Smarter than I am.
Speaker 1: Is that where you met her?
Speaker 2: No I met her actually, my partner in this business Daryl [J.] Carter, introduced me to my wife at a house party that neither my wife nor I wanted to go to.  We just happened to be there.  We both were being brought by friends that wanted to go to the party and while at the party he introduced me to my wife to be.  So I owe him.  But we've been married for twenty years now.  We celebrated our twentieth wedding anniversary.  But--but nonetheless, I put together a business plan, got permission from my wife.  She said well I'm gone let do this, but you gotta have the business plan done by this date.  You gotta get the capitalization by that date you gotta close and up and operating by that date.  Actually her date for capitalizing and commencing the business was December 1, 1992.  Which was about a year and a half forward.  And I--Daryl and I founded the business and December 2nd, on December 2, 1992.  So I just missed it by a day.  But nonetheless it was good to have that motivation at home.  But we put together--we put together a business plan.  Daryl and he gave me a call one day and said what was I doing.  He was entrepreneur as well.  I said not much.  Trying to put together this business plan, you know trying to raise money for this in real estate investment firm.  He said oh, I'm trying to do the same thing.  Let's put our--let's put our heads together.  Let's--let's you know--you need a West coast partner.  I said absolutely.  So we split everything 50/50, down the middle.  We ended up getting capitalized by a British investment firm, real estate investment organization, proper management company called Chesterton.  And we called the company Carter Primo Chesterton.  And we commenced that company on December the 2nd, 1992.  Chesterton had originally promised us $1 million but you know the corporate process going to the boards, we ended up with a $100,000.  Which they said to us you probably don't want to take a 100,000 bucks given that's it totally inadequate for the--for your--the needs that you identified.  But we said, "No, no, we'll take the 100 grand to start the business and get some stationery and get to a major conference and off to the races."  So we did that.  And started Carter Primo Chesterton.  They ultimately were bought out by us five years later.  We bought them out for between 3 and $4 million.  So it was a--a very good hundred grand investment, you know, on their part.  We then recapitalized the company and renamed--renamed the company Capri.  Which is an amalgamation of our two last names, Carter and Primo.  So Capri Capital was officially renamed as such in I believe 1998.
Story_ID: 192457
Speaker 1: I've read that--that you and your partner [Daryl Carter] have contrasting styles of management.
Speaker 2: I'm always right, he's always wrong (laughter).  That's the contrasting styles.  No, in light of my earlier comments about not being there'll never be the one solution to any problem.  Yeah.  Daryl is my good friend and really very much the brother I never had.  He is very focused on the bottom line.  He's very cost conscious.  You know he's a great you know he's--you know--he'd make a dollar stretch for--for years.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: You know, he's frugal and very practical.  Focused on, you know, how to make payroll, you know, next week or next month.  I tend to be much more the risk taker.  Much more a strategist.  As I said earlier on I'm focused more on what can be and what could be.  And fearlessly convincing my partners to go along and go out on a limb.  Daryl's always checking the integrity of that limb (laughter) whenever we venture out into business and architect.   But my role is to push the envelope and challenge my associates.  And so we make a very good--we make a very team.  He's also a big jock.  He understands all that sports stuff.  He's a golf player.  He plays golf rather. You know he's very much a relationship person.  I--very social as well, but tend to--I much more enjoy being in my office just thinking and strategizing and creating.  So we make a fast and good team.  We've always maintained that that we each, individually would be very successful on our own as entrepreneurs.  But together we're a force to be reckoned with.  And the fact that we've grown from zero dollars under management in 19--December of 1992 to just about 7 billion today, speaks to the--the synergy of the two of us together.  And we don't we--we argue.  We used to argue a lot more we don't--we've gotten old and slow.  So we don't- we really don't argue anymore really about anything.  It's--we look at the world slightly differently, but it's--and we've gotten to the point where we so trust each other's judgment that if one of us feels very, very strongly about something then the other will--99 point 9 percent of the time defer.  Unless the other partner likewise feels very, very strongly and so it's--but it's a very respectful debate.
Story_ID: 192458
Speaker 1: We've given each other areas of responsibility.  And technically and organizationally Daryl [Carter] runs the mortgage banking business and I run the equity investments business.  But in matters like, for instance, where we're capitalizing the firm right now, for $100 million we have an investor that's gonna invest 90 to 100 million and Daryl's role has been to foster the relationship with this investor.  Who he's known for many years.  And my responsibility is to structure the investment and position the company in such a way through the structure that it will be able to thrive and double, triple, quadruple in size over the course of the next seven to ten years.  All achieved through all-and--that we both make lots and lots and lots and lots and lots of money.  Which is all achieved today, not all achieved, but it's--unless its structured properly today, all that cannot happen.  Oh, it's a lot of hard work and effort on everyone's part and our employees and staff, but if ain't structured right, today, seven years of work can result in not a lot of benefit to anyone.  So it's--we realize that what we put together today will have lasting, lasting impact.  We make all our money today.  Effectively through this--this structure.  Our money is made right now.  It's realized later.  But it's made right now.
Story_ID: 192459
Speaker 1: What advice would you give young African Americans interested in getting involved in the investment--
Speaker 2: To not accept no as an answer (laughter).  To push forward.  We've recently, and I co-founded an organization called the Real Estate Executive Council [REEC].  And what it is, I'm now chairman of that.  What it is--is--it's a year old organization that is the national association for minority professionals in real estate.  It's the first time that we as a group have ever come together on a national basis.  And very similar to the Union of Black Episcopalians which my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.] co-founded years, and years ago.  We--for us to get our fair share of participation in the real estate industry, we have to do a better job of communicating amongst ourselves.  Giving each other access to opportunity, ideas, capital.  We discovered amazingly that there were some powerhouses that we didn't even know about or didn't realize in our industry already controlling billions, and billions, and billions of dollars of capital and opportunity.  And I'm happy to say that in our first year of being in business we've had some extraordinary results.  We now have members of--of REEC as we call it, doing hundreds of millions of dollars in business between members of the group.  Hundreds of millions.  So you know it is as my-- recommendation to someone coming into the business is first seek out organizations like REEC and others.  And also in the traditionally white national organizations like Urban Land Institute you know.  The National Housing Multifamily Council.  Other organizations that have as its mission, education, association, business and the like.  Secondly, I'd--I'd suggest to that student that to the extent he or she wants to get into a very contained, very real exclusive industry like real estate, demonstrate first excellence in the task they had at hand which was--which is school.  They must demonstrate strong grades.  An active involvement, extracurricular involvement.  They have to demonstrate themselves to be leaders.  And if they do that they should have no trouble entering the industry.  But the development of technical skills, mathematical skills, analytical skills these sorts of things are--are critical to getting the respect of your fellow associates, primarily Caucasian and others in this business.  I think thirdly, in real estate one must be extremely, extremely aggressive.  Kind of like never accepting no.  But truly one must be--one must absolutely, aggressively pursue the industry.  Because there's very limited opportunities, very limited windows--open windows.  You're still very much controlled by family members and the like and you just gotta get knee deep into the business and aggressively seek out those that might, might be able to employ you or guide you in some way shape or form.  It's a very tough business to get into.  Yeah.  There are no longer those training programs at Citicorp [later, Citigroup, Inc.] and Prudential [Financial, Inc.] and others they just don't exist in the numbers that they did when I was coming out, wanting get in the business.
Story_ID: 192460
Speaker 1: And those training programs were caused by pressure from the black community, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was kind of the, it was the '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s] you know affirmative action was alive and well.  And there was a conscious desire on the part major multinational companies to do business and to matriculate people of color within the schools I mean the whole nine yards.  You know so but beyond--beyond simply just African Americans Hispanic Americans and other Asians--now there seem to be other Asian Americans and other minorities there was a--these organizations had the money to spend to train young MBA [Master of Business Administration] types like myself.  Citicorp [later, Citigroup, Inc.] now is not as actively involved in the real estate industry as they once were.  And the market, you know, the market kind of--the stock market basically once the debacle of the '90s [1990s] was over and tremendous were losses were realized in the real estate sector, banks like Citicorp and others were forced to move out of it.  Okay.  So there-- no major lending programs like there were at like the commercial banks.  The S and L [Savings and Loan] industry doesn't exist virtually anymore.  There--the thrifts were--which were from the backbone of the Resolution Trust Corporation, of the RTC, which basically took up all these aliening thrifts and sold all their assets into the market place.  You know the thrift industry just basically disappeared.  So again that was a source of training programs for young individuals.  Insurance companies likewise had tremendous regulatory issues and the likes.  So there's been a movement away from training masses of young students--taking masses of college students and MBA students and bringing them into these organizations.  Unless they have some very relevant experience.  There's--if you have eight to ten years of experience in this business, it's a lot easier getting a job.  If you've got zero years of experience again it boils down to relationship and a lot other things to get into this industry at this point.
Story_ID: 192461
Speaker 1: Tell me about your civic activity and some of the--I know--you're involved in several initiatives and boards, you know, to improve the community.
Speaker 2: My community and charitable involvement, next to God, my family, and this business [Capri Capital Partners Llc, Chicago, Illinois] they represent the most important thing that I do.  My community activities represent my ministry.  In this city and in this country.  I am a not a minister.  I don't wanna be a minister.  But the--the code of ethics, the--the constant assisting of the poor and those in need, the sick and the ailing, that I saw in my parents, obviously had a dramatic impact on me.  So I am chairman of something called the Primo Center for Women and Children [Chicago, Illinois] which is named after my father [Quintin E. Primo, Jr.].  It's--it's a women's transitional shelter for first stage homeless.  It sits in the middle of the battle field out there in West Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois] on Washington [Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois], West Washington.  And it's twenty-two beds.  It's my passion.  We've gone so far as to have over for Christmas the family and others that are in the shelter.  They are the most needy and the most disenfranchised and the most difficult.  And therefore they get most of my time.  I'm involved in the--a member of the executive community of the Chicago Community Trust [Chicago, Illinois].  Which has a long tradition of investing in black and Hispanic areas across the city in the south and west sides.  They're basically a philanthropic organization.  You know I'm certainly on the art scene.  I--remember I'm--I'm a musician.  I love music I've been--I--sat on the board of Ravinia Festival Association [Highland Park, Illinois] and very much have been very interested in their inner city programs.  I--I was a cofounder of Chicago Sinfonietta.  Which is a multicultural, multiethnic symphony orchestra founded here by Maestro Paul Freeman many years ago.  I serve on the board of University of Chicago Hospitals [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] which is on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And the reason I serve on that board is so that people of color that are poor can get health care.  Which, that emergency room is full of on any given night.
Story_ID: 192462
Speaker 1: I very much have dedicated much of my life--to my family's disappointment often times given that it's the time that I would have spent with them--I am down here at board meetings and the like.  But its--again it's my ministry and its--I realized as I continue to work hour after hour after hour after hour here, building this company one day it truly struck me that one of the key reasons if not the key reason I wanted to accumulate such wealth is because I wanted to give it away.  I wanted to invest in people's future.  I wanted to make the place a better place than from what I found.  And I know I just I cannot--I cannot even explain in words how much this drives me.  And so it's greater than my partnership.  Daryl's [Daryl Carter] always saying you know stop giving away so much money (laughter) don't give it--you can't give it all away you know.  But I'm clearly the--the one writing the checks and--and putting it out.  And Daryl is, "We gotta control costs.  Man, come on we can't give everything away can we."  But we can actually give everything away.  But thank God I have him around so I don't.  But this is a--this--this my--my community involvement, my charitable work, very much defines me.  It is--it-- allows me to demonstrate the compassion that I have for those that were not so fortunate to have a father that's a minister and a mother that was a school teacher or lived--grew up in a white neighborhoods that had great schools or you know went to a Big Ten school [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] or had mentors like Marshall Bennett.  I'm a product of my environment.  And certainly I have worked very, very hard, but I've had some very powerful people watching over me.  And certainly I've stepped up to the plate no question.  But I don't think for a minute that I'm truly a self-made man.  Now that's nonsense.  It is nonsense.
Story_ID: 192463
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I think the most important thing that we as African Americans must do in order to ensure the--the survival and moreover the thriving of our race over the course of the next fifty years or more is that we must take--we must be accountable for our actions.  We must take responsibility for ourselves.  We cannot blame anyone other than ourselves at this point for our success or lack of success.  I think it's incumbent upon those like myself and others that have been very fortunate to necessarily reach back and to pick up and pull up those of us that are again much less fortunate than ourselves.  And certainly we cannot save--I cannot save everybody.  No question.  I can--I'm happy to save one or two.  But I and my associates and the community must roll up our sleeves, get our hands dirty and individually do what we can to help those that are less fortunate than ourselves up out of the mire that they are in.  Until we take full accountability and full responsibility for our conditions, we will always have the structurally unemployed, the structurally poor, and everything else.  I have great faith, I have tremendous faith in--in--in my race.  And I think that this millennium is our millennium.  I think this millennium is the millennium for people of color.  I think we have all the skills and the gifts that are needed going forward.  And I think spirituality is one of the key--key characteristics that as we move forward in this millennium, I think will become very, very, very important.  As we--as a country, as in a world get in touch with our spirituality.  I think that certainly we have to do a better job at educating ourselves and again taking care of ourselves.  But I think if we all become accountable, and all responsible, I think it will solve most, if not all the problems that we have as a people.
Story_ID: 192464
Speaker 1: I know you're still fairly young, but if you had to talk about legacy, what would you consider as your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  I would like to leave an organization of and more--let me back up.  I think I would like as my legacy, I would like the commercial real estate industry in the United States to be fundamentally changed.  Because I and my partner [Daryl Carter] were a part of it.  And--and change for the better.  I'd like the commercial real estate industry to commence on a march on its path towards diversity enlightenment, integrity, and I want those things to occur as a direct result of my involvement and my partner's involvement in this industry.  And I'm happy to report that we are well on our way doing that.
Story_ID: 192465
Speaker 1: Finally, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as an innovator who demonstrated honesty, sincerity, integrity.  Someone who--whose heart ached for those that have not benefited like I have over the course of my life.  I would also like to be remembered as someone who provided for his family.  Who was a leader amongst his peers. And who again, made this place a better place for future generations to live and to thrive.
