Story_ID: 508028
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer and Avree Walker is observing.  Can you state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Sarann Knight Preddy, S-A-R-A-N-N, K-N-I-G-H-T my middle name, and P-R-E-D-D-Y.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, twenty-seven, twenty [July 27, 1920].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eufaula, E-U-F-A-U-L-A, Oklahoma
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: Business; I was a business owner practically all of my life, I'm retired now.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, where we are now?
Speaker 2: The location of this interview?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: New York-New York Hotel [New York-New York Hotel and Casino] in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 4th, 2007.
Story_ID: 508029
Speaker 1: Now before we begin I'd like to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Red and all bright colors, red, purple, pink (cough).
Speaker 1: Okay and what about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and summer.
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation what is your favorite place, favorite destination?
Speaker 2: I guess I would say California.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you like to eat, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Anything sweet (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess I would like chicken is my favorite meat.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes my saying is, always treat people the way you want to be treated and I think that way you'll never go wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Treat people the way you want to be treated.
Story_ID: 508030
Speaker 1: I want to begin by talking about your family, your mother and father [Carl Chiles].  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: My mother is Hattie, H-A-T-T-I-E Crabtree was her maiden name and Chiles, C-H-I-L-E-S [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] is her married name.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in Huttonville, Oklahoma, H-U-T-T-O-N, Huttonville, V-I-L-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay now before we talk more about your mother tell me about her parents.  Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I know my mother's mother passed away when she was about five years old and her grandparents raised her.  Her father was Creek Indian [Native American].
Speaker 1: Creek?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Indian and he, I lived, he lived to see me so I can't remember when he passed away but that was her father.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was George Crabtree and he was known as Chief George.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you remember her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Her mother's name was Tooker, T-O-O-K-E-R Hutton [Tooker Hutton Crabtree].
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know what her ancestry was?
Speaker 2: She was part Creek also.  Do I know what her ancestors were?
Speaker 1: You said she was part Creek? And--
Speaker 2: And black (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Black.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. And did your mother ever tell you any stories about growing up with her grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yes, she used to tell me stories about her grandparents because he and back in the day he liked to go hunting and she would go with him when she was like thirteen or fourteen years old; they would ride horses and go out into the woods and sometime they would spend the night.  She said it would be very scary to her, but he used to going in the woods hunting and they would be sleeping on the ground and looking at the stars and listen at the animals squealing or whatever they were, wolves or whatever, and this is something that she was kind of raised up with him.
Speaker 2: And that's her grandfather?
Speaker 1: Her grandfather.
Speaker 2: Now her grandfather that was Chief George?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: That was her father?
Speaker 1: That was her father. This was her grandfather Joe Hutton (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her grandfather. Do you know--Joe Hutton? Okay, and what about the grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Tooker Hutton that was her, that was her mother's name.  Oh, her grand- her mother you're talking about Louisa Hutton (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Louisa okay so Louisa and Joe Hutton were your mother's grandparents?  Okay and that's who raised her? Okay.
Speaker 1: And most of them lived to be 109 years old.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Now her parents--you said her mother died when she was young--
Speaker 1: Her mother was Tooker Hutton-
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: --and her father was George Crabtree.
Speaker 2: Right, all right, okay. Did your mother share any other stories about her growing up or about her grandparents?
Speaker 1: I guess she shared many stories and I can't recall some of the stories.  I know she had two sisters.  When her mother passed away, well, her mother was married to a doctor and he was keeping the two girls when she passed away.  He tried to keep my mother but that, he wasn't--this was her stepfather and her grandparents didn't want him to have her so they had a little fight over who was going to keep her.  So finally that's how she wound up with the grandparents taking of her.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Do you know how much education your mother had?
Speaker 1: I think my mother finished the eighth grade.
Story_ID: 508031
Speaker 1: Growing up with her grandparents [Knight Preddy's maternal great-grandparents, Louisa Hutton and Joe Hutton], do you know whether her grandparents owned the land that they lived on and what their occupations were?
Speaker 2: Yes they owned the land that they lived--the Huttons, and so did her father Crabtree [George Crabtree].  He owned a lot of land, he was quite wealthy, her father (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And, any stories about her father?
Speaker 2: Well he was a big man in the community and I remember he used to ride his horse around and everybody looked up to him as being the big chief.  I know he used to visit us and when he would visit he would always give my mother money and take her shopping like buy special clothes for her.  This was after I was born and she would always stay in contact with him.  I had a first cousin that my parents [Hattie Crabtree Chiles and Carl Chiles] raised and we were like sisters and she's about nine years younger than I am and we were talking about him the other day and she was crazy about him 'cause every time he would come he would always give us some money.  I know that he had two or three sets of children and my mother was one of the first sets and he had a couple by another lady and then later on he had five children by her.  So she has a lot of half brothers and sisters which some of them are still living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother passed away in 1999 or 1989 was it and she was ninety-six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it's just a trend that the, the people in your lineage live a long life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Like me I'm going to live to be a hundred (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 508032
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your, your father what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Carl, C-A-R-L James Chiles, C-H-I-L-E-S [Carl Chiles] and he was born in Texas don't recall the name of the town but when he came to Oklahoma--during those days Oklahoma was Indian [Native American] territory so they looked down on people who came from other places 'cause they used to call them state raised people.  I know when my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] married my father, she ran away and married my father when she was fourteen and my grandfather [George Crabtree] told her to come and get her trunk and everything she had because she married that state raised fellow and he wasn't accepted in the Indian territory.  So she came and got her trunk and everything and left with my father and he was like an outcast but before the end of time my father wound up taking care of all of them and he finally was the favorite son-in-law.  My father was from Texas but his grandfather--I have the history on that and I guess I should have been looking at it a little bit--his great-grandfather was white and he had three or four boys and then one of those boys was his daddy.  We just did a history--family reunion history and I have a book and everything but I haven't been looking at it lately.  His mother [Eva Chiles], her father was from Spain and I do have his picture and his mother's picture also but I think she died right after my mother and father got married, 'cause she died before I was born--just before I was born.  He had--it was five of them by his mother and then his father got married after she passed away to a lady that was my mother's aunt.  So that was kind of complicated because then he had about eight children by her and some of those children--there was only one of them older than me 'cause he married this young woman and he had a family right along with his son.  I'm still talking about my father--my grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: I can remember in Oklahoma the town called Eufaula, well he was like the black mayor in that town.  Everybody respected him and he had a lot of influence in that town.  Eufaula was a very small town, but it was a town where everybody knew everybody and Mr. Chiles [Harmon Chiles] was the big dog (laughter) in Eufaula, Oklahoma.  It's been so long it's hard for me to remember because I've been away--I mean that's been, what? Talking about seventy-five years so it's kind of hard to remember everything especially when you don't talk about it often (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Okay, that's fine. Well just tell us what you, what you can remember.
Speaker 2: And I know my father had as full--sisters and brothers he had two brothers and two sisters and the one brother--it was only two in my family and he had a brother that had eight kids.  So that was a sister that I was talking about.  They adopted her when she was born about six months old, and they raised her so we're like sisters.  Then they had seven other children and then I think all of them are living here Las Vegas [Nevada] except one that passed away recently.  Then he had another brother and that brother was married to a white lady and they have two kids and he's passed away with the wife, he was with a young wife, too.  Then my aunt, one of his sisters, when she moved out west way before we did because she was older and she had a daughter and moved and then passed away in California.  So that was my father's family and as I mentioned my mother had three sisters and her sister had three kids.  And one of them had three kids and the other one had two; and I think one of those kids is still living in San Francisco [California] and one of the other sisters is living in Oklahoma; all the rest of them passed away (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 508033
Speaker 1: So your mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] and father [Carl Chiles] do you know what year they married?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking they married in 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now once they get married where do they live?
Speaker 2: They had a place of their own where they lived and my father was a musician who played in a little band that they had, I can remember that.  It was kind of like his one of his sister's husbands was in the band, it was about four of them and they used to play for the dances and the picnics.  He was a famous ball player during those days so they would play ball, I guess you would call it some kind of ball conference or something where they'd all gang up in other little cities and play 'em and play games and whoever would win the most games; however they would do that back in the day.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're talking about baseball?
Speaker 2: Baseball, um-hm. And they used to have those ball games and they'd have picnics at night, I guess it was some form of entertainment.  They would have like stands, that's what they called them back in the day and I remember that they used to have a stand and they would sell whatever they were selling.  I think back in the day it would be fried chicken and whatever and then somebody else would be selling something else so this was after the ball games in the day time and then they would do this for like entertainment get together type thing.  And we also had a restaurant and we had a little restaurant in a little small town and we had a meat market and I was kind of raised up around business so that made me want to be in business all of my life.  And I remember that I was--I had a brother [Clarence Chiles] and he was very, very quiet but I was the one that always gave a lot of problems.  I was hard headed and my mother would always punish me all the time, she never had to punish my brother because he never would do anything.  But my thing was, "Why you always pick on me, you never whip him?" But he never did do anything (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 508034
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now your [maternal] grandfather's name was what?
Speaker 2: George Crabtree.
Speaker 1: Okay now I'm talking about on your father's [Carl Chiles] side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh his name was Harmon Chiles.
Speaker 1: Harmon? Okay.
Speaker 2: Harmon Chiles
Speaker 1: And did you know your grandmother's name on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Her name was Eva [Eva Chiles].
Speaker 1: E-V-V?
Speaker 2: E-V-A.
Speaker 1: Oh. Okay.
Speaker 2: You know back in the day they spelled her name E-V-E and they called it Evy and there was a story behind me.  When I was born and I guess I was like they were pulling for me from both sides of the family so when I was born they named me Eve, but they spelled it, they pronounce it Evy but they spell it E-V-E.  And then later on they changed my name to Sara because my grandmother on the other side was named--one of my greater grandmothers was named Sara and they wanted me to be named after her.  So then they changed it to Sara and somewhere along the line they added Ann to it and then that Sara changed to three times like S-A-R-A-N-N, I mean S-A-R-A capital A-N-N and then they spelled it S-A-R-A-H-A-N-N and then I was Eve Louise the grandmother [sic. maternal great-grandmother] that was named Louisa Hutton that died, they wanted her name--my name to be.  So they bounced me around with names because it was a jealousy in the family and so then I was Eve Louise all through grade school and then when I went to high school [Dunbar High School, Okmulgee, Oklahoma] I would come to be Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy].  It's a long story because when I got my gaming license, I had to tell all these stories on how it was changed and I remember them mentioning to me that they had never had anybody to get any kind of license that had as many names as I had had.  Then after I was grown then I changed my name to Sarann, S-A-R-A-N-N one word.  Then on top of that I was married five times so I was Sarann Walker, I was Sarann Bradford [ph.], I was Sarann Scruggs, Sarann Knight and Sarann Preddy.  I remember when I left my first husband [Luther Walker], I left Las Vegas [Nevada] and went to Los Angeles [California] and he was an abusive type of person and I was very young and I was afraid of him and I went to Los Angeles and I changed my name because I figured that he could find me in Los Angeles so I changed my name to Jean Bradford [ph.] because if he came over and asked anybody about me nobody would know me by that name I was a Jean Bradford.  I remember being--everywhere that I would go in L.A., I would always be watching for him thinking that he's going to be around.  It was a big city and I didn't understand because I was very young at that time but he couldn't find me so that's why I changed my name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your name, okay.
Speaker 2: So I wound up marrying this guy, Moes Bradford [ph.] that was my second husband and that's where I got the Jean Bradford from because I used his last name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Name.
Story_ID: 508035
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] and father [Carl Chiles] married and they go into business and you watch them running the different businesses. And you said there was a restaurant and a meat market (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Meat market, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a musician, he played music.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your relationship with your mother?  What type of mother was she?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very strict person and she had very extremely good morals.  She didn't believe in--she wasn't a churchgoing person.  The biggest time she went to church was after she was older through the mail.  She used to be a member of one of the churches through the mail and she used to send them money all of the time and I remember my father said, "Hey people are just taking you--you just giving those people your money and you don't even know them."  She said, "But they are preaching the same thing that I want to hear."  My mother was a person--she only had two kids and she loved children.  She must have helped to raise at least twenty children.  When her sister died she took her three kids and raised them and then she helped to raise my father's brother's kid, the one she adopted and then she--she didn't legally adopt her, she took her over, and then she helped them with the other two kids that they had because she was having them so fast.  She had eight kids real fast they are all about a year apart the sister-in-law of, my father's brother.  So her thing was always children and I know when I got married I had all of my children by my first husband [Luther Walker].  So she raised my four children [James Walker, Richard Walker, Glen Walker and Janice Walker Currie] and then she helped to raise my grandchildren and then their grandchildren.  He's [Knight Preddy's grandson, Avree Walker] sixteen, and he lived to see my mother.  She--and she was raising on him before she passed away 'cause he was born in 1990 and she died in 1998 or '99 [1999] one or the other I can't remember, I think it was '98 [1998].  But--and she was a homebody, she was always home and my father always was the one that worked to make a living.
Story_ID: 508036
Speaker 1: Just before they [Knight Preddy's parents, Hattie Crabtree Chiles and Carl Chiles] had left Oklahoma, well he had bought a farm and I think he was there for maybe a couple of years before he came out here.  But way back there after he was in--after we were in this business then he went off into construction and he used to work in what they called a mine where they got the rocks out of the mine and these rocks they would have to chisel them and this is what they build a lot of things with in Oklahoma.  I was kind of brought up on an Indian [Native American] settlement 'cause this mine that I'm talking about was owned by a big rich Indian person and a lot of people was working there in that rock quarry, okay, that's what they were calling it.  That's what he was doing before he bought--after that he bought the little farm and he was there a couple of years and then he moved to Las Vegas [Nevada] and he went back into construction and he had a partner, he and a white fellow that had a block plant.  All the buildings that you see, old buildings were made from what they call cinderblocks and that's what they used in Las Vegas to build a lot of things.  So it's a lot of old buildings that are still built out of those blocks and they're still making those blocks and things.  They may have added a little more to it where they may be a little more refined than they were when he was doing it.  Then we came to Las Vegas in 1942.
Story_ID: 508037
Speaker 1: Well let's back up just a little bit 'cause I want to talk about your childhood and your growing up, okay?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: We actually were talking about the type of mother your mother was.  What was your relationship with your father [Carl Chiles]?
Speaker 2: My relationship was very good with my father 'cause he was a very gentle person and they married when she was fourteen and he was seventeen and they were together until he passed away first.  My relationship was very good because they were the type of people that we always had an open house.  That's where everybody came when they were down and out and they fed them and slept them and helped with all the families and they were very well known throughout the country in Oklahoma, when I was a child, because everybody was coming to them for help and they never turned anybody down.  My mother loved to cook and like I said she was definitely a housewife, she never worked. And she always, my dad always provided the good living and she always took care of all the business and spent the money, and I know she loved a lot of children hanging around and my dad used to complain sometime but he didn't say too much because he knew that's what she liked was the children.  My relationship with her, she was always tried to keep you there as long as possible.  But my brother [Clarence Chiles], was practically--I think he was living with them when he passed away which he probably was sixty something years old.  But me I was kind of on the wild side, so I married young and I left home and I always, I always would be close but she never could corral me as to have her fingers on me and that's what she liked to do.  All the ones that she could keep in touch with and keep them home that was her style of doing that.  We were a very close knitted family it's just that I--she used to tell me all the time about staying and taking care of the kids and I would remind her, "But you know, you remember you married when you were fourteen."  But she thought now that people shouldn't get married and I guess from her experience that she was telling me the right thing but I didn't believe what she was saying so I wanted to be something different.  But she was a very good mom to everybody and she was the type everybody could have whatever they wanted because they were always accessible to money because when my father married my mother she was kind of like rich in the day.  She might have had ten thousand dollars, twenty thousand dollars or something but that was rich back in 1917.  And all the kids that did grow up with her--I have two granddaughters living with me and they talk about it all the time how they used to get anything they wanted.  Her thing was going to the store.  Whenever the family would be around talking about, "Wish we had such and such a thing," my mother would say, "I'll go get it."  She'd get up and get her coat and go get ice cream or popcorn or whatever it was they'd be talking about.  So she was somebody that just waited on the family, whatever they wanted this is what she got.  I know she raised my brother's two kids, well, she used to--she sewed and before they started to school she would dress them--always make the little black pleated skirts, little white blouses and the little boys would have the short pants on, and white blouses and she would get up every morning and comb their hair and dress them up like they were going to school and we lived across the street from a church.  They would go over and sit at the church on the church steps all day.  Then when my niece started going to school she dressed them up like this and one day a lady followed my niece home and she said, "I came to see Ms. Chiles [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] to talk to you, because every time your daughter goes to school she's always dressed up and I've never seen her not dressed and I just wanted to meet you." 'Cause she was known to take care of all the kids and everybody in the neighborhood wanted her to take care of their kids because she was, she truly loved kids.  And I remember my mother never making a difference in any kids she ever had because sometimes I'd be a little jealous but I was so busy, you know, trying to live my own life until I wasn't interfering with the kids she was keeping.
Story_ID: 508038
Speaker 1: Why did your father [Carl Chiles] come from Texas to Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: I would think they came probably like most people to go from one place to another looking for a better place and I think that maybe Oklahoma was--all of the people, natives of Oklahoma was getting the money and all the oil and stuff and I'm imagining that's why they came. 'Cause they probably read about Oklahoma and with all the money, with all of the natives getting the land and the money so that's, that's my imagination.  I never heard him say why they came.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now again tell me where your mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] and father lived once they got married?
Speaker 2: Eufaula, Oklahoma (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Eufaula.
Speaker 2: And Huttonville [Oklahoma] was named after your grandfather?
Speaker 1: After my [maternal] great-grandfather [Joe Hutton].
Speaker 2: Great-grandfather, okay. All right. Now tell me about your growing up.  Tell me about the community in which you lived.
Speaker 1: I guess I lived in several different types of communities.  I know when my father was in the community with--doing this work that they were doing with this Indian [Native American] reservation type thing.  It wasn't no blacks in that community but three families my father and his two brothers and most of the other people was white or Indians.
Story_ID: 508039
Speaker 1: I remember we had--there was no school in that area and they finally organized or built a little small school.  It might have had about twenty people going to the school.  This was when I first started going to school and I'll never forget I had a teacher named Hattie Agnes Marshall [ph.] and some of the things that she taught me that I reviewed after I was in high school.  She was a fantastic, dynamic teacher and really gave a good basic foundation for kids that started going to school.  I think that didn't happen but maybe a year then that's when we moved to Hoffman, Oklahoma and I was going to school there.
Speaker 2: Well tell me a little more about the area where you first went to school.  You say there was an Indian [Native American] reservation tell me about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was an Indian, it wasn't exactly a reservation but it was an Indian where he had this rock quarry where it was like a factory type thing where they were getting the rocks out of the mountains and they would chop those rocks in a form where you could build buildings out of it.  I vaguely remember what was happening during that time and this is where my father [Carl Chiles] was working for the Indian.  It was like there weren't any black people in that area.  So they had this little school that they started for a short while but after that I always left and went away to school.  They called this place Red Hill where the Indian reservation or whatever it was and I went to school in Eufaula [Oklahoma], 'cause I stayed with several people in my lifetime going to school because they were living where there was no school.
Speaker 2: Okay. So when you were in the say second and third grade where were you living then?
Speaker 1: I was living--I think I was living in Hoffman when I was like second and third grade.  At Hoffman by that time that's when we had the restaurant and the meat market and after that we moved back to Eufaula. And then in my junior high school I went to Eufaula--back to Eufaula, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: So in Hoffman what was the name of the elementary school that you attended?
Speaker 1: In Hoffman?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. You don't remember? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gee I have no idea, can't remember.  I can't even remember the school in Eufaula.  I think it was--I remember it was a junior high school but I can't remember the name of it.  But then after I got in high school I left and then I went, I stayed in Okmulgee, Oklahoma and that's when I went away to high school.  The name of that school was--isn't that something I thought of it when I was talking and I forgot maybe I'll think in a minute.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: But-
Speaker 2: Well, tell me how was it growing up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dunbar High School [Okmulgee, Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Dunbar High School.
Story_ID: 508040
Speaker 1: How was it growing up in these different areas and the different people and being the only blacks in certain situations?
Speaker 2: It wasn't difficult with me because I was adjusted and it was like everybody was the same.  I can remember when I was going to school at the place where the Indian [Native American] reservation was.  Well I used to visit with some of the white kids and the mother and everybody was very normal and everything.  It was just that the daddy was very prejudiced and I would eat over there and everything but he didn't eat at the table with black people.  So he ate alone they let him eat first and then we all ate together.  I can remember things in spots because you know after you get old and you move away from that and I've been out here sixty-five years so I don't remember a lot about those things because I never think about them.  I'm a person that I don't dwell on history like my grandson over there [Avree Walker], he's a history buff.  He probably could tell you more of what happened than me with my past when I was younger because he heard it before and he always corrects me on a lot of things because I don't remember as well as he remembers.  In 1969, I think it was, that I had a terrible accident.  They didn't think I would live, I was in the hospital for thirty days and it was many years that I couldn't remember anything that happened before 1969.  So a lot of memory was kind of like blocked out and some of it was blocked out because I wanted it blocked out.  I don't dwell in the past and right now a lot of things I don't remember, that I don't want to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine. Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I look forward to today and tomorrow and I know my family cautions me about that all the time 'cause they think I'm cold blooded because I don't dwell on what happened before.  But I guess that's just the way that I am.
Story_ID: 508041
Speaker 1: When you're in elementary school it's 1925, twent- through '29 [1929], '29 [1929] starts the Depression [Great Depression].  Did your family feel the effects of the Depression; did you know that there was a Depression going on?
Speaker 2: No, no, I really didn't because as I said my dad [Carl Chiles] was always stable and always had a job where he either had a job or was working for himself and I don't remember ever not having any food or not having any clothes.  When I was like five or six years old I remember when we had the restaurant, we had three cars, we car two Buicks and a Ford.  We had a Buick and a Ford and how he came about the other Buick he had a brother-in-law and they both had Buicks and the brother-in-law, he was married to my mother's sister, and she passed away and of course that's why my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] took the three kids because he ran off with some lady and he gave the car to my daddy.  So that made us have two Buicks and a Ford.  We had a meat market, so I guess we always had plenty of food and plenty of clothes and whatever and when my parents worked on this Indian [Native American] reservation the top person that had all the money they were very close to.  I remember when I was going to school in junior high school my mother had a card, credit card they didn't call it a credit card back in the day.  But she had access to one of the largest stores in Eufaula [Oklahoma].  She could buy anything that she wanted to, and when I was in junior high school and high school [Dunbar High School, Okmulgee, Oklahoma], I was wearing shoes that cost six and seven dollars.  Kids--I remember tennis shoes were like twenty-five cents, never owned a pair in my life, but you could get a pair of tennis shoes for that price and other shoes was like fifty-nine cents or whatever and I was wearing shoes that cost six or seven dollars, and clothes too.  So I was kind of like always--I used to call myself the little poor rich girl (laughter) because my family always had money and always kind of got everything I wanted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember when I was about nine or ten and I wanted to learn how to drive, he [Knight Preddy's grandson, Avree Walker] will never forget all of this that I'm saying, and I would tell my mother well I know how to drive.  So one day she took me way out in meadow like and she said, "Now I'm going to let you drive."  I got in the car and I said, "Well what do I do?"  "I don't know.  You said you could drive."  So I got in the car to drive and back in the day you had this thing and on the wheel you pull it down and that's how you went.  So I pulled it down and if I go too fast than I had to push it up and down and I was driving.  You have to concentrate on pulling this but then I couldn't concentrate on this and steering the wheel so I was going like around and around and around trying to learn how to drive at such an early age.  It reminds me of him also because now he's just now beginning to try to drive and when he gets in a car every step of the way he tells me how to drive and what to do and then when he gets under the wheel, "Grandma what must I do?"  You know how to drive, so why should I tell you?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I know I'm getting away from what you're talking about.
Story_ID: 508042
Speaker 1: Did manage to finish high school in Okmulgee [Oklahoma]--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in where?
Speaker 1: In Okmulgee at Dunbar, Dunbar High School [Okmulgee, Oklahoma]. And--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry spell the name of the town.
Speaker 1: O-K-M-U-L-G-E-E all these were Indian [Native American] towns.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: But I always--my parents [Hattie Crabtree Chiles and Carl Chiles] didn't live there but I always went to school there.  I would always come home, you know, after school.
Speaker 2: Who did you stay with when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I stayed with, one time with my uncle and one year I stayed with my aunt and another time I stayed with a lady that I knew.  I remember when I stayed with this lady she lived about a block from school and it had a little, I guess it was a school cafeteria right near the school and that's where I boarded at this cafeteria.  My mother would come up every couple of weeks and pay for me that was boarding.  Now this was while I was living with the lady and whatever I bought they kept up with and then she would pay for it, you know.  When I was living with my aunt, she had a store and then I lived with my father's brother-in-law that went off and married this younger woman, I lived with them.  So I lived with three different people while I was going to school.
Speaker 2: Okay. What type of student were you?
Speaker 1: I guess I was average.  I was laughing about that the other day 'cause I got this Jeff the chef [HistoryMaker Jeff Henderson] gave me one of his books and he was talking to me about it and can remember when I used to make book reports.  I'd read the first of the book, the middle and the last and I could make a dynamic book report.  I never would finish the book.  When I was going to school I was in a lot of activities even when I was in junior high school I played in a lot of plays and I was doing some dancing and it didn't ever dawn on me how important that was until many years later when I'd get around people like [HistoryMaker] Martha Jordan and different people and that's how they started out.  But I never think to even talk about that with me and then after I was in high school, I took tap dancing and I played in the school band.  And I played saxophone; I was good--math it was my favorite subject.  I guess it ran in my family.  Everybody in my family was math students.  I think my favorite subject probably was science.  I used to like science but I didn't like English so I guess you can tell by that I was never a good English student.  I didn't have, I didn't get a car until after I was married before I had a car.  Nowadays kids get cars after they get sixteen or what have you.  But I had a good life and it was a different life for most kids because most kids came up maybe right at one place with a family that didn't--my family didn't move around 'cause we lived in Eufaula [Oklahoma] and we lived in Hoffman [Oklahoma] and I lived in Huttonville [Oklahoma] for a short time and I guess those were all the places I lived in Oklahoma and moved out here in 1942 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now you graduate from high school in what year?  How old were you when you graduated from high school?
Speaker 1: Seventeen
Speaker 2: Okay so we're at 1937.
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-seven [1937]. Then that would make you--right. Did you go to a school prom, was there a prom?
Speaker 1: No I didn't go to a school prom.
Speaker 2: Okay. Any other outside activities?  Did you take dance in school or was that an outside activity?
Speaker 1: No I took dance in school
Speaker 2: In school, okay.
Speaker 1: And I played in the school band.
Speaker 2: Okay. What about the student government?  Were you involved with that at all?
Speaker 1: Very, very little (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't involved I had more--then after, after I was married [to Luther Walker] I went back to school.
Story_ID: 508043
Speaker 1: But let me ask you about your teachers in high school [Dunbar High School, Okmulgee, Oklahoma].  Were there any teachers that you remember that might have encouraged you to further your education past high school or a favorite teacher that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember one of my teachers.  His name was James Edward Weaver [ph.], he was one of the ones that always encouraging me to go to school because he was in music and he wanted me to pursue being, dealing with music.  My teacher Ms. Anderson, she was very strict in school and she was a teacher that wanted you to pursue more education but I was the type of person--I was never inclined to be an educator.  At one time I wanted to be a nurse and someone told me that when people die, you're the first one handling them.  I left from that, I didn't want to be a nurse no more.  I think I had a teacher that was very encouraging in my math class and I think all the teachers--when we would have like, I'm trying to think what they called it when you're on Fridays, they'd have the big--
Speaker 1: Assembly?
Speaker 2: Assembly and we'd have teachers that would be teaching the whole class not me in particular and they would emphasize going to school to be this, that or the other.  But I was never school oriented to where I wanted to be a teacher or something like that.  I always wanted to be in business.
Story_ID: 508044
Speaker 1: So what did you believe you wanted to do after high school [Dunbar High School, Okmulgee, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you what I got married right at high school, when I--just before I finished high school as a matter of fact. And I, I had a blank in my life that when I got married and I right away had four kids and I was dumb to the fact I don't think I had anything in mind that I wanted to be or do 'cause I was busy having children. And I married a person that was seven, eight years older than me so naturally I was kind of like a person who wasn't able to think for themselves 'cause I was busy having children.  I didn't get wise to the fact until after I divorced him, and then that's when I decided what I really wanted to do.  My husband was extremely jealous of me and I couldn't communicate with nobody or nothing, and during that time I was a church person.  I used to go to church, and he didn't even want me to go to church.  I remember when I would go to church and I was going to a Church of God in Christ and during those days they didn't wear lipstick and he would make me put on lipstick if I was going to church trying to defy what the church was all about.  I might be skipping here and there but I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay that's fine.
Speaker 2: But I was with him for like nine years and then after that I woke up to what was going on in the world and after that well, you know, the sky was the limit.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was this first husband's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Luther, L-U-T-H-E-R, Walker [Luther Walker].
Speaker 1: So after nine years you divorced him and--
Speaker 2: And I had four children.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what were your children's names?
Speaker 2: James Walker, Richard Walker, Janice Walker [Janice Walker Currie] and Glen Walker and unfortunately they all passed away except James.  He's the only one that's living and he's--works at Mandalay Bay [Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], he's a big boss at Mandalay Bay in gaming.
Story_ID: 508045
Speaker 1: Let's go back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --after you are divorced.  So what happens next?
Speaker 2: After I got a divorce I got a job working at one of the clubs in West Las Vegas here [Las Vegas, Nevada].  I started out as being a keno writer and it was very segregated during that time here, but during that time I really get upset when I hear so many negative things about Las Vegas [Nevada] and this is all the people show all the negative stuff about Las Vegas but it wasn't like that all over.  I can't witness some of things that they publicize or say, because during that time when we came here there was only one little dinky place on the strip and that was El Rancho [El Rancho Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], a really small place.  They were building on the Last Frontier [Last Frontier Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada].  So I saw the whole city grow, and as they build on the Westside we had about nine or ten clubs over there like they did downtown.  So nobody wanted to go downtown because every--white people were coming over there because we had all of the people Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] and Pearl Bailey and The Ink Spots and King Cole [Nat King Cole] and everybody that you hear that came here during that time they came on the Westside.  So I was working at one of the larger clubs over there so it was more fun to me to be working there than to be trying to go downtown and like I said all the people from downtown would come over there to hear the good music and stuff. 'Cause downtown they was playing I guess hillbilly music or something, I don't remember but I know I never went down there.
Speaker 1: So this was before the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] was built so it was called downtown rather than the strip.
Speaker 2: Oh no there was no strip.
Speaker 1: I know, I'm saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh downtown is where all the businesses were--
Speaker 1: Businesses were, okay.
Speaker 2: --there were no businesses out on the strip.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause there was no strip.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. So do you remember when the Hoover Dam [Boulder Dam; Hoover Dam, Nevada] was, was constructed?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't here during that time it was almost finished when I came 'cause I came in '42 [1942] and I think it was built in the late '30s [1930s] but they were still building on it the Hoover Dam.
Speaker 1: So your family actually moved to Las Vegas and that's where you got married?
Speaker 2: No I married, I married in Oklahoma (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you did marry there, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I was married in Oklahoma and we came here.  My family came here, my, my family, my husband [Knight Preddy's first husband, Luther Walker] and kids, I only had two kids, came here and my father [Carl Chiles] and my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] and my brother [Clarence Chiles] was, we all moved here about the same time.
Story_ID: 508046
Speaker 1: So it's probably about 1948 that you moved here is that right?
Speaker 2: That I moved here?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942]. Okay, now downtown where all the businesses were was very segregated so black folks could not go there to be entertained is that right?
Speaker 2: That's right because they didn't have much entertainment down there during that time. They could go there and do whatever, we shopped downtown and they some little joints on the street where you could buy some hamburgers and stuff.  They did have some places where they didn't want black people to come in and eat, but no one worried about it because we had the same thing on the Westside--they call it the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada].  So we had more going over there than they had downtown but now you could go downtown and nobody would bother you because people give Las Vegas [Nevada] a name as being the Mississippi of the West, I don't know why because in Mississippi they were putting dogs on black folks, they were putting water hoses on them, they were lynching them, they were killing them, dragging them, that didn't happen in Las Vegas.  It was just that you couldn't go in these places, and I remember when the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] first got built.  They built the first big hotel and they had right where the Sahara [Sahara Hotel and Casino; SLS Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] is they built a club they called the Bingo Club [sic. Club Bingo, Las Vegas, Nevada] and some bartenders and dealers built that place because they did not want them to come to the one or two clubs they had on the strip.  They only had one or two big clubs, they were dinky, but they called them the bigger ones then because they were getting people from out of town and it wasn't room for people.  They didn't want anybody to come that didn't have any money.  Black people and the dealers and things they didn't want them there either.  So that's how the Sahara was started.  They built this club called the Bingo and I think they were there for maybe a year or so and somebody came along and bought it.  Then they changed it into the Sahara so that's what it is today.
Speaker 1: Okay. What about--is there a lot of stories about Bugsy Siegal building the first hotel?
Speaker 2: Hotel. He built the Flamingo [Flamingo Hotel and Casino; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I think when he built it that was kind of like the largest hotel and Bugsy Siegal---who? He's [Knight Preddy's grandson, Avree Walker] trying to tell me something, maybe I'm wrong because he, he knows--he's a history buff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's an entertainer, so he knows all about everything. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Well, we'll, we'll come back to that.
Story_ID: 508047
Speaker 1: You're here with your family and, and you say you got a job writing keno tickets and was this in the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay tell me about that?  What is writing keno tickets?
Speaker 2: You don't play keno while you're here? You know they've got keno in the hotels and you play keno; that's where you can win--you hit a ticket and you win all the big money and this club had, had a full gaming license.  We had 21 [Blackjack] and Keno and poker and a dice table bar. There's a big place, we had a big showroom in the back so when all the entertainers--by that time they had built two or three clubs on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], and all the entertainers that was coming here couldn't patronize the strip so when they got off work they came to the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada].  So when they came to the Westside a lot of white people came too because they were following the music and I think that in the entertainment world they have never been prejudiced in that world so to speak.  They were but really not, 'cause all the entertainers kind of stuck together and they all would want to come and see each other and that's where I started out having the main job that I think I had a couple of little jobs for a couple of months before I started working in there.  Then I came to be a dealer, I think I worked in the Cotton Club until--and I kind of went back and forth 'cause then I got married to this guy Moes [Knight Preddy's second husband, Moes Bradford (ph.)] and I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for six months then I came back to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] 'cause I didn't like it down there because it was very prejudiced in California and I was used to seeing all the money and being with all of the celebrities and all the people.  So it was too slow down there for me, so I moved back to Las Vegas and I finally moved back and got a divorce--I wasn't married to this fellow very long maybe a year.  I wanted to come back where the lights were bright and all the happenings and I got to mingle with all the people that was in the entertainer world.  I dealt to all the people that I mentioned like the Mills Brothers and Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.].  Sammy Davis was a young kid during that time and he wasn't popular.  It was Will Mastin's trio [Will Mastin Trio] and that was his dad [Sammy Davis, Sr.] and his uncle and he was a little singer with them so he wasn't popular.  I remember Sammy Davis as being--every Wednesday he would come to the Cotton Club and borrow some money on his watch and the thing was he'd get forty dollars on his watch every Wednesday 'cause he got paid on Thursdays and he was making like $150 a week. Well where I was working--probably was making four or five hundred a week, because I was making five dollars a day working but we were making plenty of tips.  Some days we might make two or three hundred tips, and that made my salary a lot more than his because I used to loan his father money when he would run out of money I would let them have money to go to the next job.  His father and my father [Carl Chiles] were the same age and I don't know if I want to say this, but I know I was dating his father 'cause when I got a divorce from Moes and moved back I was single then.  Sammy Davis and I were closer to the same age but Sammy wasn't interested in nothing but shooting dice.  That was his thing he'd come in and shoot dice.  But basically all the entertainers had girlfriends in Las Vegas and during that time they had the people, the railroad came through here from Salt Lake [Salt Lake City, Utah] and they had a lot of guys that worked on the railroad.  They were like waiters and stuff plus the train was coming through here so all these people frequented the Cotton Club.  Not only the Cotton Club 'cause they had Louisiana Club [Las Vegas, Nevada], the Town Tavern [Las Vegas, Nevada], the El Morocco club [Las Vegas, Nevada], Club Alabam [Las Vegas, Nevada], they had the Ebony Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and they had El Morocco and they had several nice restaurants and they had a key club.  So the Westside was jumping and nobody else wanted to be any other place and it didn't really fall down until they integrated and when they integrated, everybody left, followed the lights and more money. 'Cause like, our limit on our keno I can't remember was like twenty-five thousand dollars and downtown it probably was fifty thousand.
Story_ID: 508048
Speaker 1: Before we go on to how people left from the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] to come to the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], I was asking you about other people that you knew.  You talked about Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] and his family and what about Pearl Bailey?
Speaker 2: Pearl Bailey was playing on the strip but she used to come--well she had to come on the Westside all the time.  She liked to party and gamble but she was a very down to earth person 'cause I remember this friend of mine was serving her some champagne and she wanted to put it in a glass and she wouldn't accept it out of there she said, "Just give me a water glass or something, I don't need this champagne glass."  She had a friend just a casual friend and they used to gamble all the time and she was over at one table gambling and he was at the next table. So, you know, people back in the day and they even do that now they get so serious when they're gambling, "Don't bother me and if you talk to me that's why I lost because you talked to me."  So this friend hollered over and told her, "Give me some money I'm broke."  So she just--it was all silver during that time--she reached into her stacks and got a handful of silver and threw it to him like this and when she did and she didn't mean to do it but when she threw it, it hit him in the eye.  They were really close friends and he sued her and well after that they weren't ever friends anymore.  That was one incident that happened that I remember.  During that time the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] had a boat and it was on wheels and whenever on Sundays some days they would decide to go to the lake and everybody would have a picnic and we'd all go to the lake and everybody would ride in this boat on wheels but me.  Not everybody but my little gang and I would always go in a car 'cause when you go to the lake and you get there the car didn't stop, it just went on in the lake 'cause it was a boat on wheels.  I always afraid of water anyway, so I'd never get on this boat.  But Pearl Bailey used to go with the gang whenever she was in town also.  She was a regular and she was a very good entertainer, very congenial person.  She was one of the ones that stand out in my mind and that she was a super person to be around and a number of others that I know--
Story_ID: 508049
Speaker 1: The only person that I ever thought was Nat King Cole, when he came over here.  He was a little uppity, as my grandma always used that expression, and kind of like a little prejudiced maybe.  I remember one incident happened that we had been begging him to sing, and I didn't, they did, 'cause I never was that type of person; I didn't beg nobody to do nothing.  Everybody was saying, "Please sing," and he's sitting there being all everything and so by that time I remember a couple of white girls came in and when they came in he fired all up.  They went over there and asked him to sing and he got up and went over to the piano and he was singing and he didn't stop playing for maybe twenty minutes, but by that time those girls were over there looking for some fellows and they had found who there were looking for and they left.  When he got through singing and looked around the girls were--these were white girls--they were gone.  So I always kind of held that against him but he didn't come over here as much as some of the others.  But like the Mills Brothers lived over here, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] lived over here.  I'm trying to think of some of the other entertainers that are very outstanding that you probably would remember.  Pearl Bailey was always here, [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt was with, and I can't remember who she was dancing with whether it was [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham or who.  She brought them over here when they were real young.  I remember they came over here as not more than a teenager because they would go bare foot all the time.  They'd always come to the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I remember her being--my brother [Clarence Chiles] was really a handsome man and a young fellow and he had a car and they would always take up with the fellows who had a car and he used to be around with Eartha Kitt. And I remember one time when they were out partying and my brother had just bought a new watch and as I mentioned before about my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] and how she controlled everybody but me and my brother came home and she asked him, "Where is your watch?" And he said, "Oh, I let that girl wear it."  She said, "Well you just get up and go and get that watch from that girl."  So he went back and got his watch and that was Eartha Kitt.  But during that time they were just some little dancers that were raggedy and holding on trying to do something in life and of course she did.  The Mills Brothers used to come over a lot and gamble.  All of the people that were coming over some of them were more notorious gambler like Sammy Davis and a few of the others were just customers that would be--everyday they lost every dime that they could get their hands on.  I remember Fats Domino when he came here he didn't frequent--it was a little more integrated when he came 'cause he spent all of his money out on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  He gambled so much until they barred him from coming to Las Vegas [Nevada], he left and didn't come back anymore 'cause he was making a lot of money but when he'd leave they'd have to buy him a ticket to go home because he'd be gambling off all of his money.  I just read about him a couple of days ago I didn't know he was still living.  But as time went along and they integrated well then they started and--staying on the strip.
Story_ID: 508050
Speaker 1: The Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] opened in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: The Moulin Rouge opened in 1955 and it was the first integrated hotel that opened in Las Vegas [Nevada] and when it opened it opened with a full bang.  It was just as nice as any hotel on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  They had the largest kitchen and they had the largest swimming pool when they first opened up of any other hotel.  But unfortunately Moulin Rouge didn't stay opened but five months because they were taking all the business after twelve o'clock on the strip.  They always used the phrase that you could shoot a cannon through there and wouldn't hit anybody, everybody would be at the Moulin Rouge because of all the entertainment there and when then came to the Moulin Rouge they opened up an all-black entertainment.  All the showgirls and they picked the prettiest ones they could find in the country and the best ones and came there and all the acts were all black and it was something new in Las Vegas.  And all the people that worked in the hotels the waiters and waitresses and all those people came to the Moulin Rouge and all the customers came and all the entertainers came to the Moulin Rouge.  That's been a question they have asked and it's always been considered the sixty-four thousand dollar question 'cause they never knew why it closed.  But I know a lady who--a white lady who had interest in the Moulin Rouge and she told me it closed because the strip hotel came to the owners of the hotel and asked them to close and join in with them, which was the Dunes Hotel [Las Vegas, Nevada], and in that way they would be where it was growing and they'd make a lot more money than they would in that location and they did that.  So they closed up and had standing room only at the Moulin Rouge that night and the next morning they alarmed everybody that they had closed. And I think they had planned that in the beginning because when they closed they didn't pay any bills.  They owed all these bills to all of the people that they had gotten credit with and right after they moved out they went into bankruptcy. And when they went into bankruptcy a fellow by the name of Leroy Fry [sic. Leo Fry], he had loaned them I think a million dollars and so when they went into bankruptcy, well he got it out of bankruptcy to save his money.  So that's how it came to be up for grabs 'cause he had it and he was trying to be prejudiced when he had it because he couldn't get no gaming license and he had a bar.  So he was charging black people five dollars for a Coke [Coca-Cola] to come in and of course they reported it to the license people downtown and he couldn't do that so they closed him up, he didn't have a bar.  So then after that he had just the hotel and it didn't do, couldn't do anything it was too big of a building and wasn't making enough money.  So several people rented out little space in the Moulin Rouge like to open up a bar and a little inn in the Moulin Rouge.  One time they opened up a little bit more space and that went on for several years and that didn't work out too good so then it just kind of laid dormant until I went there.  But I did a lot of things before the Moulin Rouge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 508051
Speaker 1: After you leave the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and, and you said everybody started going to the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  The strip is then developed now and people are going there 'cause they were following the lights and the money, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).  That happened way after I left the, the Cotton Club.  It didn't happen when I was there.  When I left the Cotton Club it was in 1950 and in Las Vegas [Nevada] the city as a whole you could shoot a cannon through it.  That's when the war [Korean War] was going on and everybody left and went to Washington or Alaska and different places and I was married to Bill Scruggs [Knight Preddy's third husband, William Scruggs] during that time and he was teaching school here in Las Vegas not making any money and they opened up an ammunition depot in Hawthorne, Nevada and everybody went there.  So I was still here but I went up there one week to see him and I went, they had two clubs in Hawthorne, Nevada.  They had a white club and a couple of white fellows opened up a club where blacks could go it was segregated too.  So when I went up there I visited the black club and by me who was working in that business and went in and talked with them and they took a liking to me. And they, I told them what I was doing and they asked me, "How would you like to have this club?"  No money other than that little bit of money my husband was making and the little bit of money I was making.  So I said, "Well what would I have to do?"  So he said, "You know what?  You're a very interesting person and we really like you.  If you bring us six hundred dollars, you can have this place," and that's how I got the place in Hawthorne and I was there for seven years in Hawthorne.
Speaker 1: Wow so what was the name of this club?
Speaker 2: When I bought the club they called it the Lincoln Bar and after I was there for a while we named it the Tonga Club [Hawthorne, Nevada] and that's when I was first involved with gaming licenses in Hawthorne in 1950.
Speaker 1: So did you have to get a gaming license to open this club?  So tell me about the process of getting your gaming license.
Speaker 2: The process of gaming licenses back in that day was very minute because gaming wasn't like it is now there was no lot of competition.  Basically, basically you would go down and get a business license and then include gaming with it wasn't that hard to get a license during that time.  I was there for seven years and I had a full gaming license.  We had keno, we had 21 [Blackjack] and we had craps and we had poker and I had a bar and a restaurant.  So it was very lucrative for the first three or four years.  I made a lot of money because Hawthorne was the stopping point between Carson City [Nevada] and Las Vegas and in Reno [Nevada] and people was coming from everywhere they would come to this place in Hawthorne.  Then I left there because things went bad about two years before I left and then I moved back to Las Vegas.
Story_ID: 508052
Speaker 1: This made you the first woman, the first black woman to get a gaming license in Nevada is that right?
Speaker 2: I'm the first woman of color to ever have a nonrestrictive gaming license in the world in a hotel.  I have to get it straight now first woman of color to have had a nonrestrictive gaming license in a hotel in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there's never been anybody else in a hotel in the world that had a nonrestrictive gaming license.  They only have two kind of licenses, it is restrictive and nonrestrictive and I had a nonrestrictive.  I could have the same thing that Steve Wynn has if you had the money.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that means?
Speaker 2: Restrictive gaming license you can only have so many slot machines and I think now it's fifteen slot machines and if you have a nonrestrictive gaming license then you can have anything in your place that you have money for.  Like back in the day I had three 21 [Blackjack] tables whereas Steve Wynn probably got three thousand so but I have the same opportunity that he has to put them in there if I have the money and that's why you have small places and large places. You know, in all of North Las Vegas [Nevada] you have clubs down there and they might be worth a million dollars and Steve Wynn's hotel is worth a billion dollars.  So it depends on--which you still can do whatever he's doing if you have the money and it's very, very hard to get a nonrestrictive gaming license.  It wasn't hard the first time I got one, the second time I got one it wasn't too hard but when I went to the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] it was a different story.  It took me longer that's why I wasn't as successful 'cause I spent too much money trying to get the gaming license.  I was there too long before I could get them so I could make money to stay there.  I had a person that I knew on the gaming board and I was asking him--I was talking to him one day and I asked him, "Why is it taking me so long, I'm having such a hard time getting a gaming license and I have one right down the street about ten blocks."  I knew him and he said, "Well Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy] always remember when you're moving up in the world it gets harder, it don't get easier."  People always said because I was at the Moulin Rouge it was only five minutes from downtown, so you're getting too close to downtown during that time for a black person.  I know Lou Rawls tried to get a license with another group down the street from me about a mile and they flatly refused to let them have a gaming license because he was involved in the corporation and he was black.  So they wouldn't let them have it either unless they got rid of him.
Story_ID: 508053
Speaker 1: You said things started going bad two years before you left. What happened?
Speaker 2: At Hawthorne [Nevada]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: The plant closed up, it kind of closed down you know it was really open and it was after the war [Korean War] where they cut out so many things and people started moving.  So they had started moving back to Las Vegas [Nevada] and other places and I remember the El Morocco club in Las Vegas when I was in Hawthorne, he owned the El Morocco, a friend of mine and he called me up and said he was getting ready to move to Alaska and Las Vegas had hit rock bottom and he didn't want to be here anymore and he wanted to know if I wanted a club, he was going to give it to me.  I remember telling him I have, I wouldn't live in Las Vegas if they made me the mayor and I don't want the club 'cause I'm up here with a club [Tonga Club, Hawthorne, Nevada] that's making plenty money and everything is jumping. And so anyway he left and I think he just kind of left the club.  I remember some more people took over after that but then they became big and famous after that 'cause when Las Vegas caught back on--it was a depression here for a while in Las Vegas. You know, the clubs weren't making any money and people moved away and they thought it had hit rock bottom but it didn't last very long, it caught back on and never stopped anymore.
Speaker 1: So really this was during the time that the war was going on well after the war.
Speaker 2: Right like 19--this was 1950.
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950], okay. Now and, you're, you're fairly young when you get your first gaming license.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was I guess I must have been in my thirties.  I can't remember, I guess I could go back and count it up.
Speaker 1: Yeah well yeah, thirties 'cause you were born in '20 [1920] and this is 1950 okay.
Story_ID: 508054
Speaker 1: Did you have any involvement in civil rights in 1950, '55 [1955] and '60 [1960] starts some civil rights action?
Speaker 2: Yes because when I--I worked very close with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I was involved with all the things that they did here when they got the consent decree and when they were integrated for Las Vegas [Nevada] to be integrated, I worked along with that and I have a lot of history back on a lot of the things I did do and I worked with it when I was in Hawthorne [Nevada].  I was the president of the NAACP when I was in Hawthorne and I worked along--the chapter up there along with Las Vegas and you know I guess it's okay to skip and go back.  When I was in Hawthorne and I had the club there [Tonga Club, Hawthorne, Nevada] I was kind of like the halfway point to Carson City [Nevada] and people used to come to my place and meet up and then we'd go to Carson City when we was fighting for integration and so forth.  I remember when we went to Carson City they had a little room about a fourth big as this and they called it the Buzzard Roost [ph.] and this is where when we went to the legislation session it would hold about ten or twelve people and that's where we had to sit.  You had to bend over to get in this little place to sit to watch the legislation session. 'Cause I was young and cocky and I used to say all the time, they can go down and pass a law to run all of us out of town and we can't do anything about it.  We're sitting out here looking, we don't have no voice, we didn't have no people involved in politics or anything.  But then that's why we were working to change things and finally we got someone was elected to the legislation session and it was a long story behind getting integrated in Las Vegas 'cause Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan] was the person that really spearhead this and I worked closely with him at NAACP, I was his vice president for a long time.  He was the head of everything but I organized a lot of clubs.  I was the first person to organize a women's NAACP women's club throughout the country they hadn't even done that in other places. And then we were like a support group too, the NAACP and then when I organized I included a lot of white groups and we used to have teas and fundraisers together out at the convention center, because during that time blacks couldn't do anything out there but just work. And, and I remember I was a member of Gamma Phi Delta Sorority when it first started and that's been about thirty-nine years ago.  We used to have our Ebony fashion show [Ebony Fashion Fair] on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I think we were the first persons to go out there that could use something in the hotels 'cause we used to have for the NAACP convention we used to have to use the convention center and then we used a place up at the country club.  We used the churches and I had another business and we used to use my business.  I had a cleaners and this is where everybody met at my place so that's why I would come to be so well known, I guess because I was always in the mix. And I would always make trips to Carson City and load busses of people to go up there to do whatever we were doing trying to get that legislation passed on certain things so it could be integrated in Las Vegas.
Story_ID: 508055
Speaker 1: So you moved back to Las Vegas [Nevada] when?
Speaker 2: In '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I came back to Las Vegas when the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] opened.  I came back and stayed thirty days because during that time it was so glamorous and I was making a lot of money in Hawthorne [with the Tonga Club, Hawthorne, Nevada] and I came down here and stayed a whole month; I had forsaken everything up there.  I remember when I came down here and my husband [Knight Preddy's third husband, William Scruggs] would come down here to see me instead of me going back up there.  He told me that, "Well this is the end of this, you have to come back to Hawthorne [Nevada] or I'm not coming down here so this is the end of it."  I went back to Hawthorne and stayed another couple of years and then I told him, "This is the end of it, you can stay as long as you want but I'm moving back to Las Vegas."  During that time we didn't have any housing 'cause they always showed the worst end of Las Vegas like all the shacks and stuff.  But when we came here my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] had six thousand in a money belt that she was wearing around her waist and then everybody didn't have houses or whatever because there weren't any built, everybody was working up at the magnesium plant [Basic Magnesium, Inc. plant] out in Henderson [Nevada].  So there was nobody starving to death they didn't have no houses because they didn't have any here and they didn't have any lumberyards here to furnish enough lumber for people to build.  So people were snatching anything they could snatch to build a place to stay.  I kind of lost my train of thought but my dad [Carl Chiles] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were talking about (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --built a house right away.  It wasn't a big fine house when we first came but he built it out of new lumber and we had like a three bedroom house that he built 'cause me and my husband [Knight Preddy's first husband, Luther Walker] and my kids and mother and father and my brother [Clarence Chiles] lived together.  But then right after that, then my father--you could buy a lot for fifty dollars or one hundred fifty.  You got a big time lot and then--'cause he, I had bought a lot and then me and my husband got a divorce so I sold--gave it to my father and he built a big house on that lot and they lived there for like forty years and maybe twenty years ago they sold it to the church.  So now it's got one of the biggest churches on that lot that they have in the black churches.
Speaker 1: And was this on the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well you know they've got maybe two or three hundred black churches in Las Vegas.  We have more churches per capita than any place in the world.  People complain about it but I think it's a blessing because they've got that many clubs, so why not have that many churches 'cause if they didn't have but one or two churches it wouldn't hold the people.  A lot of the churches have got like Mountaintop [Mountaintop Faith Ministries, Las Vegas, Nevada], I think they might have six or ten thousand members and Second Baptist [Second Baptist Church, Las Vegas, Nevada] at one time had six thousand, Victory [Victory Missionary Baptist Church, Las Vegas, Nevada] had six thousand members and they got a lot of the smaller churches and they are still building them because it's just so many people coming here.  I understand we're getting seven thousand people a month just moving into Las Vegas.  They're moving here faster than people can accommodate with the roads, the transportation and the schools; they can't build them fast enough and the streets are so congested.  The freeways, you know, were built up and I remember when you could leave the Westside and go to the airport [McCarran International Airport, Paradise, Nevada] and it would take you like ten minutes.  Now you have to leave two hours ahead of time by the time they get through searching your bags and all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 508056
Speaker 1: Go back to where you said you came back when Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] opened and I guess this was in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And it was the first integrated casino, right? Okay. Now, tell me the history that's behind this--
Speaker 2: I'm a little hard of hearing, so.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry; tell me about the history that was made about the first integrated gambling establishment there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Place, yeah. Well it was a couple of white guys who had the idea of coming here and building a hotel like that.  So they had these big ideas in which--it was they built a really nice place and they spent a lot of money and incidentally I think when they built that hotel it costs between $5 and 6 million.  Now they're building houses that cost that much.  But they had all this mahogany wood inside and all of the murals and things and they had the largest kitchen in the city.  They must have had fifty chefs at the Moulin Rouge and a lot of them was imported from other parts of the country.  They were supposed to have had all the best food and all the entertainers--they, everybody that came here was brought in from out of town 'cause they didn't have people of that caliber to work in the hotels. Like, they didn't have any dealers on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and they didn't have any cocktail waitresses on the strip so these people a lot of them came from out of town.  They had a lot of famous waiters from different places and I think it was really big and well attended.  They didn't have standing room there when it first opened and they had as many white people come in as a matter of fact more whites than blacks because it was more whites in town than it was blacks but they had a lot of out of town people coming.  And a lot of the stars were patronizing the place like Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] would come over with his group; Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra those types of people were visiting the Rouge.
Speaker 1: Didn't they sign legislation there at that hotel?
Speaker 2: Yes the consent decree was signed there at the hotel and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was responsible for that because they were talking about doing a march on the strip and I know Hank Greenspun who owned the Sun newspaper [Las Vegas Sun].  He was instrumental in pulling the people together and saying that this wasn't the right thing in Las Vegas [Nevada].  This would really kill it if they marched on the strip so they called that off and that's when they signed the bill to integrate Las Vegas.  When I was there I had it declared as a historic site and it had to be something to happen there significant if it hadn't been there for fifty years and that was one of the things that they used that and along with Joe Louis worked at the Moulin Rouge and he was a noted figure.  That was one of the criteria of getting it to be a historic place.
Story_ID: 508057
Speaker 1: Did you know Joe Louis?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I knew him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about him. Tell me about him.
Speaker 2: Well I know that he was big handsome guy and a friend of mine was dating him back in the day and I had, was at a party a couple of times and later through the years after when he had retired.  I visited several shows.  She lived in New York [New York] and she would come down here and I would visit several shows along with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He was a quiet guy because he was like most people say that he owned part of the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] but he didn't according to my history.  But he worked there as a front person and this grew a lot of people to come to the Moulin Rouge to see him.  So I have pictures of when they had the float with him and all the girls in a parade that they have here every year.  They also used him at Caesars Palace [Las Vegas, Nevada] as a person that people would like to come and he didn't own nothing at Caesars Palace.  I think he got paid very well at Caesars Palace. But a lot of people came just to see him 'cause they had a big statue in the building, I don't know if it's still there or not.
Story_ID: 508058
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] and you were telling me that there was a documentary done and tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well the documentary was done by Greg Morris when he did it it's been many years ago and he did the documentary on everything that made the Westside look bad.  Of course that's still happening right now.  When the news is on and things happening they show all the bad parts.  They never talk about the good things that happen on the Westside.  You know like a lot of organizations were doing a lot of things and a lot of schools.  Right now we have so many really nice schools like Agassi [Andre Agassi Preparatory Academy, Las Vegas, Nevada].  He has a school over there and one hundred men have a nice school over there.  You have to speak up if you're telling me something then you have to say it.  They've got several more schools on the drawing board.  They have the library over there, they have the art center [West Las Vegas Arts Center, Las Vegas, Nevada] which is doing a fantastic job and a lot of other organizations putting on programs and stuff, you never hear anything about that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The only thing you hear is about the dope and the prostitution which is none of that there.  It never has been that much, because all the drugs are brought in by (unclear) Howard [ph.] people and blacks manage to get a little bit of it and of course it's really detrimental the way that they have it because one of the only clubs that we have left have a lot of people hanging around.  You couldn't get a twenty dollar bill change, but they're selling a little dope for two dollars and that kind of stuff.  So that's a bad image for the Westside and they pick up on that but then they don't talk about the things that happen on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  I know my three sons and my daughter [Janice Walker Currie] work on the strip as far back as twenty-five years or thirty and they always worked.  My daughter worked at the Desert Inn [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I had a son who worked at the Hilton, he's at the Mandalay Bay [Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] now and one worked at the Tropicana [Tropicana Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] and they were the first dealers out and they were very well known.  The Walker Brothers, and my son have told me a lot of times about when he was at the Hilton.  This is where, what's his name? Redd Foxx was gambling there all of the time and they had a room in the back where the Baccarat was, you could go and rest in the back and he would sit back there and do his drugs right back there in the room and anybody else that was doing drugs but they were big time people.  The police can't come in the hotel and arrest nobody.  They've got people here that are cops or something, there're hotel people that's in charge of that kind of thing.  So if the cops off the streets come here they meet those people first and they got told what they want and they are not welcomed up in here.  So you can't get anything out of here unless they want it out. So now on the Westside the police come over there and--I remember one time I had the People's Choice [People's Choice Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and they'd come over there and when I had the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] they came in there and went behind the bar and went in my cash register but I was black so they could get away with that kind of stuff, you know.  So there are so many things that happened in West Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] that they don't get the right dues for what's really going on over there.
Story_ID: 508059
Speaker 1: But you were also saying about the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] back in the day where there weren't--houses weren't built and that people had a lot of money but they didn't have a place to stay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't have a place to stay.
Speaker 1: Where, where did they live?  You were telling us--
Speaker 2: Well I remember when we first came here a lot of people slept on the grass between the post office and all the way down to Main Street.  There wasn't any houses maybe one or two, it was all grass and at the Union Plaza [Las Vegas, Nevada] there was a train station and that was all grass.  Some black and white people were sleeping out there, getting up going to work at that plant [Basic Magnesium, Inc. plant] out in Henderson [Nevada].  They didn't have any place to stay.  I remember when they built the first housing project in Las Vegas [Nevada], so to speak.  Now they had right in the downtown area they had quite a few old houses that had been built like twenty years ago then and a few people lived there.  They had a few of those on the Westside that was built, there wasn't that many but maybe ten or fifteen and then a few people had the little shacks but they weren't--when they show Las Vegas it looks like somewhere in Africa.  Now that's a famous thing to show.  They've got that picture and it's on everything.  I know a friend of mine wrote a book and she has it on the back of her book.  But I guarantee you nothing like that will be on the back of my book.  If I can't say something about progress and things that people did do here, of course now we went through some struggles.
Story_ID: 508060
Speaker 1: The reason I can't witness that is because I didn't, so you can't witness too much that somebody else happened.  You have to talk to somebody else who went through some of those things where they didn't have--they was misused on a job or something.  I never worked for anybody else; I always had my own thing.  I never worked on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] so I don't know really what was happening other than what I heard people say. And I know in my family always had good jobs and they were always in the top ranking of whatever was going on on the strip.  But I imagine that there were some people who had a tough time.  They have tougher times getting jobs now than they did back then 'cause if you were good to deal that's what they went by.  But now they're catering to the foreigners and of course they work cheaper and they are easier to get along with because, you know, we people want to be respected and we want to be recognized and those people will do anything just to be where they are.  You know, and I think that's a lot of the reason for some of that.  We're more arrogant, I think to being successful than people who are just coming to town and they're just trying to get their foot in.  But they will be same way as soon as they do, because they're already moving right now, you know, and I think that--and another thing about not disrespecting the gaming people it's like anything else, they cater to people where they make their money.  They make their money from all those foreign people that come over here from China.  That's why they recognize those people and get people to work there 'cause that's where the biggest portion of the money is coming from there and Mexico and all those other places where they have a lot of money, because that's the market.  I know like the California Club [Las Vegas, Nevada]--gee it just slipped my memory, they mark the people from some country and that's all they have.  Everything they do they cater to these people.  They have a whole success of these people coming that keep their place going.  When you are in business that's what you have to do is look out for your revenue and where the money is coming from.  And as we were talking about the houses and things earlier, some people has some little old trailers and some people would go around and find some old lumber or cardboard and they build a place 'cause you know it didn't rain here but once a year during that time, twice for sure.  It was very hot and dusty when we moved over here--when we moved out here.  But like I said right away when my--I came out here first and my father [Carl Chiles] and my brother and my husband [Knight Preddy's first husband, Luther Walker] came first and then I came.  By the time my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] came, he had built this house and then after that they built a bigger house.  I never had the privilege of living in a shack, shack.  They were shacks according to what the people are doing now. People was--I think when we came here it was only like a hundred and eighty black people in Las Vegas [Nevada] so it was a very few people.  When that plant [Basic Magnesium, Inc. plant, Henderson, Nevada] opened up that's when an influx of people came here.  Most people came here from Louisiana.  I remember Tallulah [Louisiana] was a prize name of the people that was here.  Because when I got here and all I heard about was Tallulah and I was very quiet about it because I said, now I've been to school and I've read about a lot of places but I never heard of this place.  It must be someplace overseas, something that I didn't know about.  But then later on after I got in the mix and got to know people most of the people here was from Tallulah and most of the people here now are from Tallulah and Arkansas and Mississippi.  But there were never very many people here from Oklahoma.  I never knew fifty people from Oklahoma that lived in Las Vegas even now.  I think, so I understand in a different part of the South, people left that area going to certain places like a lot of people from certain places went to Los Angeles [California], some went to Chicago [Illinois], and a few people came to Las Vegas.  But it wasn't like people were on welfare they had plenty money, they were eating even though food was rationed, I remember shoes was rationed and people would buy shoe stamps.  Me having four kids [James Walker, Richard Walker, Glen Walker and Janice Walker Currie] I think they allowed you maybe like three stamps for each kid so I wound up having four kids and three times four is twelve so I had twelve shoe stamps.  And of course at some point I did sell some of the stamps because I didn't need that many and I gave them to people who didn't have any stamps, so some of the maybe hard times that I could witness that were some of the worst times that I went through.  But as far as food and all that--and they didn't have any--black people didn't get any important work to do because it wasn't any need of coming here with a high education 'cause you couldn't get no job but a porter's job.  A lot of people was working teachers and things worked as porters because they couldn't get any other job.  Now they did hire black teachers but not very many.  They didn't have many schools here anyway so they couldn't hire that many but when they did open up more schools then they hired a lot of black teachers in Las Vegas.
Story_ID: 508061
Speaker 1: Well let's go back to the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] closes and, and what do you do next where do you go next?
Speaker 2: Well when the Moulin Rouge closed--you're talking about with me or when it closed (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No the first time.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was still in Hawthorne [Nevada] when it closed.  It closed in '55 [1955] and I didn't move back until '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I came back in '57 [1957] I still had the place [Tonga Club] in Hawthorne but a couple of months later my husband [Knight Preddy's third husband, William Scruggs] sold the business and moved down here and then I went to work at--when I first came I had a friend that was running a liquor store.  It was a big, big liquor store and when I moved back she asked me to come and help her out.  I went up there and worked a couple of weeks.  Then they had all these clubs on the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I had a friend that worked in one of the clubs and the Chinese people was running several clubs over here during that time.  So then she asked me to come to work at this Chinese place and it was called the Louisiana Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I went to work over at that place as a dealer.  I worked there and then Town Tavern [Las Vegas, Nevada] at that time was a Chinese club and it was a nicer place so I went to work over there and I worked several, can't remember the years but I worked for several years and then they stopped women from dealing in the City of Las Vegas [Nevada].  So they when they stopped them from dealing, several of us left and went up to Reno [Nevada].  I went up there and stayed about six months a lot of the others went up there and stayed--some of them never came back.  When I left I left my family here, my kids--my parents [Hattie Crabtree Chiles and Carl Chiles] raised my kids [James Walker, Richard Walker, Glen Walker and Janice Walker Currie] anyway, so I stayed up there about six months and then I moved back to Las Vegas. And when I moved back to Las Vegas, then I went into a different business.  I went into the cleaning business and I did that for a couple of years and then I went into the dress business and I did that for a couple of years and I had a dress shop on Sahara [Avenue] which was considered across town. Didn't no blacks have any businesses over there during that time.
Story_ID: 508062
Speaker 1: I need to clarify some dates.  Who is (pronunciation) Jerry Nuget?
Speaker 2: Jerry Nugget [Jerry's Nugget Casino, North Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 1: Nugget? Okay, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a club that's in North Las Vegas [Nevada] and that's the only job that I had--significant job that I had in Las Vegas [Nevada], I worked.  I was working there close with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time and they were trying to get blacks to fill in some of the hotels and they were asking if your brought me somebody that had experience we would hire them.  So they came to me and asked me if I would be willing to take a job down there for six months because they agreed to hire someone if they had experience and I had this little business, I really didn't want to do it but they begged and begged and so finally I went to Jerry's Nugget to work six months--to open the door like to work.  When I went down there it was so good because the people treated me with the highest of respect because they were scared to--the NAACP was in full force during that time and you could mention it anywhere.  I remember my daughter [Janice Walker Currie] working at Desert Inn [Las Vegas, Nevada] and people used to bring things out there for the NAACP and they would ask for her right away they'd let her be off and take care of business, that's the NAACP you let her do this.  When I was working Jerry's Nugget if they call me, they'd called me out of the pit to the telephone to answer the call because I was working with the NAACP.  So after working there six months I got in just in time to be in the profit sharing and during those times they had profit sharing at a lot of the hotels some of the do now, I guess.  But that meant that you'd get a profit sharing off of all of the money that was being made until you retired or until you quit.  So that sounded good to me and I wasn't in no big time business during that time so I worked there for seven years but I worked as I wanted to, I got off when I got ready.  I remember when they had Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] inauguration well I went to that inauguration and I remember how they treated me when I went. With all, it was a big deal for them; you know, they let me off to go to Washington, D.C. and anything I wanted to do because I'm the big person with the NAACP.  So I got treated royally by working down there and I worked there long.  But then I left there--the NAACP recruited me to run for an office because I was a really high profile person and they thought that I'd be the right person to do this and they were backing me to run.  So then I left Jerry's Nugget and I went to--I had a friend that owned Ruben's Supper Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and my husband, I had gotten married again and my husband was working there during that time and I have to kind of remember.
Story_ID: 508063
Speaker 1: So when I left Jerry's Nugget [Jerry's Nugget Casino, North Las Vegas, Nevada] and went there then we took that club over [Woody's Supper Club; People's Choice Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] and, 'cause I had that place of business when I was running for the office of city council person and I think that was in 1981, I believe. And it wasn't popular for blacks to be running and especially a woman and I was the first woman that ran for the city council that won the primary and went into the general election. And I was running against a man, he was an incumbent, he was an attorney and he was white.  So I had a hard road to hoe with me being the person that I was to run against some high powered person.  So that made history because I lost by seventy-two votes but when the election made the announcement, they announced that I had won and it stayed like that for about fifteen or twenty minutes and the whole town on my side of town was all stirred up and they thought we had won and then they came back on the radio and said they made a mistake, that I didn't win I lost.  And of course the people who were kind of in power claimed they hollered like they did at Bush's [President George Walker Bush] election, that they cheated.  I didn't want the position there anyway because what little bit I knew about politics is one of the worst things you could be involved in.  It didn't bother me but everybody else was so upset.  So they got together and you had to pay for a recall.  So they got together and paid to have a recall and I think I believe if I can remember correctly it cost something like six thousand dollars and they had this recall to see what they had done. And I remember telling them, if they did anything and you did it over it's going to come out the same thing and they weren't going to change it just because you're having a recall.  So when they had the recall they did find two votes that should have been somewhere else, for me and not to the other person but I still lost by seventy-two votes.  So that was a thing that went on for years.  It's in all of the documentary that comes about that I lost by seventy-two votes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-two votes.
Story_ID: 508064
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about going from being a keno writer to a dealer, tell me how that transition worked (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well a keno writer is considered a dealer too.  You're just a dealer with craps, 21 [Blackjack], poker, keno and whatever, they all are dealers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I just started out as a keno writer [at the Cotton Club, Las Vegas, Nevada] and during that time this place that I was working they had--it was a black owned place and they had keno writers and didn't, they had a standard on keno writers.  I don't like to say this but you couldn't work there if you didn't look a certain way.  He didn't hire any women unless they were pretty and they had to be light.  So that's why keno kind of stood out in that particular area, with the black casino.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they had their women bartenders and they had women 21 dealers also but keno was kind of special 'cause working on keno you were kind of like--you haven't visited any of the keno places here you know it's behind a counter and all the women that work back there, I guess they want them all to be beautiful so it could add something to the club.  There is no difference in a keno writer than a 21 dealer other than it's you're, just a matter of your choice.  I'd rather be a 21 dealer because you, I don't know, it's a more glorified space to be a 21 dealer back in the day.  I don't think it's so much like that now because they are so strict in these places now where I auditioned to be a dealer on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] at the Dunes [Dunes Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I think I worked two days and I never came back anymore because you couldn't talk to the people.  See where I was working you were free to mingle and talk with all the people, with all the stars and whoever it was but out here now the dealers can't talk or hold any conversation with people. You know, you've got to watch what you're doing.  You might be able to say, "Hello how are you doing, where are you from," but I'm talking about hold a conversation like when I was working in the clubs on the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada].  You know, you talk of your life's history and even find you a boyfriend talking to the people you were dealing to (laughter).
Story_ID: 508065
Speaker 1: After you left Jerry's Nugget [Jerry's Nugget Casino, North Las Vegas, Nevada] is that when you took over the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After I left Jerry's Nugget I went back to the club that I told you about called Ruben's Supper Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I went into the dress business and that's when I had the dress shop [Sarann's Fashions, Las Vegas, Nevada] and my husband [Knight Preddy's fifth husband, Joe Preddy] worked there. Then it was Woodrow's [Woodrow Wilson] place and his wife and I were very close friends and she kind of like lost her eyesight and he was the person that worked up at the ammunition--at the depot up in Henderson [Nevada] and he'd been up there--I think he worked up there like forty years and he didn't want to retire and they sold us the place, this People's Choice [Woody's Supper Club; People's Choice Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada].  We renamed it People's Choice and that's when I got into the gaming business on the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada].  I was there about fifteen years and then I left there and went to the Moulin Rouge and I didn't about the Moulin Rouge until 1985.  A lot of people think I opened it up in '55 [1955] but I didn't open up until '85 [1985] and closed it in '97 [1997].  So that was the highlight of my life, was from '85 [1985] until '97 [1997] when I brought the Moulin Rouge to fruition.  It had not been opened since '85 [1985] fully and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean since '55 [1955].  It hadn't been opened since when?
Speaker 2: Since '55 [1955] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 2: --when it closed that five months it hadn't been opened into a full fledged place until I opened up in '85 [1985].  It was like a hotel, kind of run down, where people lived in and out and they had opened up the bar two or three times but when I went there and opened it up a full fledged hotel and it took me a long time--I was there several years before I got a gaming license and by the time I got the gaming license I had spent a lot of my money and it took so long and I could never recuperate with finances to bring it up to the next level.  That's when I decided to close and my husband had a enlarged heart and he was--my son [James Walker] decided that he was going to go back to work on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] because he was used to making $100,000 a year where he was working practically for free.  We got paid if there was any money left and by my husband having this enlarged heart and I had worked hard and I just decided to close. And I--
Speaker 1: So from '85 [1985] to what year did you--
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] for two years well let me step back just a little bit to '97 [1997].  How many years--it was from 1985 until 1997?
Speaker 2: Um-hm about twelve, twelve or thirteen years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twelve years, okay.
Story_ID: 508066
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, you said that the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] had not been opened fully since '55 [1955] when it closed.  But in the '60s [1960s] wasn't it place that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] used for meetings and a lot of (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, like an office.
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of civil rights--
Speaker 2: We had an office. The NAACP didn't have an office; it was attorney Charles Keller had an office there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They rented out office space in the Moulin Rouge and he had an office space there and several other people had office spaces in there and that's where the law was passed, they held the meeting in the office.  Moulin Rouge wasn't opened per se (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Not as a casino.
Speaker 2: As a casino.
Speaker 1: Right, okay. But the building space was used to, to help get the agreements sign for desegregation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you remember in the '60s [1960s] it was a time when lots of things happened.  The March on Washington, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] what were your thoughts, what were some of the things that were going on in Las Vegas [Nevada] during that time?
Speaker 2: I think Las Vegas being a smaller place and I think there was a lot of sympathy for when all this happened and I remember the day that Kennedy was killed because during that time I had a cleaners, I never will forget that and I thought that it impacted Las Vegas somewhat because I think it gave more courage for people to start doing more things to make a better life for black people if I'm following what you're alluding to.  I thought more people was interested in the NAACP and we had a lot more going back in the day than we have now 'cause to me now and no reflection on the NAACP but it's kind of like a band aid, it wound up being more or less like a social thing.  People have banquets and they give trophies and honors and that type of thing. Back in the day we had banquets but we were still talking about marching and opening up jobs for people. 'Cause we would always have some dynamic speakers coming from the top part of the NAACP and when they'd come here their thing would be tearing Las Vegas open because of the prejudices that they had here and they weren't hiring black people.  I think that was the trend of our time that we were working on during the time that all of this happened which now is kind of like, more flowered down.  When they'd have a banquets and stuff they talk about who is popular, and who got an award, who's doing this and that type of thing.  It was a lot more effective back in the day than it is now.
Story_ID: 508067
Speaker 1: So what happens to you or what happens in your life after you close the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Well one thing happened when I got busier with no pay (laughter) because I've been in everything that you could ever mention on the Westside [Las Vegas, Nevada] and everybody still relates to me as being the Moulin Rouge.  I meet people every day saying, "When are you going to open up?" "Never."  I get more interviews than I'm able to attend.  I've had so many interviews and people want to write a book that's been the latest thing that everybody has been contacting me about. Just since I was on the Trumpet Awards I guess I've had at least ten contacts for me to get involved in doing something.  They just did a story on me a couple of weeks on Channel 3 [KSNV-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] and somebody called me last night and wanted to do a story on me about the election and I told them I wasn't available last night 'cause I was going to come here this morning, I didn't want to be bothered.  And all the organizations and everything that goes on they still respect me as being the person that owned the Moulin Rouge and the person who has been out here getting the Bushes [President George Herbert Walker Bush and President George Walker Bush] for so many years and my publicist always tells me that I'm a very modest person.  I don't like to pat myself on the shoulder, now if she was here she would be stewing at me not saying what she thought I should say, because I've always been like on the quiet side and I've never been tooting my own horn, and like a lot of people do.  I know a lot of them that maybe haven't done as much as I've done but to let them tell it I've heard that in this election. So all the organizations, I guess they call me kind of like the godmother and I hate that name, but she's [Knight Preddy's editor, Cynthia Cicero] trying to tie that in with the book ['72 Years in Las Vegas,' Sarann Knight Preddy] that we're writing and I'm trying to come up with something else because everybody always confronts me about everything.  I get more calls, I'm the information bureau.  If they need a number or need to know where to go to do certain things they always call me.  So I'm busy and I'm busy with my grandson at sixteen.  I adopted him and his sister and she graduated and gone on, he's off into entertaining.  He's an actor, he plays the drums, he sings, he dances and he choreographs plays.  He's in all kinds of plays so he thinks--he's looking at the paper every day to see if he's in the paper.
Speaker 1: What's your grandson's name?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What's your grandson's name? What is your grandson's name?
Speaker 2: Oh that him there, Avree. Avree Walker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had the privilege of play for, play for Senator Colin Powell [sic. HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was one, he was here last week so he's busy.
Story_ID: 508068
Speaker 1: I know that you, you said you don't like to toot your horn and talk about yourself but only you can best tell us the things that you have done and why you have done them because you have a passion for them.  So tell me about some of the other things that you have done.
Speaker 2: Well I've always had a passion for people and I've always wanted to help people and I can remember in all of my endeavors that I always have included other people with me, I've never been that type that I want everything for myself.  When I was in business I always reached back and got someone to come in especially when I was at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada].  I had a lot of friends that bad times fell on them and I didn't have a lot of money but I would always create a job where they could come in and work and these people never forgotten.  Like if they were in bad and needed rent money or something, I'd let them come in 'cause I could very easily do that and put them on the payroll than I could pay them out of my pocket and I've done that with several people and I think all that comes back and I've helped a lot of people.  My son used to tell me all the time, "Mother you can't save the world," and people would come in hungry and they didn't have any money, I would always feed them.  When I'm out now people never forget that I've had people to walk up to me and just give me some money.  I remember I was in a place at one time, this guy came over and I was talking to somebody, he walked up and gave me forty dollars and when I looked around I said, "Who is that and why did he do that?" And he said, "Just take it gracefully," he knows why he gave it to you maybe you don't but did something in his life.  I think that rubbed off an awful lot because like now people give me a lot of praise and a lot of things that I think I wouldn't, wouldn't have gotten if I hadn't been that type of person.  I'm still like that now; I go out of my way helping people all the time to a higher cost to me that I don't have to do it.  I've had some deep tragedies in my life and I know some people admire me because by having these types of tragedies a lot of people would have given up and stopped.  But I had a granddaughter [Jamey Walker] to get murdered in 1981 and she had just come back from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and she was scared to live up there because she wasn't used to living in a big city and she kept begging to come back. Because she kept saying, "I'm going to get killed up here."  So I talked to her father [James Walker] about letting her come back so she finally came back and she wasn't back very long before somebody kidnapped her and killed her so I guess she had this premonition something was going to happen.  Then after that I had my daughter [Janice Walker Currie] was living in Denver [Colorado] and somebody went in and robbed her and her husband [Walter Marshall] and set the house on fire and killed her. And we've never found out any more than you know about it, never found out who did it or whatever but I know my granddaughter was kidnapped for ransom.  It was on a Friday and they called in and they wanted seventy-five thousand dollars and my grandson--my son talked to them and he told them that he couldn't get the money, this is Friday night where would I get seventy-five thousand dollars from.  So then the next day they called back and said we picked her up through a mistake and we're going let her go and then that eased his tension of thinking she's going to be okay. They didn't--we didn't hear from them anymore until the next morning.  The news we got then was they had found her dead over the cliff out of Las Vegas [Nevada] dam.  So those are some of the things that maybe could have stopped me from doing but I was always determined to keep going and as I mentioned earlier that I'm a person that feels like when you break an egg it's no point in crying, you can't put it back together so you got to keep on going.  Then I lost my daughter and my brother [Clarence Chiles] at the same time.  In the recent years my mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] died in November and my husband [Knight Preddy's fifth husband, Joe Preddy] died in July and I had another son to die in October.  So that was three people almost back to back.  But I'm still taking care of my grandson [Avree Walker] and I have two granddaughters.  One of them is forty-one and the other one is forty-four I think and they depend on me more so than he does and I keep telling them when are they going to grow up 'cause time is running out and they really need to.  But they were born with a silver spoon in their mouth so they still think that time is the same but it's not exactly the same but they still feel like 'cause their parents were making a lot of money when they came up as teenagers and they had the best of the world.  They travelled all to Paris [France] and Europe and all over the country and to New York [New York] to see shows and all that kind of stuff and had the best of everything.  So they still think that's there and it's not.  But I think that was some of the things that kept me going is the love that I get from other people and the things that I did they appreciate it and I think the reason for that was because I was always gracious and kind and trying to help everybody.
Story_ID: 508069
Speaker 1: You also talked about a car accident that you were in.
Speaker 2: When I had the car accident I had a dress shop [Sarann's Fashions, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I used to go to Los Angeles [California] to do my buying and I was down there and on my way back I had just bought a new car and thinking that nothing would happen to the car because it's brand new, I had a blowout in the car.  I turned over two or three times and I had my niece with me and we were on the side of the road and I guess we had been there for quite some time and she was able to get out of the car and walk.  It was a two lane and she went on the other side and she met this big truck and she was real tiny and it was really cold and she put on my mink coat so that made her look really out of order.  So when the truck was coming he said he started not to stop because he didn't know whether it was somebody that was going to rob him or what so he stopped and she told him that her aunt was trapped in a car down the road.  So he got in truck and he put her in the truck and came on back around and when he got there to me well I was completely out but I remember that he called an ambulance from Las Vegas [Nevada] 'cause it was at the state line and they came out and as they put me in the ambulance I remember coming to when we came to--there is a town down at state line 'cause I could remember seeing the lights but I didn't remember anything else until I guess after they got me to the hospital.  I had bled, I guess all--they had to give me a transfusion before they could do anything.  When they got me in the hospital they gave me a transfusion.  So I was sick with that for thirty days and that was a setback for me.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: In 1969.
Story_ID: 508070
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of, of your dress shop because you talked about two other businesses a dress shop and cleaners?
Speaker 2: Both of them--the dress shop was Sarann's Fashions [Las Vegas, Nevada] and the cleaners was Sarann's Cleaners [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: And where were they located?
Speaker 2: I had a dress shop located on D Street that was in West Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and then I had it on Owens [Avenue] in West Las Vegas.  I had the cleaners and dress shop next door to each other but then I relocated on Sahara [Avenue] with the dress shop, I had a dress shop on Sahara, don't remember the loc- the address seemed like it was 8-something.
Speaker 1: The cleaners was--
Speaker 2: I had a cleaners on D Street.
Speaker 1: Oh, D Street, okay.
Speaker 2: And I had a dress shop on D Street and then I moved to Owens and I had a cleaners and a dress shop on Owens.  They were two buildings but they was next door to each other and then that's where I had People's Choice bar [People's Choice Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada] on Owens a couple doors down from the dress shop.  That was a place that was very popular back in the day when all of the guys and everybody would like to come to the bar and spend a lot of money 'cause I have people--every day I have people asking me, when are you going to open.  I just met a man on my way up here, he was shining shoes down, and he knew me and he said, "What kind of meeting you going to?  Are they honoring you today?"  I don't even remember him.  But every day that I walk out somebody's asking me about, when am I opening up again.
Speaker 1: People's Choice?
Speaker 2: Anything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Anything?  Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But mostly Moulin Rouge, they liked that better.  But People's Choice was a very, very--and then before I had that in between I had another place the Playhouse Lounge [Las Vegas, Nevada].  That was a place that--it was in the same building that the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] was in and I had that place for a couple of years. And it was a successful place 'cause when I went in there I had that place before I had any of the other bars except the one in Hawthorne [Tonga Club] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hawthorne [Nevada], okay.
Speaker 2: --and I spent a lot of money decorating it.  I had all marble top bars and tables and really fixed it up really fancy.  It was just a bar and I had games in there but not gambling games and then I had like a place where they had dances, showroom, I had a showroom in there.  It was a real popular place too.
Speaker 1: What year did you have the Playhouse Lounge?
Speaker 2: That must have been like in '84 [1984], '83 [1983] somewhere along in there, I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. That was located where the Cotton Club was and what street was that?
Speaker 2: It was on 500 Jackson Street.
Speaker 1: Okay. And then People's Choice that was on Owens (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was 805 Owens.
Speaker 1: Owens Street, okay; what year did you own that club?
Speaker 2: You know I think I must have had Playhouse Lounge in the '70s [1970s] and then People's Choice--
Speaker 1: Oh okay, in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: --People's Choice in the '80s [1980s].  I guess I opened that up in like 1980, 'cause I had that open when Jamey [Knight Preddy's granddaughter, Jamey Walker] was kidnapped and she was kidnapped in '81 [1981].  So then I had Playhouse Lounge in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And then you, in, that's in '85 [1985] you opened the Moulin Rouge?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had both of those places at the same time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh opened the same time, okay. And when did People's Choice close?
Speaker 2: People's Choice closed--let's see I opened up in '85 [1985] and I think I closed it in about '87 [1987] 'cause I still had both places--'cause I had gaming at People's Choice and I was trying to get gaming like ten blocks up the street--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and it took two or three years to get gaming up there because it was a lot harder to get gaming.
Story_ID: 508071
Speaker 1: Well explain to me about that again or in more depth about getting the gaming license what the difference is.  Why is it so much harder in one part of town than the other to get a gaming license?
Speaker 2: Well the only thing I can think of is what the man was saying but now there is so much restriction of that.  People's Choice [People's Choice Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]--when I had People's Choice the landlord was a guy--he was a preacher--a reverend and then he was in the legislature, so he had a real good background.  When I went to Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada], the person who owned the Moulin Rouge had a real what would you call it background that-he was suitable to have a license on his premises and so that's what kept me from getting--that was the excuse they gave me because he couldn't qualify.  The place couldn't qualify to have gaming in this location because of the owner, it wasn't me, it was the owner.  So then when I first went there and I leased the place with maybe the intention of buying it later on.  So then after I couldn't get the license with him being an owner then that made me pursue buying the place.  So now it was harder for me to pursue buying the place and try to hold on and trying to get money for the license and all of this.  So it took me longer and going through with--and he was a person that they always wanted him to come before the license board and tell about his life and then they might approve him to be a suitable person for it to be on his premises and he would never do that 'cause he had a little fuzzy background and he was Jewish and he had been involved in something when he was seventeen years old that was stolen back in his home country.  He had money and he just figured that, "I don't have to do that 'cause I don't want any gaming license why do they want me to do that.  You're getting the gaming license so they ought to interview you."  That went on for two or three years and finally I was able to start buying the place.  And after we bought the place well then the place was in our name and therefore we could apply for a license in a different way.  And I think it was just being prejudiced because when I first got the license they gave them to me for six months.  "Well we needed to reach out and get more financial resources in order to make the place go," and of course by me having a license for six months who's going to come in and invest millions dollars and you've only got them for six months?  So if I invest and you don't get them next for the next six months my money's gone down the drain.  So the next time they gave them to me for a year and it went through the same thing.  By the time you get back and try and pull something together a year is up and you don't have them anymore.  And finally they gave them to me--the next time it was for two years and I think two years is all they give anybody with a license then you have to go back and be renewed and reinvestigated again.  So I understand it could have changed from that time and during that time I had several people who wanted to invest but the most interesting people that wanted to I invest was the Pequot Indians [Native American] that live up in, they up near New York.  They are very well known and the Pequot Indians have this big gaming place up there.  They made a couple of trips down here to invest with me which would have been something fantastic if they could have gotten it on.  They were going to invest $100 million and build where the Moulin Rouge is.  Take up the whole square block and build like a whole little city.  So when they came down here, Las Vegas [Nevada] was a very prejudiced town and the powers that be didn't want anybody else coming here with a lot of money that would be in competition with them and they always thought if the Moulin Rouge got off the ground we would be in competition with them but it wouldn't.  It would have drawn a different element of people and would have helped just like it is now.  Look at the hotels now that's added on and it just keeps getting bigger and bigger.  But during that time they couldn't see where the black people needed to have this kind of hotel they might take all the business from what it had done in 1955 but it has grown to a different angle now.  So the Pequot Indians when they came down here they couldn't get any consideration from the gaming people or no assurance that they could be able to apply for licensing and get the license.  So that backed them off from, from doing anything.
Story_ID: 508072
Speaker 1: There, for instance, there was another hotel out in Henderson [Nevada] that was built.  You cannot get a license until you have a place ready to open.  They built this place and it was a nice place and when they built the place it couldn't pass to get a license, so all their money was gone down the drain.  They had to sell that hotel for dollar for dollar, like it cost fifty thousand dollars to build it that's all the money they could get out of it even though it was a big fine place to have.  So that made people skeptical about coming in spending any money doing anything and nobody's guaranteed a license until once the door is open.  It's very technical and when you apply for the license you have to always say you have to be clean as two white sheets 'cause they ask way more questions than you're asking 'cause I know when I applied for my last license my husband [Knight Preddy's fifth husband, Joe Preddy] was on the license and if you tell a story they throw it in the wastebasket, if they catch you telling any kind of story they throw it in the wastebasket.  So when they were asking him--his mother had him when she was fourteen years old, I think or fifteen, and she wasn't married to his father so he never knew anything about his father.  He had met him but didn't know anything about him.  So when they were asking him if anybody had ever been in jail or murdered anybody and these kinds of questions he said no.  And of course when they asked me about my life I spent all of my adult life in Las Vegas [Nevada] so what you see is what you get 'cause when I came here I was very young and I didn't do anything back in Oklahoma significant.  So when we came down for the license and they found that my husband's father had done some time for killing some man.  So they were trying to hold that against him but when it was explained that he didn't know his father, well then they bypassed that.  But if he had been living with his father none of it would have been thrown out. Because they--that's the most--it's, it's more strenuous to get a gaming license than it is going to heaven 'cause God will forgive you (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 508073
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So anyway but--and I think I went before the license board [Nevada Gaming Control Board] more than anybody else in the State of Nevada.  I got to be like a household piece for going.  They knew me from day one and I'll never forget an incident happened at Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] and it was during the holidays and I had a lot of people working for me maybe forty or fifty people working 'cause we had like a showroom and we had a lot of things going on. And right after Christmas this guy came through selling some liquor and my office was upstairs so the guy who was a deejay called me up and he said, "Ms. Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy] this guy has got a lot of liquor that he wants to sell and he said he had it leftover from a party for Christmas and he wants little or nothing for it."  So my head lady that was working for me, Irma [ph.], I said, "You go down and look and see what's going on." So she came back with the same story what he told her.  So anyway I said, "Well go ahead and buy the liquor," I didn't see the man.  So then he had stolen this liquor from a grocery store and when he stole the liquor there happened to be a policeman in there that saw him get it.  So they followed him and when they followed him he stopped at a couple of other places but he wound up at the Moulin Rouge and so he came to the Moulin Rouge and the liquor was bought.  You can lose your license on doing that.  So when I had to go to court for this and when they asked me what happened I told them the same thing that I'm saying now 'cause that's the only thing I knew to tell them.  So they kind of like threw it out, I thought.  Six months later I go back before the gaming board and they brought it up.  I'm thinking that it's over with and never I, I won't be confronted with that anymore.  So then they asked me well, "Sarann what happened about this liquor you bought," and I told them the same story.  So they bought the story and they laughed about it and they told me when I left they said, "Don't you buy no more liquor that was left over from Christmas," (laughter).  If I had known it was stolen liquor and I bought it then they would have taken my license.  They can take your license for any little thing that you do.  Letting teenagers in--minors in because I was a threat, they tried to take my license several times after I was at the Moulin Rouge.  The police force was against us a lot. And I know that they claimed that they had a lot of tape on us of things that we had done illegally like somebody was in the parking lot selling drugs. And I never will forget the council person that went before them and the police said that they had these tapes and he said well, "Show me the tapes, how much you got?" And the guy said, "Well, we had about fifteen minutes."  He threw it out and said, "You've got fifteen minutes worth of tape and you're trying to say that they were selling drugs and that's all the tape you've got well you take that somewhere else."  So that cleared me out of that.  If they were out there taping--I've seen them out there taping but I wasn't out there and I don't know what was going on in the parking lot.  But those are some, some of the downfalls that we had in trying to move on was the system was against us a lot.
Story_ID: 508074
Speaker 1: You always have black people being against you too.  Some of the people that were in power that could have helped, they didn't but they are in trouble now.  Some of the same people that were holding office could have stepped up to the plate and helped.  Then we went to the city and the city was going to help us and they did come up with a deal that they would appropriate $3 million for us if we could find the money to match.  So then we went out and went to the bank and talked to the banks.  We had about four banks that were involved.  One bank, the top bank in Las Vegas [Nevada], that did all of the gambling money and finances and they were experts in doing this so they agreed that they would form a consortium and they were going to get together and raise this money to match the 3 million.  So when all of this was done and it came to the final thing for them to do that and we went to the meeting, the head bank sitting up in the meeting made their remark that--, "I wouldn't let them have $10 million if they had a hundred million," and that dropped the bomb on Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada].  After they said that well then it was like the end of the road for us because they wouldn't accept the Pequot Indians [Native American] and then the bank turned us down even though the city said, "Well we did everything we could."  But I think all of this was a plan that if the mayor agreed for this to happen and when it comes back to us we turn it down and we couldn't get the money.  So we went on with that for all these different years so now it's getting to where we've spent a lot of money and not getting any place and just things were looking gloomy and when my son decided to get out because--he's very, very intelligent and expert in the gaming business and business too and I always depended on him for a lot of things, because he had been in the business on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], which I had never been so he knew all about what was going on in the hotels.  And as I said my husband [Knight Preddy's fifth husband, Joe Preddy] had an enlarged heart and he had been searching for a heart and that was devastating and then I just decided--I just made up my mind and everybody was begging me to don't do that. But now sometimes I wish I hadn't because I think if I had stayed I could have been further down the road because everybody was willing to help to get things done.  But I just made up mind that I had enough and I wanted to do something else and that was the end of that story.  After I got out of that business I've had several people, as a matter of fact I'm working with some people now that want to open up a business and somebody's always wanting to do something with me involved.  I kind of like intercede and kind of like give them some advice on what I think about it but I don't want to be in any business.  I'm hoping to do this movie and maybe get something--the book and then get something out of the movie for the next few years that I have to be here or I will just stay like I am.  Because I enjoy what I'm doing and I'm busy all of the time and everybody around me is always fussing, 'cause they have to make an appointment just to get to talk to me (laughter).
Story_ID: 508075
Speaker 1: What are some of the things that, that you're doing?
Speaker 2: Well I still work a little bit with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and we organized an organization is the West Las Vegas Pioneers Society [sic. Las Vegas Black Historical Society, Inc.] and we're doing research and doing all of the history about blacks in Las Vegas [Nevada] and that's really been something that takes up a lot of my time. And I'm kind of like involved with a lot of the--I'm still kind of involved with the sorority [Gamma Phi Delta Sorority] I belonged to. 'Cause like, we just had the Ebony fashion show [Ebony Fashion Fair], I'm a retired member but I sell tickets for them and I'm still a ticket seller 'cause I know a lot of people and I know how to get out and get a couple of people to buy a couple of tables.  So if you do that you can sell thirty or forty tickets right away.  So I'm called to do that and then--what else do I do?  They are always telling me that I don't ever time for nothing or nobody.
Speaker 1: (AVREE WALKER): You went to the Walk of Stars [Las Vegas Walk of the Stars, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (AVREE WALKER): The Walk of Stars.
Speaker 2: Oh the Walk of Stars I work with they are an organization that came out of California and what we do is go back and get the history on all of the old timers and we put the stars in front of the hotels.  Whenever we have about two hundred people on our books, and of course they have to pay to get these stars put down.  So we just did Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] about a month ago.  So I met some people at that meeting that wanted to do my book and the lady was from California, she's a producer. And then I have another friend of mine that lives in Canada well he wants me to wait and he's going to produce it and those things always hold you back. And I, I can't think of everything that I do but I should (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 508076
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you about the gaming business and all the talk about the mafia.  Did you ever have any, any dealings with any of the people who were considered quote unquote, the mob (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's strange that you would ask that because people are asking me that, about the book ['72 Years in Las Vegas,' Sarann Knight Preddy].  They're saying if I don't have something like that the book might not be a success if I don't tell, but you can't tell what you don't know.  When people were talking about the mafia, I know absolutely nothing about the mafia, per se.  I know the times were much better when they were here than they are now.  When it went into the corporate world then the money froze.  When they were here I wasn't working on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] but I know a lot of people were working and they made it possible for the little person to get money. Like, I remember people telling me how they would come along and drop hundred dollars chips here and there so the poor could sweep it up. But I don't think the mafia, the mafia was involved where black people knew anything about it 'cause when it came here they were trying to keep that a secret to be in this gaming world here because they had people who was over there gaming but they had ties with the mafia so I understand it had the money.  I don't think a lot of that was leaked out other than hearsay.  There might have been some people that knew a little bit about it but I don't think it was any black people involved with the mafia.  I just think that during that time from what I can remember that people made a lot more money because they were more lenient with passing out the money to people. And, as, as I mentioned, when the corporation came in and well now it's like, well, you know, they put down for eight dollars a day working and you can't get a penny otherwise and you can't do this and you can't do that 'cause they want all the money for themselves 'cause they've got all these people that work in these big corporate offices making all these million dollars a year so they put as less money as they can on the bottom.  I couldn't elaborate on nothing about the mafia because I really don't know that much about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 508077
Speaker 1: You had mentioned earlier about the silver dollars and I just wanted you to clarify that for me.
Speaker 2: Back in the day they didn't have chips they had silver dollars.  When you were dealing 21 [Blackjack] you paid people off with silver dollars instead of chips.  I can't remember exactly when they started the chips but it was much later on than when I first started like in the '40s [1940s] and then when they did get chips they weren't as prevalent then as they are now everything now is chips.  You know you have chips to go in the slot machine.  It used to be you put money in a slot machine but I think now you can put chips in there.  Now I've never played a slot machine, so I don't really know.  But in that time it was really bulky because I had a friend that worked at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] when it closed and it was so many rumors out about whether they were closing.  He worked in the office part and he said they were saying that they ran out of money and he said there was no way they ran out of money.  It took 'em two weeks to get all of the money out of the Moulin Rouge to take it to the Dunes [Dunes Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] and he said they actually rolled it out in wheelbarrows because it was silver and sacks.  If you needed a fill that's what they called--a fill is when you're on a 21 table and somebody wins all the money and then you ask for a fill and they bring it to you.  They used to bring it in a sack of these silver dollars.  Now they bring it in a tray, I think they bring it in a tray.  Everything that they did it had to be in a tray or a sack because it was so heavy. And when you went to the bank to put your money in the bank you took all your silver dollars and they always took it in a bag, it would be in a big old bag and the more silver you had the bigger the bag was.  I remember guys taking them over their shoulder and taking the money. And I think it was--the silver dollars was very fascinating because it was actually money and I believe that someone thought the idea of chips for two or three different reasons.  One because it wasn't heavy and as bulky and other one was that it's like me when I charge on a credit card I don't have no limit 'cause I'm not spending money but if I got dollars to spend then I'm very careful.  So if people are gambling with the chips they don't realize it's money so they just gamble with chips and chips 'cause it ain't money.  But it is money and I think they use that to offset the people from--they would be gambling and they wouldn't have the sense that I'm losing all this money, now that's my scenario about that.  I'm pretty sure they had some of those in their mind when they went to the chips.
Story_ID: 508078
Speaker 1: What about corruption did you ever have any problems with employees or people who counted cards or whatever it is that is against the law?
Speaker 2: I never had any problem in my place of business with that but I have, I was confronted with it when I was a dealer of counting cards and so forth; on both sides, they used to do that on both sides of the table.  Some of the smaller places and maybe some of the larger places did it too.  They used to have certain ways that they could put a deck together and I forgot what they called it, hot deck or something and they could beat the customers and then they had people who were customers who would come in and they know how to read the cards and they could beat the house.  But I think all that went out the window with high button shoes when the gaming commission [Nevada Gaming Commission] got strong and took over.  Now they have what they call the eye in the sky.  All the hotels have the eye in the sky.  Somebody up there at all times looking at everything that goes on downstairs.  So now people would be more afraid to do that especially employees 'cause if you get caught doing that then you are disbarred from the game.  You can't have a job anymore and gaming is a very lucrative business.  Everybody working in the gaming comi-the gaming area make a lot, a lot of money and so they wouldn't want to take a chance on losing a hundred thousand dollar job to give somebody fifty dollars or whatever.  But now that's how they do catch a lot of other people who are on the outside using different ways to beat the system, they have caught them.  They have what they call the black book.  If you get caught you go in the black book, some of them can't come in the state anymore and some of them can't come in the town and some of them can't come in the clubs.  It depends on how serious it was or how they got caught.  I think that since it's gotten to be refined down so and now gaming is a business and it's a big time business and people--the reason why they got so strict you're in business with the gaming people and they have all these rules and regulations.  In the big hotels I understand that they have some people in the big hotels from gaming to oversee and watch what you're doing right along with the people that are operating the place. Because--for instance if you have a and I can speak about myself when I had slot machines and say for instance you have three slot machines here and maybe six over here and you say well I'm cleaning something and I want to move these over say a foot, you can't do that, you can't move them out of that spot unless you get permission from the gaming people to move them out of that spot.  So therefore they want to monitor everything because they get a percentage out of whatever people make.  So if they let you get away with all of this then they lose money and this is how they keep the state going that's why they have so much money 'cause they get money off of people. You know, when you have to pay for every table you have that's why I was saying the more money you have the more tables you can get.  Every 21 [Blackjack] table you have you pay a certain amount of money so if they have ten you pay a lot more money, you got twenty then you're way up and when you get so many it can run up in the millions of dollars like Steve Wynn.  His gaming bill is probably several million dollars where some small person that had a few machines would be maybe fifty thousand or something like that. So that's why I think the gaming commission have gone into really making this be a business to where it would be lucrative enough so they can run the state and I think that was--
Speaker 1: Do you remember some college students not too long ago that came to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and won a lot of money?  Do you remember anything about that?
Speaker 2: Students you say?
Speaker 1: Yeah they were college students that figured out how to make a lot of money (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I read something about that and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't they get caught?
Speaker 1: Yes
Speaker 2: Yeah. And if you get caught they can give you time for doing that because it's against the law to do that.  I can't remember exactly happened about that but I remember something else that happened.  Some people playing here and their son wrote a keno ticket, somebody was on the 21 wrote a ticket and they won way up in the millions of dollars and I don't know what happened but it went on for years and years and they didn't pay them off 'cause they weren't suppose to be playing 'cause they was underage.  I don't remember the final decision that they made on that but it's just, that's the law you can't play at 21 so how are you going to win if you can't play?
Story_ID: 508079
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there something that you want to do now that you have not done?
Speaker 2: Not really because I travelled an awful lot but I have no yearning to travel anymore.  I don't fly anymore and I'm not going to get on a ship anymore and it's not too much you can do just in Nevada.  I think that I would just like a peaceful life, you know.  I go to church and I'm involved in some things at church and I have a lot of friends and I tell people all the time I don't want to meet anymore friends 'cause I can't get around to all the ones that I have.  That's one of the things that keep me busy, I must have at least fifty or sixty close friends and I always get that, oh I can never catch up with you I guess you were talking to so and so, and that kind of bothers me sometimes because I don't want to be accused that I like one better than I like the other one because right now if I had to tell you, you'd ask me, who is your best friend, I couldn't tell you 'cause I have a lot of best friends.   I don't have any of them.  I have friends that I like this one because of this and that one because of that, and I have friends that I go nightclubbing with and I have friends that I go to church with and I have friends that I go shopping with, but I like them all basically the same.  I think I'm kind of still like the child that I was born and everybody was fighting over me when I was born. You know, everybody wanted to name me and everybody wanted to be my guardian and be closer to me than anybody else and I think my friends are about the same too.  Now I know a lot of people--I hear them say, "Oh, I've known Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy] since, or I knew her before that." You know, so I go through that and I guess I do have friends--a few friends that I'm around more than others.  I've always been the type of person that I always say that I know people on the street, I know the winos and I know the dope-os, I know the governors, I know the legislators and I know the president and I have mingled with all of them in the churches and everything else.  I've never been on a pedestal to where I think now that I can't talk to him 'cause he's on drugs or he's a wino and I can drive down the street and my grandson [Avree Walker] can attest to this because he's always saying we can't go down the street everybody is hollering, "Ms. Sarann and he's a wino and how does he know you?"  But somewhere along the line he might not have been a wino all of his life or he heard about me or might have come to the club or I might have given him something to eat, I don't really know how I knew him.  Like I said, I meet people every day that I have to say, "Your face is familiar, but tell me how did I know you?" And then when they tell me I still don't know them.  I always say it's much easier for a thousand people to remember you than for you to remember a thousand.  So I think that I basically done all the things that maybe I want to do and I--
Story_ID: 508080
Speaker 1: One thing, that I guess this happens to everybody, my last marriage was my best marriage.  I was married to him twenty eight-years and he was much, much younger than I was and I was really devastated that it ended so early.  But I thought maybe that I would be the first one to go, 'cause he was about twelve years younger than me and the most beautiful life that I ever had was with him.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: His name was Joe Preddy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And now I don't think that I would ever--I'm too old now to be married I think, but I can never get married anyway for these friends and grandchildren and they don't even want me to talk about especially this one I can't even talk about--everywhere I go I have to give an account of where I'm going and what I'm going for.  My granddaughter [sic. grandson] got up this morning and she said, "Why are you dressed?  Where are you going?  What kind of meeting?"  So he's out of school this week--school break, so last night when I told him I was coming out here and he wanted to know why he couldn't go and I said, "Well I don't think you be invited."  He said, "I don't know why, you're just doing an interview."  I said, "If you are ready at eight o'clock, I'm walking out the door at eight o'clock and if you are ready than you can go" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What because--
Speaker 1: So here he is, Avree Walker.
Story_ID: 508081
Speaker 1: Because your story is going to be shared for generations to come, what message would you like to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: I'd like to send a message to the future generations that first of all make sure that you get an education because back in the day when I came along even my father [Carl Chiles] and mother [Hattie Crabtree Chiles] I remember in my father's time people finished eighth grade and they left and went to college.  In my time it was a little different but it wasn't like it is now.  Nowadays, you can't get a job being a dishwasher if you haven't finished high school.  I think that is so important and a lot of people think that you go get an education to maybe be a schoolteacher or whatever but you need an education to know how to live.  You don't, if you don't know something about life you can't even manage your own family because there will be times like right now with me with what little I do have that it's an effort for me to keep my books straight on my little finances.  So if I didn't know anything about finances then I would be in bad shape and I have heard of people having monies coming in and they'd have to get somebody else to write the check for them or maybe get somebody else to make a deposit or get somebody to tell them what to do and how to find something.  I remember my husband the schoolteacher [Preddy's third husband, William Scruggs], he told me one time that, you know, "The best thing in life is you get an education and know how to go get what you need.  You don't have to know everything but you need to know how to go get it--how to find it out."  For instance what they mean is look it up in the dictionary or find it out.  If you want to put an application in you've got to find out the process and this type of thing.  You have a lot of people who don't know how to fill out an application, they don't know where to go and I do a lot of that too in telling people where they can go and get certain help with certain things. And the next thing, I would think that people should be loyal and truthful; I think that is number one is being loyal and truthful and keep yourself as clean as possible because you never know when you would need it down the road. Because I never thought when I was younger that I'd ever be in a life to where I'd be able to get a gaming license.  Had I been the other way around, I might have been stealing something or arrested one time for something for drinking or whatever.  But I have a fairly clean slate and I always tell people what you see is what you get.  I don't have too many things that I couldn't share with anybody. You know, sometimes you have a little thing that you might not want to say that you did when you were a kid but it's nothing that I couldn't tell that would hurt me if I did tell it. And I think the other thing is that always be understanding and try to understand people and get along with people because the people through life, I don't care how big you are or how much you know or what you have if you can't get along with people than that's a hindrance to you.  You always have to look at the other side of the story and understand why this person is like this and then try to help. And I think, sometimes I think that's been my downfall, I know it is with my kids [James Walker, Richard Walker, Glen Walker and Janice Walker Currie], you know, because I always try to look at their downfall or what they could have done or should have done and I'm always there for them.  I get kind of eaten out about that with some of them because he thinks the whole world of me belong to him, and I shouldn't do anything for anybody else.  I'm constantly explaining you're the same to me as the other person.  Like he always said I did more for his sister but he's the same to me as she is and you know, you can't do the same for every person. You know, one person might need help in one thing and the other one need it in something else.
Story_ID: 508082
Speaker 1: You talked about the fact that you went back to school after high school [Dunbar High School, Okmulgee, Oklahoma], years after high school.
Speaker 2: I went back to school before I started dealing because I went to Los Angeles [California]-and I went to a business school down there.  I thought maybe if I go down there and take up some kind of trade that I could come back.  But when I went down there and got all this training and came back to Las Vegas [Nevada] it wasn't anything for me to do.  They weren't hiring any bookkeepers or anybody that's doing that kind of work or what.  If they were it was only like maybe five people--blacks in the whole town that was working in some of the clubs that was the bookkeeper or something.  So that was a waste of time.  Then I went to a beauty college and I wanted to get in that business and after I came out and saw where I was always a person that was always in the limelight.  I always dressed well and was flamboyant and had Cadillacs and furs and diamonds and all this kind of stuff and the people who would be doing hair trying to get somebody ready to go and by the time you get the ready the party is over, so I didn't like that. So then I went to real estate school and I didn't like that so much although I wished I had pursued it and kept doing it. And I didn't want to do anything that it couldn't go on without me.  In real estate you can't sell a house for me, I have to do it myself.  So that's like a job, you've got to be on the job all of the time and that's why I reverted back to something like the dress business or gaming or bar business, you have somebody else working and you're free to go stay a month if you want to if you can find somebody to take care of your money while you're gone, you know.  I always liked that kind of business, you know, to be involved in.  I went to school and I tried to take up Spanish, I was always going to school.  I had a friend tell me one time, "If you put all those hours together, you probably would have your master's [degree] with all the time you've been going to school."  How do they say that, "Jack of all trades, and master of none?" And I was always doing something to go to school taking up some kind--I went to business college out here at UMC, at yeah, at UMC school [sic.]. And I got a scholarship from United Airlines to take that course. So I, you know, that did learn me a lot about businesses and how to take care of my own business.
Story_ID: 508083
Speaker 1: At one time in my life, did I mention I wanted to be a missionary? Did I say that?
Speaker 2: No (laughter). I talked about that just yesterday and this friend of mine who is doing the books said, "You don't want to talk about being a missionary you took the right road." 'Cause I told her sometimes I think if I had took a different road and went to be a missionary, I would be in a different limelight and it might be something--people frown on gambling a lot, you know peoples that's in the gaming world.  People who don't understand but right now that's the highlight of the world, everybody wants to be in gaming.  Every state is trying to get in, it's legal, and it's no, it shouldn't be no reflection.  I remember way back when I was in Hawthorne [Nevada] with my husband [Knight Preddy's third husband, William Scruggs] who wanted to join the Masons and we were running a club [Tonga Club, Hawthorne, Nevada].  Somebody in the Masons was saying, "Well he can't belong because he's running a gambling joint and you Masons are more of a religious benevolent and he can't belong," so they had to call the national person over the Masons whatever they call them, I've forgot.  When he came down and he looked at the situation he said, "Well that's the law and there's nothing wrong with him being a member.  He has to get a license to do that so anytime you get a license it's legal, it's nothing wrong with being a Mason," so they accepted him. And I know being around some church people, I have the feeling that they think, because I had a gaming place that I'm not as clean as Mother Somebody over here, not that I care 'cause I don't even want to be a mother, I hate that name mother, and being on a mourners' bench or the deaconess or whatever it is. But I think that I've enjoyed doing what I've done and I've met so many people.  So many people got started out from my place at the time that I was in it at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Story_ID: 508084
Speaker 1: I know a lot of entertainers that came here walking. And I remember one group in particular, they came here on a bus and they slept on the bus for like a week.
Speaker 2: What group was this?
Speaker 1: I know them really well and I can't--The Next Movement, no I think The Next Movement was the name of their group and I gave them their first job at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] and now they're big time.  There was another group that came here I gave them their first job and a lot of times I go out to shows and they in the show they always make me stand up and say this is who started me out when I came to Las Vegas [Nevada].  I went to a show not long ago and this kid--I forgot that it even happened--had me to stand up and said, "This is the lady that caused me to be in show business because," he had a chance to--he was asked to play with Gladys Knight many years ago and he came to me and he said, "Ms. Sarann [HistoryMaker Sarann Knight Preddy], they want me to play with Gladys Knight but I'm not that kind of musician."  I said, "But they asked you to play, you go and play.  You'll never know what would happen, if you can't make it, you can't make it but you did have a chance."  So he went and now he is a big time musician and whenever I see him and many others they always bring that up and of course I guess that makes me feel a little bashful sometime and sometime I don't know how to accept those kinds of accolades but I guess they are all good.  So a lot of people know me that--and I've given a lot of people as I mentioned before chances to work that couldn't get a job somewhere else. Because you know, now it's kind of hard to get a job out on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada]. You know, they ask you so many things it's like you'd think that they're asking you to be a professor at the university for the things that they ask you.  That's another thing that I'm hard on youngsters, not getting involved in drugs because that can ruin you for the rest of your life. Because that record can follow you on down and then sometimes you go off in drugs and you can't get out and that's the end of your life.  So you need to keep yourself as clean as you can in case something does come up, you will be able to do it.  I'm really proud of my grandson [Avree Walker], I just think the world of him he doesn't think so, but he is a very extremely well grounded young man that's got his foot on the floor in the right way.  I'll never have to worry about him being--as a matter of fact he's scared of people to the point to where if we're in a mall shopping and a bunch of black kids are walking he'll cross over, "Let's walk on the other side 'cause we don't want to be over there, they might start a fight."  He's so busy with his world until he doesn't have time to get involved with anything.  His whole life is in entertainment with the art center and his school 'cause he works in both putting on plays and all that kind of stuff.  I don't have to worry about him running out trying to find a girl or trying to find some drugs or get with the wrong guys because he's a very good kid.  The only thing I'm bothered about is he tries to run my life, tell me how to drive and always--I went to the Ebony fashion show [Ebony Fashion Fair] Sunday and he was somewhere else and when he came home he wanted to know what did I wear.  I had a dress hanging up on the closet and he says, "Is this what you wore" to the Ebony fashion show, "No."  "Well what did you wear?" 'Cause he helps dress me all the time, you know.  Whenever I'm dressing he's got to tell me that doesn't look right and I guess being in a household with all youngsters it does help me to think young and act young sometimes.  One granddaughter teases me all the time--I hope we're not still on whatever.
Speaker 2: We are.
Speaker 1: She said, "You really look nice you'll get out of that old folks shuffle as soon as you get on the street," 'cause I have a tendency at home as being all bent over sometimes but that's because I have a bad back.
Speaker 2: Tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out of all of the mishaps that I've had in my lifetime I don't have any regrets.  I think that my life is pretty well rounded and I enjoy doing what I'm doing and I don't know no- nothing that I would like to be doing now.  Maybe I would like to have a little more time to devote to some happenings with kids--getting involved with helping kids and that type of thing. And I do work very closely with the art center [West Las Vegas Arts Center, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I'm formulating a group now to raise money that can be funneled into the art center because they only get so much money from the city so they need a lot of other things and I do work for them, too. And just a lot of different things that calls on me to do different things and that's why I stay busy all of the time.
Story_ID: 508085
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well I want people to remember me as being a kind, nice, generous person and I want to have a big funeral and I want all the things that I--to be like all the things I was doing in life.  You know plenty of flowers and a lot of people come and have good things to say about me and I don't want anybody moaning and groaning 'cause I think of--as a matter of fact, I'm getting my funeral together now.  I don't want people to be sad because they got the best of my life; I lived a long time and be happy that I was here that long.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I really want them to feel the way that I have touched their lives.  If you have something to say about me you can tell the truth and say it. You know, I don't want anybody getting up telling something that really didn't happen.
Story_ID: 508086
Speaker 1: Well is there anything that we haven't spoken about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That we missed?
Speaker 1: Anything that you would like to talk about that we have not?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that there is because I go a lot of places and sometimes people ask me to say something and they will give you ten minutes that's another thing that I do, I've been going out to the university speaking to the, some of the classes about history and they'll give you ten minutes.  How can you tell somebody sixty-five years about something in ten minutes?  I really don't know where to start.  If I'm going to speak about something in ten minutes, I know I missed a lot of things.  There certainly isn't eighty-five years of my life that I'm talking--eighty-six years of my life that I'm talking now that I'm telling everything.  I'll probably get home and say why didn't I mention that?  I was trying to maybe do some of the highlights of things that were more important.  I think--we did talk about when I wanted to be a missionary did we get off of that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think I was--I was an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star] and I started going to church and when I got off into the Bible and I was reading and I had a friend who was kind of like a missionary, we both was young during that time and talking to her all of the time. And I kind of got carried away and I thought that was something that I wanted to do and the more I read.  I read this book by Robert Vincent Peale [sic. Norman Vincent Peale] about the mustard seed and reading that book ['The Power of Positive Thinking'] steered me in a direction that I really wanted to be in that field of being a missionary.  I was living in Hawthorne [Nevada], just before I moved back here [Las Vegas, Nevada].  So when I came back here all of my friends weren't in that mode and when I would talk to them and I was trying to tell them all about this, they would laugh at me and say, "She wants to be a preacher," (laughter).  So anyway kept being around--not that they were bad people or anything they weren't doing any more than I'm doing later on but they weren't in the mold of being mother in the church. 'Cause we, I never have been a nightclub person.  The only time that I've ever enjoyed any nightclubbing basically is when I was working or owned the place.  But I never frequent those places after that.  I go out to see shows occasionally now when somebody like, will invite me to go.  A lot of my friends as I mentioned before a lot of them liked to go nightclubbing but they didn't want to be in the church and being a missionary.  They go to church but they don't want to go that deep. And I finally let them out talk me of doing that so then I went a different direction and I was always kind of sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay I want to thank you for taking the time to tell us your story.  It's going to be an inspiration for generations and generations to come so thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: And thank you for inviting me.  I feel honored 'cause I've told different people about what I was coming to and they wanted to know what it was all about, I couldn't tell them.  The only thing she ever told me was history in the making, or something to that point.  But now that I know more about it I'm just honored to be a part of this.  I was put on a show once and the name of the show was, 'History in the Making' ['Moulin Rouge: History in the Making'] and what we did was gathered up all of this--I'm off of this now, right?
Speaker 1: Oh we're not stopping.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you want me to stop?
Speaker 1: Do we have more time?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have thirty seconds.
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Continue?  Oh it was about the history of West Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and I went back and gathered up all the things that had happened here and it came out to be fabulous.  That's one of the things that I miss when I had the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada], I was always putting on shows of various things.  I did something with women making a difference once and I had like forty-nine women that are high profile in this big show and I gained a lot of friends from that 'cause a lot of women was involved that had never been involved and every time I see them they thank me.  I was never involved in anything until you involved me in being women in the making--
Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but not just one time.  When I was there at least twice a year we were putting on some kind of different shows.
