Story_ID: 382640
Speaker 1: So we're going to get started by slating, my name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer, and Matthey Hickey is our videographer, and we have no observers today, it's just the three of us.  May I address you as [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Renee] Powell?
Speaker 2: You may, or you may address me as Renee.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you.
Speaker 2: Which is--okay?
Speaker 1: No disrespect intended.  Okay.  Would you please state your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: My name is Renee M. Powell.
Speaker 1: And would you spell--both the--well first, middle and last, all three?
Speaker 2: Okay, Renee, R-E-N-E-E, I usually just use an initial, but I can use my whole name if you like (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Please do.
Speaker 2: It's Massaleaner, which is after my grandmother, and it's M-A-S-S-A-L-E-A-N-E-R and then the last name is P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right, and your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 4, 1946 in Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 16, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of the interview with the address?
Speaker 2: Okay, the location of the interview is at Clearview Golf Club which is at 8410 Lincoln Street in East Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And would you please state your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is professional golfer/golf professional.
Speaker 1: And there's a difference?
Speaker 2: Well there is, I, basically--professional golfer when I really traveled and played competitive golf, and now basically I am an instructor of the game more so.
Story_ID: 382641
Speaker 1: The next questions, next set of questions might sound a little silly, but (laughter) again it's just part of the slating process, and we call them People magazine-ish types of questions, but I just wanted to know if you would please tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, actually my favorite food I guess is meatloaf, because my mom [Marcella Oliver Powell] use to make meatloaf for me, that's what I always wanted on my birthday.  We all had our favorite birthday meals, and she made the best meatloaf.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think probably, I've got two different times really.  I like the fall because I love the colors and you know the trees.  I also like the spring because it's sort of a new beginning.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color I guess is red.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't take vacations (laughter) so I don't know, that would be hard to answer.
Speaker 1: Okay, or is there someplace you'd like to go?
Speaker 2: You know I--because I have traveled--all my life is just traveling so I guess the place I like most is home.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess one of my favorite phrases is that "I can do all things through Jesus Christ who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 382642
Speaker 1: We'd just like to talk about your family background, and I wanted to start by asking about your mother.  If you could please tell us her name, and something about where she was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother, her name was Marcella Powell.  She was born in, I think Alliance, Ohio and grew up in Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And do you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about it now, I know she only has one living sister and so, you know most of her family is now--is all gone, all of her siblings.  She has nieces and nephews, but don't know a whole lot about my mom's background other than I know that she had relatives in Alliance and some in Maryland, and I didn't know--her mother passed when she was fourteen and her father passed when I was a little infant.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the sister who's still alive, what's her name?
Speaker 2: My Aunt Virginia.
Speaker 1: Virginia and the last name?
Speaker 2: Jamison.
Speaker 1: Okay, Virginia, is she also in Ohio?
Speaker 2: She is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and how would you describe your mother?  Did she share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: She grew up--she had a tough time growing up so I think that a lot of things that happened in her life, she didn't really want to talk about, and so I knew my mother more in the present as opposed to in the past.
Story_ID: 382643
Speaker 1: Would you tell me a little bit about your father?  What is his name and where was he born, where'd he grow up?
Speaker 2: He--his name is William Powell.  He grew up, he was born in Greenville, Alabama and came to Ohio when he was I think three years old and grew up in Minerva, Ohio which is just about ten miles from where we live now.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he share any details of his childhood with you?
Speaker 2: The most details I found out about my father's childhood was in the book on his life (laughter)--so I, you know it's sort of interesting because there are things I didn't know about my father that I learned, you know just about, in his growing up, how he discovered the sport that he got us all involved in which was the sport of golf, and I knew more about that side because I knew my grandparents on my father's side.
Speaker 1: All right, and what's the title of that book in case other people want to read about those details?
Speaker 2: It's called 'Clearview: America's Course' [Ellen Susanna Nosner]
Speaker 1: Is that a recent publication?
Speaker 2: Several years ago [2000].
Speaker 1: Okay and how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father is probably a person that had a lot of tenacity, I know, in order to do what he did.  He's a very bright individual, and just a very strong person, very determined and certainly in order to do the things that he did as far as--you know, in creating a golf course [Clearview Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] back in the 1940s, I think that sort of told you a lot about him in that respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said he was born in Alabama and then the family migrated to Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what time period are we talking about roughly?
Speaker 2: My father was born in--it was in the early teens [1910s] around--probably around 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay so just after World War I [WWI]?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, that's true.
Speaker 1: Or in that era, okay.  Did he give any specific reasons for the family's migration north?
Speaker 2: I am sure that my grandparents moved up here because of jobs and they--in the South it was--they couldn't make a living and my grandfather came up here to work in--they had a lot of different foundries in Ohio and I think probably--it was probably because some of his siblings and relatives had come up this way and pottery, a lot of potteries at that time, and so all of the hard work and all the dirty work they had black people do, and so that was the type of work that they were able to find, and certainly in Alabama back in those years, in the teens [1910s], the times were not nearly as good and so they came up here to find a better way of making a living and raising their family.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said you know more about your paternal grandparents than your maternal grandparents.  Could you tell me your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was--her name was Massaleaner.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: And that's who I'm named after, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather's name was Berry.
Speaker 1: And that's the Powell side again?
Speaker 2: That's the Powell side.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how about your grandparents, your father's grandparents, your great-grandparents?  Do you have any information about them and their lives at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's grandparents, not really no.
Story_ID: 382644
Speaker 1: I want now to talk a little bit about the family's experiences here in Canton, Ohio.  I wanted to ask, what's the earliest memory you have of growing up in this community?
Speaker 2: I mean I go back to probably just my grade school days, and first and second and third grade I can remember a little bit about that, and probably a little bit before that time and I can--I grew up right here and when--so I suppose I can remember some things when I was like three or four years old, and--but just by being here [Clearview Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] on the property and at that time it was a golf course already, and at that time I was just a kid (laughter) that was, you know, playing, and but my dad [William Powell] put a golf club in my hand when I was three years old, so I started playing at a very early age and I went to elementary school here locally here for three years, and ran into so many racist problems, a lot of racism with the youngsters in my school and with teachers that my parents finally took me out of the school system here and put me in parochial schools, because we were raised Catholic, my mom's [Marcella Oliver Powell] Catholic and raised the children Catholic, my dad was not, he was Methodist.  But I guess the things I remember most were when we started--when I first started school and just--the racism sort of stood out most because I had friends that were--a couple of really good friends that I played with all the time, and I can remember the very first time I knew anything about being discriminated against was one day on the playground, and we were going to play, and my friend said, "We can't play with you anymore," and I said, "why?" and they said, "my parents said so because you're colored."  So that was--so from there on I remember a lot and that was--actually that was when I was eight.
Speaker 1: So this is early 1950s?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 382645
Speaker 1: You said that your parents [William Powell and Marcella Oliver Powell], well I was gonna say it's a mixed marriage, one Catholic, one Methodist (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But you were raised Catholic.  Can you tell me about the importance of the church in your early life?
Speaker 2: Well I think it probably gave me more of what was a stability in a sense, and because it was always sort of drilled into us that everyone's created equal, and then I think that was important because of the fact of going through different problems, and in--so the church sort of and my parents always taught us that foundation, and that God loves you, and it's not the color of your skin, and even though I was getting--so I was getting positive reinforcement there, but having from--especially from negative issues that I was facing from the age of being an eight year old you know in--certainly in public school, but when I went to parochial school I actually was the only child of color in that school until my brother [Larry Powell] came along, so and I ran into a couple of incidents there.  I remember I ran into a bus incident even with the bus driver who picked me up when I was about maybe the second year, I was probably about the fifth grade and--because I walked up the lane to get on the bus, and it was like a quarter of a mile walk up from here to the lane and I got on the bus and he said, "Well we're not going to move the bus until you go to the back of the bus and sit down," and this is the parochial school that I was going to and I should have got off the bus, but didn't really think to get off the bus, and then all the children started laughing, and so I went, I knew not to go to the back but I went to the middle of the bus and sat down and he still--the bus sat there for a while and finally the bus driver decided to move the bus, and to drive on and to take us to school, so I was still running into racial incidents.  But yet and still I had my parents that also sort of--again, they grounded us within the church itself, so knowing that those were individuals that were reacting in a certain way, and not the church, and not the higher ups like Christ and God themselves.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's interesting is that you tell the story and this is the 1950s, at the beginning of the modern Civil Rights Movement and it's sort of--the story especially about the bus is one that we would associate usually with the South, and Rosa Parks, and the desegregation of the buses there in Montgomery [Alabama], but interesting that it's happening in the North as well.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and the incidents sort of continued, because my mother had called the priest, and my father had to go in to see the priest, and so it just sort of but they finally got an interesting understanding and Father realized where my father was coming from and they had--and he--then they had a mutual respect for each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it took a little bit of processing to come to that.
Speaker 1: All right, I heard you say your brother joined you as a student at that parochial school, and I just wanted to ask first, the name of the school, and then ask more about other children in the family, their names?
Speaker 2: The name of the school was St. Benedict's [School, Canton, Ohio], which is no longer a school, but the church [St. Benedict Catholic Church; St. Mary/St. Benedict Parish, Canton, Ohio] is still there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your brother's name, and if you have other siblings?
Speaker 2: Well I have a younger brother who, his name is Larry and he's the one that followed me.  I have an older brother, Bill, who passed away years ago and so I don't like to talk about unpleasant situations.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you're the only girl?
Speaker 2: But I'm the only girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 382646
Speaker 1: I also wanted to ask about other institutions that helped define the community that your family was a part of here in East Canton, Ohio.  Any other institutions besides the church [St. Benedict's Catholic Church; St. Mary/St. Benedict Parish, Canton, Ohio] that were important to shaping those childhood years?
Speaker 2: Well, not really here, because I think that you know--I think that when one grows up in a larger city then you're probably surrounded by more people that look like you and more people of color, and I mean like in the State of Ohio, if you're in Cleveland [Ohio] or Columbus [Ohio] or Cincinnati [Ohio] but here in East Canton we were sort of a rarity (laughter), and so and more isolated too because I grew up right here in the middle of the golf course with no neighbors and so there really weren't--I guess there weren't any areas around here.  And actually and I can't really say a lot you know within the Canton [Ohio] area because I quess I was really, grew up sort of sheltered in a sense.
Speaker 1: So the family home was always a part of this complex?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Part of Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so my next question was what street did you live on, but I guess it's Lincoln Highway.
Speaker 2: It's Lincoln Highway, which and I will tell you Lincoln Highway, for you know many people don't realize that Lincoln Highway was at one time the only coast-to-coast highway in this country.  So it went from New York City [New York, New York] to San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: All right, can you tell me something about your neighbors then along the highway did you get to know many of them?
Speaker 2: Not really, and I actually think that my father [William Powell] said that when they first moved here there were no neighbors.  There was no one else here, and from here all the way up to about two miles up the road there was like--there was no one, and so this was an old dairy farm, and so when in my mother [Marcella Oliver Powell] being from Canton and my father being from Minerva [Ohio] and so they were looking for a place that was sort of in between, and that's how they happened to see this old dairy farm when they decided to move here back in the 1940s.
Speaker 1: And did they build a home here on this side--?
Speaker 2: No, the home here is probably about 150 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's been here for a long time but the room that we're in was added on because when they first moved here they opened up and it became--you know when my father built the golf course then it was just one of the rooms in the front of the house was the pro shop, and then they added on probably about thirty-five to forty years ago.
Story_ID: 382647
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask also about the time period, you're coming of age in the 1950s, where there is such a sense of the real possibilities that African Americans will gain full citizenship, with that optimism that sort of comes out of the World War II [WWII] victory era.  Did your father [William Powell] seem to have that kind of vision as well, that, "Yes, I can build a golf course," and, "Yes, I can create this community here at Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio], and my children won't have to suffer perhaps some of things that I suffered" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well yes and I think that's the reason he built the golf course because growing up in the little town that he's from, actually their family was the only family of color in the town.
Speaker 1: And that's Minerva--
Speaker 2: Minerva.
Speaker 1: --Ohio.
Speaker 2: And today his sister is the only African American that lives there, and so it hasn't changed a whole lot, but when he grew up and discovered golf at the age of nine, and he started caddying because it brought in extra money for the family and he--but he also learned to play the game at the same time.  He was fascinated by the game of golf. And so growing up as a youngster--and so it was sort of interesting cause I asked him and we talked and I said, "Well when you were nine years old and you hitchhiked all the way to--with another friend, all the way to the golf course," and I said if you look at--and I said, "What did your mother [Massaleaner Powell] say?"  Well, the first time he did it, he said he had the worst licking of his entire life ever, and my grandmother loved willow switches, so I unfortunately had only one switching ever (laughter), it was from my grandmother with the willow switch, because they are very flexible and bend a lot (laughter), but anyway my--you know, you wouldn't think of a nine year old hitchhiking eight miles today to a golf course, I mean that just doesn't happen.  So that tells you how things have changed from the--actually from the '20s [1920] to now, but my father when he, he discovered the game of golf and then their--he and his older brother started a golf team at the high school and my father was the captain of the golf team, so he played golf then, and--but after he got out of school and they played around all the different courses, but after he got out of school he wasn't able to play because of the color of his skin. And when he went away to school at Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio], and they started the first golf team there also. And what happened after, after that though, and after he went away to the [U.S. military] service and went away to war [World War II, WWII], and when he came back he thought that things would have changed because he was over in the European Theater, and at different times he was able to play golf in England and Scotland, but when he came back to the United States he found out that things had not changed.  And at that time as we all know that, you know, when--during World War II they had a segregated [U.S.] Army and so, but he thought that things would have changed, because as a black soldier being overseas and fighting for your country and when he came back he found out that things had not changed and that many of the prisoners of war were treated better than the black soldiers, and so he then became determined that he was not going to go through the same situation, and that he was going to, to--he loved--he had developed a passion for the game, and wanted to play, and did not think that his--that anyone should be denied an opportunity to play a sport that they loved and he just--I mean he just loved this game, and so that is how he came about building the golf course, and so when we came along he taught all of us in the family to play the game.  But I think that, you know, in thinking back, he--at that time there weren't as many golf courses around and there weren't as many people playing, although with a golf course being built then, you know, most--'cause most of our clientele was white until civil rights time.  And then people got a little nervous of going to a facility that was a black owned, and my dad said that even friends of his from Minerva would say, "Well, what should we call you, we don't know what to call you now," and because when all the riots and things occurred, and black power, and it made people that were white uncomfortable of coming here, because they didn't, they just didn't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you say we don't know what to call you is that colored or Negro or black (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, or mister or can we still call you Bill, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it must have been an interesting time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a pretty special place even on this snowy day (laughter).
Story_ID: 382648
Speaker 1: I wonder if there are any special sights or sounds that remind you of your childhood here at Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well I think that one of the things, being here where we're really right in the middle of the golf course, and it's nearly 150 acres around us, and I think just by with nature, it's all those sounds of the birds, you know, in the spring I guess that I love the spring because it's a new beginning with the birds, and you see all the--we see a lot of little animals around here, and we see squirrels and rabbits and we see a lot of deer in the wintertime and groundhogs and all sorts of things, so all of those things remind me of my childhood and how peaceful it is, how peaceful it was in growing up and so that's why, you know, I just love being around here because of the nature, and the serenity of everything.
Speaker 1: So now I have some information about sights and sounds, how about smells associated with your childhood, things that take you back?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--yeah, well I guess you know when--freshly cut grass and that's what I've always grown up with, and living on a golf course is just like living on a farm because it is, it's just a grass farm, and so and all of us have always worked on a golf course, I mean I worked on a golf course mowing greens and mowing fairways and doing everything out there, and so you know it's, I think the smell of the freshly cut grass, which is done every day, it's sort of, it's just nature in itself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the springtime you have all the blossoms like the crabapple trees and different things like that.
Story_ID: 382649
Speaker 1: Now I know that, based on what you told me, you were an athletic child, playing golf starting at the age of three, but can you tell me a little bit about your classroom experiences as a student?  What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was probably--I was not a straight A student, my brother [Larry Powell] was, but I was about a B+ student.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you enjoyed school?
Speaker 2: I did enjoy school.  I enjoyed the learning experience, and maybe because I was also very much a loner, and a loner from the fact I think of just how I grew up, I mean I grew up with no other people of color around me except for my family, and so therefore running into different issues, and I think that just sort of kept me more into I guess wanting to learn and studying more and the one thing that my parents [Marcella Oliver Powell and William Powell] demanded out of us is that you--that you know of--you had to get our studies and--I had to get my studies, and I had to play golf (laughter).  Those were two things that I basically (laughter), but I had to do both of them well and those are the two things my parents sorta demanded out of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any teachers who were especially influential in those early years?
Speaker 2: Do you know, I think that everybody remembers different teachers in school and there were some that you know just sort of stand out and we had one, Sister Mary George [ph.] in the fourth grade, and that's when I first went to St. Benedict [School, Canton, Ohio] and she was sort of a very strict teacher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I think we all learned in that class out of frightened fear (laughter), and--but she was a good teacher but everybody, you know you ask different people that went to the same school and you say, "What teacher do you remember most?"  And everybody says Sister Mary George (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's elementary school?
Speaker 2: So, elementary school.
Speaker 1: What middle and high school?
Speaker 2: Well then I just went to elementary first through eighth and then high school, and I went four years.  I went to Central Catholic High School [Canton, Ohio], and there Sister [M.] Beatrice was another one and she was sort of the same way and I remember I had her for homeroom, and then she made me run for student council representative, and I was so shy and didn't want to, but she made me run and I ran and I won (laughter), for homeroom rep, but also she was one that taught English, and she also taught geometry, and she picked her classes, and I was in both of those classes, and so I learned a lot from Sister Beatrice and still remember a lot of [William] Shakespeare from her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, so Central Catholic is also right here in East Canton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, it's in Canton [Ohio].  It's about, maybe about fifteen miles from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Like in the '60s [1960s], do I have to say when?
Speaker 1: Well, please--
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], actually.
Speaker 1: Class of '64 [1964].  Okay.
Speaker 2: And we're having our fortieth class reunion this year.
Story_ID: 382650
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask about 1964, such a landmark year in American history and also the year that you're coming out of high school [Central Catholic High School, Canton, Ohio], and I say landmark because it's the year of the Civil Rights Act [of 1964], and again sort of the opening up of the society.  Did you have a sense that this was an important transition period?
Speaker 2: Well I did, because I mean you couldn't help to--I mean all the news and everything, and you follow constantly the things that you talked about at home, and so you knew that it was such a major transition period.  But not knowing where it was going to go or what was going to happen, and just a lot of turmoil that was taking place and reading about what was happening in the South, and one of the things I know that we always read a lot was Jet magazine, it was such a great magazine to keep you up on things that were happening you know--sort of current events for African Americans, so yeah I think that everybody at that time had a great sense of what was going on at that time and then you know around that same time because of also of earlier the assassination of President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy, and just a lot things that were going on.
Speaker 1: Yes, do you remember the day that Kennedy was assassinated?
Speaker 2: I do, I do.
Speaker 1: What was happening in your life?
Speaker 2: I was in gym class in school, and 'cause it was towards the latter part of our school day, and it was announced over the PA [public address] system that President Kennedy had been shot and it was just such a shock and here because I was in a Catholic school, and we had all nuns and it was just such a shock and people got so emotional, people just started crying and praying and then I remember in homeroom, going back to homeroom, and just before school let out and then it was announced that he had died.  So that was a--yeah, that was just a very emotional type of day, I think because as people too, as people of color we had so much hope for the future, and then to see things like that happening and you, I mean never dream--in our lifetime, I mean other presidents and somewhat here in Canton, Ohio where President [William] McKinley [Jr.] came from, and he had been assassinated, but not--and you read the history books of President Abraham Lincoln but you certainly didn't think about it at your time and as a youngster, as a teenager hearing that and not thinking that it was really real, and how could something like that happen, you know, it was history of one thing, but you don't realize that you are living history every day too.
Story_ID: 382651
Speaker 1: That's in the first semester of your senior year in [Central Catholic] High School [Canton, Ohio], then in '64 [1964] you're off to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so where did you attend college?
Speaker 2: I ended up, I went to Ohio University [OU] and--
Speaker 1: And where is that located please?
Speaker 2: It's in Athens, Ohio in the southern part of Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was sort of funny cause my parents [Marcella Oliver Powell and William Powell] kept saying, "Are you sure you wanna go?"  'Cause I was such a baby (laughter), I was--you know I sort of clung to my mom's apron strings and--and years before that I remember I was going to, I would never, I mean I never went away and spent nights overnight anywhere.  So they couldn't believe I was gonna go over a hundred miles away and go to school.  I had, was going to stay at my grandmother's [Massaleaner Powell] for a weekend and then I said, oh well, maybe I'll just stay for two days you know, and I said, well maybe I'll just stay overnight.  I ended up--my parents ended up having to take me home.  I was much younger then (laughter) but they thought, oh my goodness how can she go this far away from home (laughter).  Yeah, they thought if I went to a school right locally it would be fine, but I went there, and my mom took me down and she was shocked that I (laughter)--that I didn't want to come back right away, but I made a lot of friends, I'm still friends with people from school.  As a matter of fact, a couple of weeks ago I saw my roommate and got a chance to spend some time with her who lives in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And what's her name please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Nancy, it's Nancy Baker now and then another friend from school called me a couple of days ago, so Alice Faye [ph.], so I stay in touch with--there's a couple of friends I stay in touch with from there.
Speaker 1: And were you able to continue with the golfing at OU?
Speaker 2: I did, I played golf there and I was the, actually the captain of the women's golf team and played a couple of years there and then transferred to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and had some incidents there with--I always ran into (laughter) racial incidents my whole life I guess, and not and decided to transfer from Ohio University to Ohio State cause I wasn't allowed to go to one of the tournaments, it was the NCAA Tournament.  It was the national's women's collegiate golf tournament that was in Jacksonville, Florida, but my coach thought I should not go because she wasn't sure what it was gonna be like for me as an African American going there, but--
Speaker 1: And you said you were the captain of the team?
Speaker 2: I was the captain of the team, so actually none of us ended up going but I--but a lot of my friends that I knew having grown up and playing junior golf at different places around the country were there, and they had got--you know they were in college now and they were assuming that I would be there.  So, just different little things that happened and so I ended up transferring, went to Ohio State.  I went--I was there for--actually I was at Ohio State for a year, I was captain of the women's golf team there, and then decided that I would become--turn professional and become a golf professional.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you finish the baccalaureate program there or--?
Speaker 2: I did not, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you entered the professional world?
Speaker 2: Right--
Story_ID: 382652
Speaker 1: Now what did that mean, as far as turning pro?  What difference did that make in how often you played or--?
Speaker 2: Well I actually ended up joining the regular tour, the Ladies Professional Golf Association Tour [LPGA], and, but I had played a lot of amateur golf through the years and in tournaments like the U.S [Women's] Amateur [Golf Championship], the U.S. [Women's] Open, and you know all the major events that I was able to play and there were a lot that of big events that a lot of my friends played in that I was not invited to.  Again, because of color and, but I did play in, like I said, the U.S. Open because the United States Golf Association, or the USGA for short, which is a governing body of all of golf, did not have a policy where you could not play, and so I played a lot of tournaments too as an amateur but in playing tour events because the LPGA allowed so many spots for amateurs to compete with the pros, and so then in 1967, I actually turned pro.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't know a lot about golf so I'm going to ask a lot of questions.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: How do you qualify and how do they know that you can enter as a professional?
Speaker 2: Well, when you play a lot of events, a lot of tournaments, and they didn't have a ranking system per se like they have now, but everyone knew, but it was sort of rank, because everyone knew who the best golfers were you know around the country, and being the only African American person coming along at my age, and everybody knew me 'cause my parents [William Powell and Marcella Oliver Powell] had gotten me into events that were the most competitive of events that I was able to play in, and so when I played--what you ended up doing when I played on tour, you qualified on tour and I think at that time you had to finish in a certain percentage out of three out of four consecutive tournaments in order to get a player's card, and you certainly wouldn't attempt to play on tour if you didn't have credentials to be able to do it, because you just wouldn't be able to qualify, so I actually qualified on the first--you know in the first ranking that I was able to do and I started on tour then in 1967, and then stayed on tour until I left in 1980, '81 [1981].
Story_ID: 382653
Speaker 1: You know when I look at golf from a distance, you know, very much the outsider looking in, I see a whole different culture, you know, the special shirts, the golf shirts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's true.
Speaker 1: --and the shoes and then the visors--
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: --and the golf clubs and the golf umbrella (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It seems to me however that it would be very expensive, so do you have sponsors when you enter these tournaments, or is the golfer expected to finance all of this touring?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The golfer is expected to find out how--I mean to--whether it's through sponsors, whether you find sponsors, or whether you do it yourself, and my parents [William Powell and Marcella Oliver Powell] had to, my parents just struggled to, cause they were my sponsors when I went on tour, they struggled to get me out there and I had to try to make my own living out there and times were so different then, back in the '60s [1960s] as opposed to how they are now, because I can remember playing in golf tournaments where the total, the total prize purse was $12,500, and today, I think this year in 2004, the U.S. Women's Open, their total prize purse that they're playing for is four million dollars, so you know it's very different, times have changed so much, even how they qualify now, because the qualifying now, they're qualifying schools that you go to, I mean but that's just the difference of what forty years, nearly forty years makes, thirty--you know thirty-seven years makes, and when I was on tour I can remember when the very first Asians came and there were three Japanese girls that came to play on the tour and I remember when that first happened.  Well now, there are so many, our tour is so international now, and it's nearly 50 percent international players that play in the LPGA Tour [Ladies Professional Golf Association] now whereas it was nothing like that back then and I think there were probably a couple of--I had a couple of friends that came from England and I knew a couple of people from Australia at the time when I was on the tour, but now it's so different.
Speaker 1: So what do you suppose is driving that?  Is that a measure of progress in race relations or has the money had something to do with that, the ability to attract certain sponsors?
Speaker 2: Well I think all of it, all of the above and because golf now instead of just being, you know, it originated in Scotland and England and you know in Europe but now it's--and golf really you know in the United States became more of a business and, but now it's become so international all over and the U.S. still has some of the biggest tours but the [Ladies] Asian [Golf] Tour is huge and the Australian [Ladies Professional Golf] Tour--so really it's become almost a world tour both from the men's standpoint and the women's standpoint, so golf is one of those sports that has just grown a lot from--you know it started out as you talk about the expenses, it was always known as a rich white man's game and, but that is changing and I'm seeing nowadays more African Americans getting into the game and playing the game and I'm always--you know I always try to tell especially African American women, I say I don't care whether you like the game or not, you need to play it because it is one of the few sports that you can play your entire life.  It's one of the sports that it's the best business contact sport in the world, and there are many companies and many corporations that when their upper management--they will send them to golf schools or they want them to learn to play the game because you're out there with a customer or client for four and a half hours and how many times do you get, you know just wonderful time like that where you are on a one-on-one situation with a person, and so I think that and I'm really pleased see to see that many more people of color are taking up the sport and sort of realizing that it's a great sport from many standpoints, but also from a business relations standpoint and there was up until 1961, there was a Caucasians only clause in the PGA of America [Professional Golfers' Association] so where you weren't able to join and my father when he was coming along could not join the PGA because of the racism.  The LPGA really appraised themselves of certainly not ever having a clause like that and their--the total body voted on whether they should do that or not back in the 1960s, and they chose to keep it open but at that time they're--over the history, the fifty-four year history of the LPGA, they've only had three African Americans to ever play the tour.
Story_ID: 382654
Speaker 1: You know, I'm wondering too about the business of golf here at Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio], because I believe I read that the course started with nine holes and then was expanded to eighteen holes, and then I heard you say that maybe four or four and a half hours you are on the golf course.  So what does that mean to go from nine to eighteen?  Is that a major accomplishment or--what's the average size of a golf course and how fast do you have to play it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well years ago when my dad [William Powell] was--back in the '40s [1940s] when Clearview was first built, I think so many of the golf courses and a lot of the golf courses were nine-hole golf courses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, all over the country and then a lot of things drive it you know, and then it became--in the '70s [1970s] it was when people say, "Well, you know if it was eighteen holes we'd play it more," (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my father had the land and but it was still sort of a lot of trees, and a little--a lot of rambles and things on it but he then built and added on another nine holes.  Well you can imagine that in you know, we grew up as a family working the golf course, so going from nine to doubling it took, I mean that was a lot and, so as far as maintenance, as far as dollars, as far as--and so everything that was you know was to try to do different improvements and to grow it so you could grow your clientele also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And but at the time I think what happened, like we talked about the '60s [1960], and so the '60s [1960] affected us also in a different way whereas--or like you said our clientele for many years was basically, was probably about 98 to 99 percent white because not many black people played golf, not many people of color played golf and so it, in the '60s [1960] it affected our business in a different way, adversely, because then people that were coming to the course that were white were afraid to come because you were black and they didn't know whether they should continue to come or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had your summer job then?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I--
Speaker 1: Because the family had Clearview.
Speaker 2: Exactly, I always had a job (laughter).
Speaker 1: And was that the primary source of income for the household, just the maintenance or the fees realized from making the course available?
Speaker 2: Right, and my father was working a full time job too, until the '60s [1960].
Speaker 1: Oh, in addition--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to the golf course?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I mean it's--to run a golf course, well if you can imagine what it takes to--if you have a lawn--say if you had a good-sized lawn, front and back lawn you know how to--if you want to maintain it, you know what it would take.  Well a golf course which is different because you have greens, what you putt on, and they take a special type of grass, and special care, and it's not like--and a lot of times people look at our green and they'll walk on it if they've never been on a golf course before, they say is this real grass, because it looks like artificial grass, because it's cut so short, so the ball will roll, and not bounce on it and then you have your other grass on your fairways, and then you've everything else and so everything takes special care and different types of care, so there's a cost in all of that and, so and actually over the years our family has always had to subsidize the golf course really, to keep it going, but I think what my father has always--and my father and mother [Marcella Oliver Powell] both and they were such a team working together in trying to create something that was important in society--in American society, but certainly no one ever thought it was going to become a historical site (laughter).
Story_ID: 382655
Speaker 1: We've talked about your high school years [at Central Catholic High School, Canton, Ohio] and a little bit about the college years at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] and [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], can we talk now a little bit about your years as a pro golfer?  You said that was from '67 [1967] to 1980, that first round in the United States.  Did you experience any of the, the kind of blatant discrimination that you associated with your school years, or were things really getting better towards the end of the 1960s?
Speaker 2: I--well I experienced a lot of different things.  I mean I experienced things such as--'cause I traveled through the South a lot, I mean a lot of the tournaments were in the South, a lot of the players were from the South, and I didn't have any problems with any players on the tour, because most of them knew me when I--having played junior golf tournaments, and playing collegiate and amateur tournaments.  But I mean, I would run into such situations as, of people not wanting to serve you in restaurants, and I have a friend who, we were roommates on the tour for a long time, and she is a Canadian, from Canada, and so several years ago she was talking, she goes, "You know I use to wonder why people wouldn't serve us in restaurants," (laughter) it was because she was with me. But, and housing situations, I ran into a lot of housing situations.  I ran into things where people tried to run me off the highway, or in hotels a lot of times I would receive obscene phone calls in the middle of the night.  I received a lot of threat letters on my life so, so no things didn't get any better for me because I was one person, who was a person of color, traveling and going to a lot of--some courses were public, but a lot of private country clubs where a black person, an African American, had never played before and going into other situations probably where they didn't allow African Americans to stay before, didn't serve very many in the restaurants and so but here I was. And I would run into other situations just like, you know going into the club house and going into the locker room and having the same credentials as my colleagues that were walking beside me, and the guard at the door would stop me and want to quiz me, and not want to let me in.  So for me, no things didn't change, they were worse than before because I was out there by myself, and I can remember one time I had received these threat letters on my life and I was in Florida, and I called my parents [William Powell and Marcella Oliver Powell] and I just cried and cried on the telephone because I thought that someone was going to, you know I could just envision somebody, envision somebody jumping out from behind a tree and killing me, and my parents didn't say come home (laughter), which I--you know I, but I think that, I think they were just trying to make me be tougher and stronger and I--they probably thought that I was safer than I thought I was. And I can remember even taking, taking--going to our tournament director at the time, and because I was so frightened, and our officials saying well there is nothing they can do, but I was receiving these letters and somehow they were being delivered to the locker room, and I would open my mail and it would have like, you know like, "Dear nigger, if you want to live then you need to leave here," so. But so then your question did things get easier, no, they didn't get easier, they just sort of escalated, and I think it was because of the fact--I mean if I were in a situation where there were a lot of people of color in a situation, and if I weren't playing in a sport that was at that time very much a non-minority oriented sport then it would have been different, but that's why I say, you know, I've always been confronted with racism my entire life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's primarily then because of race that the discrimination is there, or is it--do you think it is also because you were a woman--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --sort of trailblazing?
Speaker 2: Oh no, not at that time because I was within an organization which was the Ladies Professional Golf Association [LPGA], so it was all women.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So mine was just be- simply because I was a person of color that was there and ran into incidents.  I don't think they were telling the white people, "Dear nigger," (laughter), and because it--and, and but it was--and not because I was a female, but because it was a female organization, but it was just a lot of unpleasant situations.
Speaker 1: And in the midst of all that, then how do you acquire this reputation for being a professional, and not necessarily reacting only to the racism but focusing on the game, is that through newspaper accounts or magazines for the profession itself?
Speaker 2: Oh no, just from my background and my parents, and knowing what they had gone through and, and always--you know, them just, you know, I think just making us stronger in, just in, in, just in talking and seeing what they had experienced.
Story_ID: 382656
Speaker 1: --And knowing that you had to be tough, and they [Powell's parents, Marcella Oliver Powell and William Powell] always talked about making a difference and leaving the world a better world than you found it, and things like that and so, and one of the things that I still do think of, one of the things I really thought about all the time was, I would love to read like autobiographies and biographies, and Harriet Tubman was a person that stood out so much in my life and she's a person that I you know just realizing what she had gone through and when she'd gone through it, and what she had done and how she had traveled from the South and taking--and had to take people all the way to the Canadian border for freedom but how she did that to make life a better life for all of us and how so many people along that line have done that just to make it better, and had really just--you know it was, their lives were always on the line but it was bigger than them, and I think those are some of the things that I look back and reflect back on and say well, I just need to do this, just to make things better.
Speaker 2: Okay, and outside of the family and perhaps Harriet Tubman with the Underground Railroad, where do you find then as a young golfer these stories of the role models, of people who've gone before you, and sort of opened doors?
Speaker 1: Just you know reading books on people that have done things and the lives of different people and like Jesse Owens who was a friend and in talking to him at different times and just, and reading his book too and that was--I'd read his book and--
Speaker 2: So another Ohioan.
Speaker 1: That's right another--
Speaker 2: I think we should interject that too.
Speaker 1: That's right another Ohioan, but you know seeing and understanding that no one's life, especially those who had come long before us, was easy, and they all had struggles, you know, and just reading, just like with Jesse and hear all--just to try to make a living different things, like racing a racehorse, I mean you know things that you--things that he had to do that were more humiliating, but yet and still he had great pride, and that you can still--and the one thing that my father and my mother and my grandparents [Berry Powell and Massaleaner Powell] always taught, was that that you can have pride, and that's the one thing, that people can take anything else away from you but they can't take your pride away from you.  My grandmother used to have this saying, she says, "You could have a--you may only just have a flap in front and a flap in back, but they can't take your pride."
Story_ID: 382657
Speaker 1: I'm wondering, you said there wasn't a lot of acceptance in your early years on the part of the white community, but how about the African American community?  Is there a sports page in the weekly African American newspaper where you could read about the activities of black golfers in the 1960s and 1970s?
Speaker 2: Well there was an organization it was called the United Golfers Association [sic. United Golf Association] or the UGA, which was formed, oh, long before the '60s [1960], and there was different clubs around the country, and it was formed so that people of color that did play golf were able to go and play, and there were, and you would play, they would play in just African American tournaments, because you couldn't play in other events and also golf courses, there were certain golf courses, and not very many, they were mostly just the city golf courses where you were able to play.  Like in Cleveland [Ohio] there were two golf courses, in Akron [Ohio] there was one golf course that were city courses, and they were the ones that allowed African Americans to play, and there were different ones around the country like in Chicago [Illinois] and Washington, D.C. the same thing.
Story_ID: 382658
Speaker 1: And we were talking about professional organizations for African Americans who were passionate about the game of golf and those organizations making it possible for them to play, even in a segregated society.  So I'd just like to talk a few minutes about black golfers in the midst of this desegregation movement from the 1960s up until about 1980.  When do you start to see changes in how black golfers are received by majority organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, actually not until the '70s [1970s], and we're still doing things that are making changes. There's still a lot of--I think like Tiger Woods mentioned that, "There are still courses that I can't go to," that he can't go to and he's talking about the fact because of color, but golf still has a way to go, because you know it's sort of like tennis and golf were sort of, there was correlation between the two that there was a lot of racism within both of those sports, and golf is still taking a little bit longer I think, and because when I look at things like now from a professional standpoint, there is not one African American on the LPGA Tour [Ladies Professional Golf Association] today, no one, and when you look at the regular PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association], Tiger Woods is the only one out there, so it's--and back in the '70s [1970], actually there were probably about eight to ten men on the PGA Tour.  Well it's gone backwards now, and so as we look at it, I think that, you know I don't see that part of it changing drastically within my lifetime.  But, so changes have been taking place all along but then, one thing I do wanna say is that years and years ago, when we as African Americans have been involved with golf for a long time but in a different situation, because when--golf has been around for a long time, and when the majority wanted to go out to play, well they didn't want to carry their own bags so what they did was that they had caddies, and the caddies were always black and the caddies would--so that's how years and years ago how African Americans and people of color learned to play the game, because they were caddies.  Well, many of those early pros on the men's tour too, when you go back to the '30s [1930] and '40s [1940] and '50s [1950], they learned to play golf as caddies too, but it was really when it was the most elitist sport, it was African Americans or blacks, or Negroes at the time, that were the caddies, and so that's how we really do have a history in golf, and there were a lot of African Americans that were good golfers, but they were certainly never recognized or never able to play the game unless anyone in the South, they would sneak out to play the game, or go wherever they could to hit the balls, and they had to improvise and be creative in playing golf and hitting golf shots so, but where the golf world has embraced you it's still doing that.
Story_ID: 382659
Speaker 1: I'm sure you've heard some of the talk about 2004 being the fiftieth anniversary of the Brown v. Board [of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision, [U.S.] Supreme Court ruling that says segregation is wrong, it's unconstitutional, it's a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the [U.S.] Constitution, so desegregate those schools, and in the wake of that, we have a lot of other institutions as well that are being called upon to integrate or desegregate if there was a deliberate effort to keep black people out, and some people now in reflecting back on the last fifty years suggest that maybe it was a mistake to try and integrate someone else's house and in the process neglect those all African American organizations that sort of sustained the community up until 1954.  Do you hear people in golf questioning whether or not it was right?  The organization again is the U--?
Speaker 2: The UGA.
Speaker 1: UGA is--
Speaker 2: United Golfers Association [sic. United Golf Association].
Speaker 1: It's still prospering now?
Speaker 2: Well no, you know what's happened?  All during the--everything with the changes then, and I look at the UGA sort of as the way I looked at our historically black colleges [and universities, HBCUs], they were--it was established because there was a need for it to be established.  Our historically black colleges were established because it was a need for them to be established, cause otherwise we as people of color could not continue with an education, higher education, and so, and the same thing with golf and those clubs, you couldn't compete, and you couldn't--unless you were doing it among yourselves, but after integration then people, a lot of people did not think that there was a need, and they said, "Well gee, we don't need to do this because we can go out and we can play anywhere."  Well, you might be able to play anywhere, most places, but a lot of places still don't want you or didn't want you to play, that is the same thing cause I think it--my thinking was that it was important to keep an organization like that together just like a lot of times there's been problems in people saying that there's no need for our historically black colleges either, and I disagree with that because I think that it's--they're important and it is an important part of our history and I think that if we got rid of all of them, I think that would, it would--we would see what a problem that we still would have, and I look at a lot of things that are going on, just like with our, there's a golf tournament which is a, it's a minority women's college championship [Women's Collegiate Golf Classic], and a lot of the various colleges compete, and they have a cup that's called the Renee Powell Cup that they play for, and so I was--I went to Atlanta [Georgia] a couple of years ago and spoke and I found that the--for three years I think it was like those three years prior the team that had won was the team from Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], which is in Daytona Beach, Florida, and when I met the Bethune-Cookman golf team, women's golf team, every single player on the team was from Sweden, then I was like, I was shocked (laughter), because I felt that the scholarships that were going and growing the game of golf and teaching young ladies of color to play the game, those scholarships and going to college were sort of left out, and they were going to international players, and so there's a lot of different things that are happening, and many of the players from a lot of our historically black colleges are no longer minorities (laughter), so a lot of things have changed, and, but I think you--we cannot forget our past and why things were done when they done, and that you have to keep a sense of why things were created and continue to educate.  I think we have to learn, I don't--you know when we talk about schooling and education, I think the thing was that we wanted equality, equal education, and I think a lot of people questioned the fact of yeah, if you're taking a youngster from a neighborhood that's not the greatest neighborhood, and all the way across town to the elitist area, you know there are situations that you know from a--I think from a psychological and a social standpoint that are, maybe damaging, but if that education has got to be the same at both situations, and you cannot have inferior education, and the same thing, you know, in golf.  I think that in anything in life, you know, we've got to try to make things as equal as we can and not substandard.
Story_ID: 382660
Speaker 1: Do you think it's possible to achieve equality in a segregated setting, 'cause I know that there are more than a few African Americans who say there's nothing wrong with an all-black school.  No, there is no special prize that's won when people get into these integrated environments where they're looked upon as being minorities, when they could just as easily go to a majority black setting.  Can we achieve equality?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I--but the thing is that we don't live in a totally black society, and if you don't live in a totally black society then you have to be integrated into a total society, and so I think that if all the situations are the same and if you can learn and you're educated, I think I would say that if a person went to--a couple of years to a--if you grew up in a totally black school and black society and you went a couple of years to a black college, then maybe you would even want to go to a white college maybe even later, or--but you somehow you have to be integrated into society and you can't live in a little cocoon, and it's the same way that we need to all, blacks and whites need to be able to learn more about each other, because it's all part of education, and if we believe, if you really believe the Bible that we all came from Adam and Eve, then you know that we are all the same.  So, we all have that same--you know we're all interrelated at some point, but somewhere in life it changes and people wanna go their own separate ways, but we don't live in a totally segregated society and so therefore, you know you have to be very cognizant of that.  You have to certainly keep your pride and understand your heritage, but also learn about other societies and live within the total society.  I mean I've spent a lot of years going back and forth to Africa too and learning so much just as I'm traveling there and learning about tribalism even, you know, and what it means and how we got here.
Story_ID: 382661
Speaker 1: The LPGA Tour [Ladies Professional Golf Association], the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association] and the USGA [United States Golf Association], which hosts, like the U.S. Open and tournaments like that, they took a stand--let me backtrack a little bit.  In 1990, but we won't go into this, but in 1990 the PGA Championship was held in Alabama, at a golf course called Shoal Creek [Golf and Country Club, Shoal Creek, Alabama] and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] went in and challenged them because they didn't have black--didn't allow any black members and they said they didn't have to have any black members.  Well all the sponsors started pulling out and so the head of the PGA went in and convinced the people that they needed to hire, they needed to have a black member, and so they decided to bring in a black member.  It was a person, I forget the gentlemen's name, but he didn't even play golf, but they brought a black member so that they would satisfy that and then all the institutions, all the associations then said that, "Well we will, we will not play at any golf courses that do not--that segregate against having either black members or females," and there were a couple of courses that decided that they would not go along with it.  As a matter of fact in Chicago [Illinois] where they had the Western Open and it was held every year at Butler National [Golf Club, Oak Brook, Illinois], and they decided that they were not going to have anybody dictate to them and that they were not going to change, and so they were taken off and there is not a major championship that is played there, not a PGA Tour event, and so it's now at a public course which is called Cog Hill [Golf and Country Club, Lemont, Illinois], that's where Tiger [Woods] has won the tournament quite a few times, but so there's some, but that goes back to 1990 which isn't that long ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I can remember the LPGA called me one day because they figured that the media was going to call me and they said, "[HistoryMaker] Renee [Powell], you know that we only play at tournaments.  We don't at any tournaments where they don't allow blacks," and they said "we've never done that."  But I knew differently because I knew some people, I was going to play at a golf course, a friend of mine who, her sponsors were at this course, and so she said, "Oh well let's--I'm gonna invite Renee down."  They said "Oh, Renee can't come here because Renee is not allowed to play at this course," and they said, "well, what do you mean?  She comes and plays at the tournament all the time?"  But as long as the tournament was there I could play and they were just treating me as I was part of the family, but outside of there, so there are things still exist.
Story_ID: 382662
Speaker 1: Since you mentioned his name [Tiger Woods], and talking about some recent changes in the world of golf for people of color.  I know, now I'm not gonna--the Masters [Tournament, Augusta, Georgia], is that where you get the green jacket?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) I think I remember when Tiger got the green jacket and he looked like such--not a little boy, but just (laughter), it was just shocking to people that this young man was so gifted and he came in, and I don't think they made that jacket for him, because it didn't fit very well, but he won anyway and I remember him standing there with this jacket and so many people wanted to be proud of him.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And certainly black Americans wanted to be proud of him because--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: They look at him and they see his beautiful beaming brown face, and you know it's like we made it.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I think that one of the people--you know Lee Elder who was on the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association], and he was the first black that played in the Masters after they you know, it was--it took a long time before he played, and there were a lot of issues about that, but, and Lee was there and I know Lee cried and many people cried because that was the one tournament that--the last tournament that blacks really could play in.  There were a lot of different stipulations, and it's interesting how things can sort of change because Charlie Sifford who actually became a--took it to court to allow for the PGA to allow him to play in the PGA and back in the early 1960s, and so and Charlie had won tournaments and there were people that played in the tournament that had far fewer credentials than Charlie, but they were other players from here, and international players but so he was never able to play, and then it was a long road for Lee also and finally the--one of the tournaments that he actually won [1974 Monsanto Open, Pensacola, Florida], it was a tournament that they had to allow him to win a spot at Augusta National or to be invited to play, and so what was also very ironic about the fact that is that when Tiger won, which was his first year on tour I believe, and my dad [William Powell] and I had been there earlier that week.  We weren't there on that weekend.  It was the first time that we had actually been invited as guests of the CEO of the PGA of America, and we'd gone down with him to that tournament, and Tiger won by something like twelve strokes or something, some unbelievable spread which had never happened before, and it was sort of like this--that God had this plan for him to win that major tournament, with that type of a spread, because had he won the U.S. Open or the PGA Championship or any other major, it would not have made that kind of an impact, but it was because it was the Masters that he won, and then he had people talking, and I mean people would make such statements, which were ridiculous statements, "Is he gonna win every single tournament out here?"  And I mean he had people that I think actually believed that, but I mean if you think about it (laughter) it's humanly impossible to do (laughter), but it made that much of an impact and so I think it was just God's plan for him to win that tournament in the manner in which he did, because it really did open a lot of doors and made a huge statement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now what year are we talking about for the first green jacket?
Speaker 2: I think it was 1997, I believe.
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990], okay and again I keep saying I'm not a sports fan, but it's like, in Ohio you become a sports fan.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By osmosis, especially in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But, again I remember Tiger, I remember the color of the jacket; I remember what I meant to golf fans of all races, but I think his winning also forced to the surface a lot of these issues about race, cause I remember editorials appearing in Cleveland's daily newspaper [The Plain Dealer] about whether or not Tiger was actually black, you know, that in fact yeah he's more Asian than African American because his mother [Kultida Punsawad Woods] is Asian and his mother raised him not in a Baptist church or an African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] church, but in the traditions of her ancestors, and so this is really bizarre (laughter), you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and I think that because it was the sport of golf, which was this white elitist sport, and here is this youngster who doesn't look white at all (laughter) and he's won and just blown everyone out, then it's like, he must be more something than the other and we all knew that we grew up that if you have one drop of black blood in you, you're black, and that's how society has always been, but all of a sudden Tiger came along, but, and had more than just a drop of black blood in him (laughter), but he can't be exactly because he is in this sport that is this, has always been this white elitist sport, and how can he do this you know?  Maybe he's been out in the sun longer (laughter) you know to have this suntan or something.
Speaker 1: It is really interesting, I just wondered what golfers were saying to each other, cause I know what those of us outside the game were dealing with and I think [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson made a statement, "Yes, Tiger is black," and then Tiger comes back with something that he is Caucasian, African American, Asian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he's everything.
Speaker 1: --a combination (laughter).
Speaker 2: Which is a combination of our society, I mean and a lot of white people don't want to admit that they have black blood in them too, I mean we are--how do we know what we are--
Story_ID: 382663
Speaker 1: Again, if we came from Adam and Eve, we are a mixture of everything, and it's just like the whole issue of people always talking about the fact that Christ was, you know, you'd always see him as blonde and blue-eyed, but from the region of the world that he came from, then he could not have been that.  So it's--I think it's just a matter of--society will always have to be educated, it's a continuous thing and a lot of times many things and many issues of history are hard to let go, and it's just like a perfect example of [Senator] Strom Thurmond, you know and an issue like that and his daughter [Essie Mae Washington-Williams] is now being recognized as his daughter by everyone, and not just by the few people that knew it years ago, but there's so many different things that have happened in our society and I think that the more we're educated, the more we are comfortable with each other, and why is it, why does it always have to be that the cowboy that wears a white hat is a good cowboy and the cowboy that wears the black hat is the bad cowboy (laughter), you know, so it's just a part of society being educated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and just for the record can we educate our viewers about Strom Thurmond and what it is, what this story is in 2004 about his daughter?
Speaker 1: Well the story in 2004 about Strom Thurmond was that his daughter is an African American, and, but it was always kept quiet and although from what it says, and what she has come out to say, is that he had taken care of her financially over the years and her family, but it was never admitted that he had fathered an African American child by an African American person who I guess worked for his family.
Speaker 2: And that he was married to a white woman at that time [sic.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And he was married to a white woman (laughter), that's right he was married to a white woman, but he does have a connection of African American, an African American child and had an African American relationship.
Speaker 2: And this is happening in the American South and that this man is a national lawmaker--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And at times among the most virulent racists that we can find in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Exactly.  I mean he was so outspoken about racism, and, but yet and still so it was two sides.  He knew, but yet and still in the society that he was living in, he went totally the other way, at least, it appeared to be for what--and that also the thing is that he's not the only person like that, and you know, and especially when you see we as African Americans are a rainbow of colors, and we are a rainbow of colors because of our background and our history, and I look at my--that's just like in my family my aunt--I have one aunt who's very, very fair and then I have--then her sister, her twin sister is a little darker and the story, the story that was told was that in, when they were born in Minerva [Ohio] and the neighbors said, oh, and they were born at home, "You've got to go see Mrs. [Massaleaner] Powell's children, she had twins, a black one and a white one" (laughter) so when you go back in history, you know, then we're all mixed up.
Story_ID: 382664
Speaker 1: Just one final comment from you please, about race and the game of golf and I'm thinking again about Tiger [Woods] and then I want to move on to something else, but the fact that he would not deny his Asian heritage and he loved and respected his Asian mother [Kultida Punsawad Woods] and his African American father [Earl Woods].  It just sort of threw the black community into this wild frenzy, but Fuzzy Zoeller, am I getting the name right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You got the name right, for not knowing a lot about golf you did great.
Speaker 1: Maybe I am a golf fan, told a joke about Tiger Woods and the dinner; I guess it's the celebration dinner--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Something about collard greens and corn bread.
Speaker 2: And fried chicken or whatever else, whatever all they eat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Soul food.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: African American culture.
Speaker 2: Yes, but southern culture.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's not just African American culture, it was that foods that they eat in the South, now if you go in the South and talk about collard greens, white people and black people both know what you're talking about.  When you talk about grits, white people and black people know what you're talking about.  Up in the North, they don't wanna know what it is white people don't--so it, so when Fuzzy Zoeller made a joke because what happens is they, the winner of the Masters [Tournament, Augusta, Georgia], the following year they select the menu of what everyone's going to eat, so at the champion's dinner and so Fuzzy happened to have made that statement, and some people defended him, and some people didn't defend him, and actually he, his sponsors felt that they needed to cut off from him at the time, but it was just a really ignorant statement to make, but I certainly think that you know Tiger, his mother his Asian, and he is half of his mom and half of his dad, and he is rightly so should be very proud of his heritage.
Speaker 1: And, I guess the reason that joke stayed with me from the '90s [1990s], I guess I'm pleased that I remember that.  Is that--it said to me that the culture of golf is changing, it's not just about race and how Tiger looks, but it's something about what he eats you know (laughter), and what he wears now that he's won this Masters Tournament, but the whole culture itself is it seemed, being transformed by people like Tiger Woods.
Speaker 2: Well that's true and I think that too that golf realizes that the only way, and it's in society too, the only way that it can survive is if they are more inclusive, and it has to be a diverse culture like society is diverse, so and sometimes people are--it's hard for some people to accept, but when you get down to it, I think the majority of the people accept it, because it because from a financial standpoint, I know I was always shocked when I started going back into the South more and I would go into restaurants, I mean having experienced a lot of the experiences that I had, and then I go back again and go to a restaurant and they say "Now y'all come back now!"  (Laughter) Like whoa I can remember when they didn't even want me to eat here, now they want me to come back?  So, so and but it's because from a financial standpoint, and society is changed in realizing that, you know, in order--you need total society in order to have a strong society.
Story_ID: 382665
Speaker 1: Now we've talked about some of the changes in golf then for African Americans and for women in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], but I think that you made a revolutionary move in the decade of the 1980s, by going abroad, you know, with golf.  Can you tell me what happened at that point in your life?
Speaker 2: Well I've spent different times abroad, and in the '70s [1970] I went abroad.  I went to England in the '70s [1970s] and I spent time over there then, and then in the '80s [1980s] I actually went abroad and spent a lot--well I was back and forth like a twice year to the continent of Africa teaching golf, so I had spent a lot of time in that part of the world with golf, so I guess I'd need you to be more specific as to where and what.
Speaker 1: Oh, sure, well we focused so much on the Americas, so places outside of the United States, what took you to those areas?
Speaker 2: When I first went to England, I went there to play in actually the Colgate European [Open, Berkshire, England] golf tournament, and it was a regular event on our American tour [Ladies Professional Golf Association, LPGA], but 'cause Colgate [Palmolive Company, New York, New York] sponsors tournaments here in the United States and they decided to branch out and to do one in England and so I ended up going over there because one of the, I thought--I knew I would love England because my dad [William Powell] always talked about England during the war [World War II, WWII], and how much friendlier it was at that time in his life then, in how well the blacks were treated as opposed to how he was treated here.  So I knew I would love England and then one of the young ladies, the first British pro that came and played on the U.S. tour, I became friendly with, and so, and she lived over there, and so when I went over there I was able, you know, I learned a little bit more about England and actually there had been a documentary that had been made on my life while I was there and at one time became--actually I had a manager, my manager was British and at one stage in my life I became domesticated, so then therefore I lived in England much longer, and then when I actually became undomesticated (laughter) I moved back to the United States and then all--and then that would take us up to the '80s [1980s] and during the '80s [1980s], all during the '80s [1980s], having lived in England I knew that anywhere the British were, that they spent their leisure time playing golf, and there were golf tournaments.
Story_ID: 382666
Speaker 1: I'd only at that point been to Africa, to Morocco, and I'd gone to Morocco to play in a golf tournament.  I was invited by--several of us were invited by the king of Morocco [Hassan II] to play in an event over there and, but I had never been to Africa south of the Sahara [Desert], and I decided that I wanted to spread the game of golf to other people in other parts of the world and to the continent of Africa, and to the indigenous people of the continent of Africa and so I put together a program on my own of going to--at the same time I was sort of, I was just getting really involved with thinking of how to spread the game of golf, and that's when I started doing them to historically black colleges [and universities, HBCUs] here in this country and also to indigenous people on the continent of Africa, and I was doing this sort of simultaneously, and I did a lot of research on--I went to Washington [D.C.] and stayed with some friends down there and did research as to, you know, the various countries, and where there were golf courses, and I knew their golf system was more on the British golf system of which I knew, and put together a program of going over there, and the first country I went to actually was to Kenya, and then after that I ended up doing a--I think going to Zambia and Zimbabwe, and then I found out that I had gone to the embassy of Zambia and I saw--I was learning so much about Africa and it was sorta like I was discovering our historically black colleges, and the continent of Africa at the same time, and it was just all so fascinating to me because I was learning so much and it's sort of like I was becoming consumed by all of this, and so when I was going to--when I had gone down to Washington I became so fascinated by all the embassies, I said "Oh, what a beautiful building" you know, I was just so fascinated by Connecticut Avenue, so I thought, oh, and I was just, sort of sat down and sort of charted, and was doing my research and chart the countries that would be good to go to and learn more about and doing my research and so then I had sort of put together programs I had.  At that time Pan American Airlines [Pan American World Airways] was flying, so I contacted someone at Pan American Airlines and I knew their whole system of where they were flying to, and so I sort of charted my programs that way and they--that way they actually sponsored my trips as far as my airfare, flying me over, and they also owned InterContinental Hotels [Group] at the time and so I, you know, knew the cities where they were.
Story_ID: 382667
Speaker 1: I went into the embassy, the Zambia embassy, and this is the first year when I was going to go over and charting all of this, and I walked into the embassy and this lady, her name was Mrs. Mamika [ph.], and she was the receptionist and she looked up and she saw me and she goes, "Oh, I know who you are", and I says "oh, no you don't, I've never been here before," and she said, she told me who I was.  She said, "You're [HistoryMaker] Renee Powell", and I'm like, how do you know that?  She'd been reading some old issues of Ebony magazine, and then I also found out that this documentary film that had been made on my life had been shown in Africa, who I had no idea where it had been shown, and so they knew me over there already, and it was just a stroke of luck I guess, I--you know I went in there so she, and at the time we did not have very good relationships, because President [Ronald Wilson] Reagan was the president at the time and President Kenneth Kaunda, who had brought, taken Zambia to independence, was the president at the time, and there were some issues because he had kicked several of our embassy people out because he had accused them of being CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] agents.  At the same time, President Reagan took a stand and withdrew our ambassador.  So our relationship between the two countries was not very good, but I had no idea of that at the time and so I was dealing with the USIA [United States Information Agency] and State Department [U.S. Department of State] and so they--I'd gone to both of those organizations.  They said, "Oh Renee, we've got a bad relationship with Zambia, you won't be able to go," and I had met the people at the embassy, and I also had received a letter from the president of the country inviting me over, and I'm like jeez, whenever I came over to call him, and it ended up then that I think I went the next year, our ambassador was back in place, and our ambassador told the State Department that I was the very best person that our country, the U.S., could send to Zambia, because I was going over not as a political figure, but the president loved golf.  And every Saturday he [President Kenneth Kaunda] spent his leisure time playing golf because there was a golf course right there at State House [Lusaka, Zambia], and so what I did then, and I felt and I knew that every--in every country every ambassador wants as many personal contacts and personal audiences with the president of that country that they're in as much as possible.  So what I would do is that I would get different items made up, like I would--I got a golf company to make up State House golf balls and a golf bag for the president, and so I felt that one of the things that I could do was--that would make it easier for our ambassador always, was I would--whenever I would--I would take these items over, and I would leave them with our ambassador so that when I left the country he could then go over and present these items to the president of the country which gave him another audience with the president.  So it was just like my own little way of trying to do my thing as far as an American citizen that was going into a foreign country and I could do something I thought you know to help you know with diplomatic relationships a little better.  Just a very tiny thing, but it was a little thing that I could do as sort of a personal thing.
Story_ID: 382668
Speaker 1: And how many years did you do that?
Speaker 2: I did that a number of years, because I went to Africa all during the 1980s.
Speaker 1: And as far as teaching the game of golf to people on the continent of Africa, were you directly involved in that or did you train the teachers and then they went out?
Speaker 2: No, I actually was directly involved because I went to so many different areas, and the different golf clubs would invite me and actually the program had been put together from--with our public affairs officer from our embassies because I worked directly with our embassies and our State Department [U.S. Department of State].  They would put together programs also with the golf unions there in those areas, and we would--and I would do programs at various places, especially you know, with the ladies and with the youth, in teaching golf clinics and playing exhibitions, and one--I guess one of the highlights when I was going to Zambia because every year I would go and I had some friends that were British pros and they said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Renee [Powell], you're going to Zambia, you know the president [Kenneth Kaunda] always wins, (laughter) you're going to play with the president," and I--when I went there and he had a--there was a golf course right at State House [Lusaka, Zambia].  It was a nine-hole golf course and you played it twice for eighteen holes, well there had never been a female to grace the grounds of the State House to play golf there, and so I went and I played and I was the partner of the president, and so we were on the same team so we always won.  I went one year and I'd been going over there maybe about three years or so and I arrived and our ambassador and myself went over to the golf course, and when I arrived there were all these ladies that were standing there, and they were ladies that I had taught over the years, and that was my team this year.  It was the first time that I was not on the president's team, and so there were these ladies and then there were the president's team, and most of the president's teams were different, various ambassadors and people from the World Bank, and you know, officials within that country, and this one lady came up to me who I had seen every year that I had been gone over there and she just grabbed me and she held me and started crying and said, "Oh, only because of you," she goes, "never in my life would I have ever dreamed that I would meet my president, because of you I am playing golf with my president," and so that was I think just a very touching and moving time for me, and probably one of the most memorable times that I had spent there because it meant that of all the times that I was going there and the things that I was doing and teaching, all of a sudden it was making a difference.
Speaker 1: And you said that was in the 1980s?
Speaker 2: That was in the 1980s, yes.
Speaker 1: So you're pretty much living and working abroad then, in various--
Speaker 2: Well no, no I would just go over there twice a year--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And do programs and I would just go over, I was just doing them, I was doing them with the State Department, and because initially I put together my own programs, but because my--I was dealing with heads of state and first ladies, all of a sudden I found out that I was getting calls from Washington [D.C.] that--and they became--actually they became a part of my program, sort of--actually sort of took over the program and did.  Then I would go over under the auspices of the State Department and USIA [United States Information Agency], but, so they would fly me over and take care of those things, but I was--I would go over to like east Africa at one time of the year and west Africa at another time of the year, and depending upon the weather because so that I wouldn't be in the rainy season, and so I learned a lot about the continent, I did my studies, and did all my research into all the countries that I was going into.  So during the '80s, I was going into countries like, jeez, like Kenya, and Zambia and Zimbabwe and Togo and Cote D'Ivoire and Cameroon and Senegal and the Gambia, where 'Roots[: The Saga of An American Family,' Alex Haley] took place, and--
Speaker 1: And that's 'Roots,' Alex Haley?
Speaker 2: Alex Haley, 'Roots' which was a very emotionally moving time too, and places like, where else? Sierra Leone. So I went into all those areas and I was teaching golf and sort of basically as a goodwill ambassador.
Story_ID: 382669
Speaker 1: At what point in your career then, do you start to spend more time at Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio], or are you doing the Clearview work at the same time that you're travelling abroad?
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So I'm doing here you know cause it's a family, you know family operations, so if you grew up on a farm, you know as a farmer then you help work the farm, and in a golf course it's really sort of a farm, it's just a grass farm (laughter).  So I would you know, I would come back and I would do my programs because generally when I was going overseas it was in the January, February, November type, so it was really when we were having our winter here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so at that point Clearview is about forty years old and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess that's true.
Speaker 1: In the mid-1980s and so what's happening at Clearview at that point in time?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Are there more African Americans who were playing this eighteen-hole golf course now or--
Speaker 2: Well, some, but not a whole lot because in our area there were not that many African Americans still playing the game, and just in more recent years has it changed.  So through the '80s [1980s], there weren't really very many.  It was just really family, you know, still trying to get everything going, it was you know a harder go for our family, certainly because it was still--you're still talking about a sport that was a minority-oriented sport and actually it was interesting because when it was nine holes, a nine-hole golf course, then the word around and a couple of people that I knew said, "Well you know what they called the course?  They called it the Nigger Nine".  So and even when it was eighteen holes, people still would refer to it as that.  Several years ago someone said something to me about, oh, that his mom's neighbor said, "Oh, that's the Nigger Nine," and this was about three years ago.  So it's still, we've always within here, we've--we have always still fought that whole thing and always been that stigma and you know because we were black people within a total white society.  I mean my father [William Powell] has been the only person in the entire world, the only person of color to design and build and own and operate a golf course, so it's--and sometimes I think how are we this one family (laughter) amongst you know, millions of families, but I guess maybe, maybe it was--I guess it was just sort of God's plan and that's how you can--really how you look at it, that it was just sort meant to be, and it's always been sort of a struggle, but just trying to educate people, to adopt people to mingle because golf has always been sort of a social sport.
Story_ID: 382670
Speaker 1: I think it's interesting that now we note at the beginning of the 21st century, what [Powell's father] William Powell did in 1946, and this is sort of a backtracking (laughter) for me at least, for someone who was never directly involved in golf.  Seems like there's a presence--there's an African American presence, very visible on television and in magazines that I was never aware of growing up in the 1960s.  I was just saying that it seems now that there is an African American presence, at least the media is willing to focus on in the world of golf, and Tiger Woods is an important part of that, but I think too Vernon Jordan's [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] friendship with former President [William Jefferson] "Bill" Clinton was an important part of that too, the sense that it's not just a rich white man's game anymore, there's rich African American men.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, and just ordinary folks.
Speaker 2: That's true, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who play golf, that's part of the American experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you conscious of that too or is that just me, again from the outside looking in?
Speaker 2: No, I think that as a--probably as a person of color I'm really conscious of a lot of things that happened like that you see, and especially if you grow up in a sport too, well first as African American I see it, but also growing up in a sport where you know what it was like (laughter) and then you see the changes, and it's sort of interesting, and a lot of times just like when we talk about golf, 'cause I remember talking to someone locally and he was saying well, gee how many other, and this was a black person, "How many other black-owned courses are there in Ohio?"  And it's like, "In Ohio?" (Laughter)  And I think that people don't realize that the numbers are so small, it's just like, even like when I think in terms of African American golf professionals, and that means teaching golf professionals, professionals that you would see at the golf courses where you would go to and in the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] of America there are like twenty-eight thousand golf professionals.  Well of those twenty-eight thousand golf professionals, there are about forty African Americans, and so forty compared to twenty-eight thousand is not very many, so I think a lot of times people wouldn't realize that those numbers are so small, and they would think oh there mustn't be a lot (laughter), or there must be a lot of black people that are playing golf.  Now there're probably a little over, there are about twenty-seven million golfers I think in this country and of those twenty-seven million, there are probably about two million blacks, and but it's--but the thing is that it is growing though, you know as a sport that we, I think we are feeling more comfortable with the fact that we can go and we can play.  When I would hear people talk about going down to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] and playing golf, African Americans going down to Myrtle Beach and playing golf, and I'm like, you do, because I think I--and it's just because I reflect back to the problems that I had in the South and I'm thinking what, (laughter) you know, and, "They don't give you a hard time?"  But it's how everything has changed.  So yeah you see more, if you look in a magazine--I could remember like you know in growing up, in watching television, you would never, ever see black people on a commercial, and all of a sudden now you see black people in commercials.  You see Tiger Woods in a lot of commercials now, or like you would never see--I can remember watching Nat King Cole, we would sit here as a family watching Nat King Cole had his television show ['The Nat King Cole Show'], and television would be fine and all of a sudden when Nat King Cole would come on every week there was a problem with the television, and they had, the program had difficulties and so he would go, you know, he would black off for a while and then come back on, or else there would be different things and it was just the things because here he was, a person of color who had his TV show, but wasn't supposed to.  And so now you see, like in the light of Bill Cosby, when Bill Cosby had 'The Cosby Show,' which was wonderful in putting African Americans into a different light too, so you know things that we see now when I was growing up, you never saw anything and you would think that black people weren't in the--weren't in that industry.
Story_ID: 382671
Speaker 1: All right, I'd like to talk a little bit about educating the next generation of golfers.  I know you mentioned that your life story was the subject of a documentary made in Great Britain, and there are, I--just looking around the room I see a number of publications that have a lot of information about golf, but where can folks go to find information on the history of golf or the current state of affairs in the profession?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there are different areas, probably if you look at the USGA, which is the United States Golf Association.  They'll have some things beyond the history of golf.  Now are you speaking of just golf in general or African Americans in golf?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm thinking golf in general and then black Americans in golf in particular.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Are there websites, books, magazines?
Speaker 2: There are a lot of websites.  There are more and more being established, and there is a magazine that came out as far as--it's called African American Golfer's Digest, which just came out this year, and--or maybe towards the end of last year over the wintertime and there's a young lady, actually she's out in New York [New York] as a publisher and it's--she's done a great job with it thus far but that's--over the years I think there was another, there've been other African American magazines that have come out from time to time but you know how a lot of things, timing isn't always right and good, and so they've struggled and are no longer around, but hopefully this magazine will stay around.  I think that there were a couple of others that were due to come out like in April or late March.  There are African American magazines about golf but then there are a lot of other magazines to do with golf too, like there is Golf Digest which is a probably the most well-known magazine on golf in this country, there's the Golf for Women magazine which just deals with--for women and there are a lot of other areas, so if you look at different websites like you go in and find out about, just about golf and there are more and more that are cropping up all the time, certainly to find out more information about professional golf then you would go into a website about the Ladies Professional Golf Association [LPGA] that will tell you about its history or the PGA, the Professional Golfers' Association, so there's a lot of things out there nowadays that didn't--you know, weren't there years and years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay and how about the title of that documentary that you mentioned, the one on your life?  Is that still available?
Speaker 2: Well you know--
Speaker 1: For purchase?
Speaker 2: No, and I have no idea where it--I didn't even know where it had been shown at the time; this goes back thirty-some years ago I guess.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And so I really wasn't real familiar about where, although I did know it was shown in a lot of countries outside of the United States, but right now there is a story that they're working on about my father [William Powell] and the golf course [Clearview Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] and I can't really say a whole lot about it right now, but I know that they're working--they're in the process of working on a--actually for a motion picture.
Story_ID: 382672
Speaker 1: Well, I know in looking over some of the materials we had for background information in preparation for the interview that Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] and especially [Powell's father] Mr. William Powell, have both been the subjects of numerous articles, but are there any videos or books where the family or the golf course would have been profiled as part of a larger story?
Speaker 2: Well, there is a book about--that my father had done, it's called 'Clearview: America's Course' [Ellen Susanna Nosner] and so it's basically about my father's life, and about Clearview, and how it started and then I'm also, have been--I was working on a book about my life, and sort of put it down because I thought it was really more important for my father to get his out, and so, then you know timing is, you know there's only twenty-four hours in a day and sometimes I feel like I need about thirty-six hours in my day and it just doesn't exist, so I put everything down and then somebody contacted me not long ago and said, "Hey, you know, why don't you--have you ever thought about a book?"  And I says, "Oh yeah, I've got chapters written, I've got the whole outline, but I just haven't had time to do anything."  So I picked it up again, just in the last few weeks and have started going through, and starting to organize it all together again so it can get into the process of getting it together, getting it written, getting it published.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we might see something in--
Speaker 2: So we might see something about that?
Speaker 1: 2005 or 2006 perhaps?
Speaker 2: Yes, well hopefully it will be 2005 you know.  I know it takes time but right now I'm sort of on a mission to get some things done, some things accomplished like that, and you know so many things have happened in the last few years.  My mother [Marcella Oliver Powell] passed in the late 1990s and then you know then our family got smaller, and so it took--so you've taken a bigger load, a bigger workload because of things that she was doing, my brother [Larry Powell] and I have sort of divided up doing, and things that I was doing have become more, and just in trying to you know promote the golf course, and we--the course went from being, well in--several things happened in the early 2000s, and first, the dedication of the Ohio Historical Marker was one, and also into 2001 the--Clearview became the--the [U.S.] Department of the Interior designated it a National Historic Site, now in the National Register of Historic Places, and also Clearview became, we turned it into the Clearview Legacy Foundation which is a not-for-profit organization, a 501(c)(3).  It's Clearview Legacy Foundation for Education, Preservation and Research, so long after we're all gone, then this will all still be as it is, and it will remain sort of a teaching center and an educational piece for people longer after we're no longer here, and hopefully we'll be able to look at it from above.
Story_ID: 382673
Speaker 1: Okay, we're coming to the end of another segment, but I just wondered, certainly before we close and we can go to another tape if we need to, but is there a message that you would deliver to young golfers who aspire to be pros in this profession?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that the message that I would deliver is, not so much to be pros, but there are so many lessons that the game of golf teaches, life lessons.  You know it, and you can, as I look at what my parents [William Powell and Marcella Oliver Powell] have done and established and they worked over so many years to do it, it's sort of, you know, if you have a dream follow your dream and just if there's something that you want to do then stick to it.  Here my dad labored for over fifty years doing this, but it was something that he felt that was important to do and that you know, you really can basically achieve or at least you can come close to achieving what you want to, and it's sort of like the never give up attitude, you just keep at it, and keep at it.  My dad always says you know he's just like the little engine (laughter) you know, you just, "I think I can, I think I can, I think can," and then finally you can.
Story_ID: 382674
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Renee] Powell, in recent years, I know that Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio], and certainly [Powell's father] Mr. William Powell and you have received a lot of accolades for your work over the years in the profession of golf, but can you tell us about some of the more recent honors and awards that you've received?
Speaker 2: Yes, and you know I think that, one of the awards that I'm most proud of, and was sort of the first one to get everything going I think, is in actually in 1992 our family, it was the only award that we have received as a family, received the National Golf Foundation Jack Nicklaus Family of the Year Award which designated us as the number one golf family in the United States, and so that was a pretty proud time, a pretty proud moment because my mother [Marcella Oliver Powell] was still living at the time and we were able to receive that as a family, and then also over the years, I think it was in 1999 I received the Budget Service Award from the LPGA [Ladies Professional Golf Association] for my it's--I think it says, significant contributions to junior golf, and in sometime around that time, maybe around 2000, I received the--either before or after I received the Card Walker Award from the PGA Tour which was one of the few outside awards that the tour gives out at their annual awards dinner and [E. Cardon] "Card" Walker had been a--and it's a beautiful award, it's bronze, and one side it's Mickey Mouse and the other side is Minnie Mouse, and so it's, we call it my Mickey Mouse award because Card Walker was the CEO of [The Walt] Disney [Company] after Walt Disney, and that too was for contributions to youth golf, and in 2003 I was actually named the PGA [Professional Golfers' Association] First Lady of Golf, which is one of the most significant awards I've ever received, and that award was presented actually in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] last year in June, and there had only been four other people to receive that award.  The first one was Barbara Nicklaus, who's the wife of Jack Nicklaus, another one was Judy Bell who was the first female president of the United States Golf Association, the USGA, and another one was a colleague of mine that I played on the tour with, Judy Rankin, who is now a television commentator on many of the tour events that you see.  She's a commentator, and then before myself was Nancy Lopez who also played on the tour and we played on the tour together, and then I was the 2003 recipient, so it's a major, major award that the PGA honored each of us, and myself in particular last year, as the First Lady of Golf, and I was just really taken back by the fact when they made the announcement that I was to receive that award.
Speaker 1: And I know that in addition to receiving those awards for your playing, you've also received awards for your teaching the game of golf to other people.  Can you tell us about some of those, some of those honors?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually by--I think in Golf Digest, also at Golf Digest, and Golf for Women both, I think you're voted on sort of by your peers, you're selected by your peers and in the last several years I have been named as one of the top fifty teachers by--in the United States by Golf for Women magazine and also one of the top teachers by Golf Digest, and interestingly enough in Golf Digest they also break it down state by state, and so I had been named in the top ten list of golfers in the State of Ohio, and the only female that was--that made that list, so I was pretty proud of that.
Story_ID: 382675
Speaker 1: Have we covered everything, are there any subjects you feel that we've glossed over, 'cause we want the story to be complete, and it is your story, and I've been doing a lot of talking.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well I think you know, the--actually my story is basically, golf has been my life, and so as I said I started playing when I was three years old and now I'm in my fifties, so I have played--I was talking to somebody recently and I said, "Oh, I've been playing golf for over half a century." (Laughter)  Sometimes people look at me and think, half a century, sure, but it's true and literally you know just about the same time I was beginning to walk and talk, I was also beginning to play golf, so, and Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] is certainly--you know I started here so you know in one's life a lot of times you make sort of make a full circle and I certainly have made a full circle, and I started off here at the golf course, and I've seen it my whole life, you know when I came on board you know in life, seeing you know what my dad [William Powell] has done in building this and my mom [Marcella Oliver Powell] and dad in creating this course, and to the point where now it is actually a National Historic Site and it's now a foundation [Clearview Legacy Foundation for Education, Preservation, and Research], and some things that when I was coming along having to mow greens, I never thought that it would ever get to a point like that, but what we do now is, you know, trying to sustain the course and so doing a lot of fundraising, and things along that nature, and getting people to--educating people in the game of golf, preserving the history of the golf course here and my brother [Larry Powell] is on the other end of things and because you know we in growing up and doing a lot of things on the golf course and it can be very costly and so you sort of create ways that will cost--you know, cut costs and ways of finding ways to grow grass that was--it was, it became more heat resistant, it wouldn't burn so a lot of things that he does, and he does a lot of things on the research side, and a lot of people that he talks to, I talk to various golf professionals and maybe some CEOs you know; he talks to scientists (laughter) so we're on completely different levels.
Speaker 1: And what's your brother's name again in case I get to talk to him one day?
Speaker 2: His name is Larry.
Speaker 1: Larry, okay, Larry Powell.
Story_ID: 382676
Speaker 1: This is a picture with actually several, three young golfers, junior golfers and [Robert] "Bingo" Smith, who played for the Cleveland Cavaliers, and it was a junior tournament that was held here [Clearview Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio] and he was here to greet the kids and so was I.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was about, that was in the 19--probably late 1980s.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I see.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I know when this was.  Okay, this was in 1964 because this was my high school [Central Catholic High School, Canton, Ohio] graduation picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let's see, this was in about 1980 and this was, actually I designed golf clothes for a major fashion house in London [England] and so these were--this was one of my line of clothes.
Speaker 2: And do you know what that publication was?
Speaker 1: Actually that was a--that was one of the--.
Speaker 2: That was just a card.
Speaker 1: That was a card out of the, it was called McCarthy's Sports [ph.] and that was one of the pictures in the catalogue.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is, this was a picture of--it was at a tournament that I won in Michigan in, I wanna say Saginaw, Michigan--Flint, Michigan.  This was in Flint, Michigan and the tournament I used to play in and that young lady was like the top female golfer up there, and so they always, every time I went up there they really sort of, it was a big competitive thing between the two of us, and that was when I was, must have been seventeen, about sixteen or seventeen years old then.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this picture was taken in 1971, I believe it was, and it was shortly after I returned back from Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This photo was taken in Greece.  It's interesting because the [2004 Summer] Olympics are going to be in [Athens] Greece this year, but this was taken in Greece.  I'd played in a golf tournament over there with actually with some of the British pros, and I was the only female I think in the tournament and I nearly beat all the male pros, I finished second and I lost the tournament on the last hole.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this was taken in England, and it was just a photo taken in England in the early, probably about 1979 or 1980, yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you design that outfit?
Speaker 1: No, but what I did is I designed, I had that outfit and the company liked that and so I designed an outfit similar to that, and actually I might have one somewhere of one that I did and it's in color, it had a blue top and white pants because what I did was--I was going through that box where I think I got one out because what I did, I added pants, long pants to that so that you could wear it sort of like as a tunic top or shorts.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this was taken some time in the '70s [1970s] in England and it was a golf clinic.  It was one of the--just one of my typical golf clinics that I did around the country.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, this picture was taken in Vietnam during our trip to Vietnam during the, it was a State--USO [United Service Organizations] State Department [U.S. Department of State] tour and the young lady standing beside me is Mary Lou Daniel Crocker, who was a colleague of mine on the tour.  We actually, there were three of us that went to Vietnam, the gentlemen on the far side, the older gentlemen who was a one-arm trick shot artist, Jimmy Nichols was his name.  He has since passed away, and then Mary Lou and myself, and Mary Lou and I played junior golf against each other also.
Speaker 2: This is, I don't know, it's a picture, actually I was on the tour then, and it was taken down by the eleventh green on the golf course here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Photo when I--actually this is the youngest photograph that I found, and this is when I was about three years old.  It's not the youngest I have 'cause I see one when I was six months old, but this is when I was about three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this photo was taken I think when I was six years old and so just in school, and this is a photo in, let me see--it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay this photo was taken in Zimbabwe and that was a clinic that I was doing for some youth at the time.
Speaker 2: Of--these two ladies were a couple of ladies that helped to put on a golf clinic that I conducted out in Riverside, California back in the, would have been back in the '80s [1980s] or back in the '70s [1970s] actually, late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And this is a group of youngsters that was--did a golf clinic in England.
Speaker 2: Now this is one of my favorite ladies that I met in Zambia, and this is the lady that I had spoken of that when I had my first all ladies golf team at President Kenneth Kaunda's golf tournament in Zambia.  This was the lady that ran up and grabbed me and hugged me and said that she had to thank me for allowing her to meet her president and to play golf with her president, but this is one of the years that I had worked with a group of ladies and this was one of them.
Speaker 1: So I'm glad you don't ask me any names.  This was our American ambassador in Swaziland and I think every one of our ambassadors that I met in Africa played golf, and so this was at the golf club in Swaziland and we had played a round of golf there.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in Zimbabwe and this is just during a golf clinic exhibition.
Speaker 1: And the gentlemen I'm standing next to is the president, at that time was the president of Zambia, President Kenneth Kaunda and this was at State House Golf Course in Lusaka [Zambia].
Story_ID: 382677
Speaker 1: I had just arrived at the golf course to do a clinic, and this is in Kenya and this particular golf course was a course that the village people here had an awful lot of pride in.  This is the first golf course that they were able to play, the Kenyan--the indigenous people of Kenya were able to play and what it was, it was just like, almost like a little park area and what they did was just an open land and they cut around some circles to make greens, and then they dug a little hole for a cup and they put a stick in it and that was their golf course, but that was the only place that they could play and they had such great pride and it was a village where there were--I went to this village and there were only a couple of people in the entire village that actually spoke English cause they only spoke their native language, but they did not think that I would ever go there because they thought that, they just did not think that it was a place that I would go that I would just want to go to all the other courses, but I went to their golf course and I guess it was probably my favorite golf course in Kenya and the gentlemen that's standing there has actually been here to our course and his first trip to the United States he came here, and there's quite a bit of history behind, is it okay for me to say all this?
Speaker 2: Sure can.
Speaker 1: Quite a bit of history behind his family because his brother was a Mau Mau, a freedom fighter, and during their independence, and this brother was killed very violently and they made a--killed him and made an example of him actually, and it ended up that the old government had to pay their family a very large sum of money and actually they have like--he's like, Kariuki, Lawrence [Nginyo] Kariuki, he's a big businessman there and also the best golfer in the entire Kenya and started the professional, another second professional golf association [sic. Ndumberi Golf Club] in [Kiambu] Kenya because he couldn't join the white association, so he started a second association and of, he has something like there's a thousand acres of tea plantation and he has some coffee plantations but I got to know him when I first went to Kenya.
Speaker 2: It's--that can be exclusive you know, "whites only" golf clubs in Africa (laughter), it's just mindboggling.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's because they went over there and just sort of took the land (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's pretty much what happened here right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is at--this is in Kenya, I mean in Zambia and this was another clinic, and actually all of these people are people from different areas of--with--their spouses are probably different ambassadors and what not, but they're from different countries of the world.  Did you hear a lady?
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture when I was twelve years old and actually what I have on is red, yes, my favorite color.  I have red shorts on; I have a red and white shirt even though you can't see it in color and my shoes are red and white.
Speaker 2: And I was fourteen then and this was on the ninth--it used to--it was the ninth green, it's now the eleventh green here at Clearview [Golf Club, East Canton, Ohio], and I was just practicing putting and having some photos taken that were--
Speaker 1: Is that okay or do you want me to open it?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of our family when actually when right after we had received the family--National Golf Foundation [Jack Nicklaus] Family of the Year Award.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you turn it the right way for a moment to see if we can get close enough to read the caption of the picture?  Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture was actually taken in Las Vegas [Nevada] with Joe [Williams], and Joe has been here.  Joe came here to play in my [William Powell] Celebrity [Golf] Tournament which we have every year, and this year we are celebrating our twentieth anniversary of our celebrity tournament, but I used to play golf with him when I would go to Las Vegas cause he lived out there, and this was actually during one of our LPGA Tour [Ladies Professional Golf Association] events and he played in the pro-am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of President Kenneth Kaunda we are walking down one of the fairways at State House [Lusaka, Zambia] in Zambia and along with the governor of the Bank of Zambia and the lady who was the lady captain of the Zimbabwean ladies golf union.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or the Zambian, Zambian ladies golf union.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of, I was--I had been presented this cup which was by the--for being named the LPGA--receiving the LPGA Budget Service Award for outstanding contribution to junior golf and the gentlemen was from Budget Car Company and they present this award every year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of myself and my dad [William Powell] when--actually taken out in California, [Omni] La Costa [Resort and Spa, Carlsbad, California] during the PGA Tour Awards [Professional Golfers' Association], when I received the PGA Tour Card Walker Award for outstanding contributions to junior golf.
Speaker 2: That's it.  That's the last one.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that Bing Crosby had sent me and it was taken actually in England about I think a year before he died.
Speaker 2: Charlie Sifford with the hat on?
Speaker 1: Okay, Charlie Sifford has the hat on, and Pete Brown is the other gentlemen, and actually Pete Brown is golf professional now.  They both--all three of us had played the tour, but Charlie was the first African American to play on the PGA Tour after they dropped the Caucasian only clause in the PGA, and Pete was the second African American on the PGA Tour, and he is now a golf pro down in Dayton, Ohio, and ironically all three of us were golf pros in the State of Ohio at one time.  And at that time there were only about, how many; probably about twenty African American golf pros in the whole county at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's in 2003, I was inducted into the Northern Ohio Section of the PGA Hall of Fame and they did that just before I actually was--received the First Lady of Golf award from the national, PGA of America, so I'm the only female inducted into the Northern Ohio PGA Hall of Fame and generally it's after you've been a member for twenty-five years and the PGA, I assumed that they took my classification, my LPGA membership into account also though, since I just became a member of the PGA in 1996.
