Story_ID: 76728
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interview today for The HistoryMakers.  Our Videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name for us and spell it please?
Speaker 2: Porter G. Peeples, Senior.  Porter, P-O-R-T-E-R, Peeples, P-E-E-P-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: And what does the P stand for, the middle?
Speaker 2: G.
Speaker 1: G, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Geneall, G-E-N-E-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, it's 10/29/1945, born in Lynch, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: All right, Harlan--
Speaker 2: Harlan County, southeast, mountains of eastern Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm President, CEO [Chief Executive Officer] Urban League, Lexington, here.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think today is the 9th of December, '02 [2002].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're, we're in the office, it's a conference room in the Urban League office, 148 Due East Street.
Story_ID: 76729
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish kind of questions that I am compelled to ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, country boy, I like pork chop.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, anywhere where I can go where I can fish.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Sort of.  I think one of them that I've catch myself saying like, you know, "do the right thing for the right reason and right will prevail".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 76730
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you some questions about your, your family origin.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Do you know very much--and how far can you go back with your family?  How far back can you trace them and, and to what region of the country or--
Speaker 2: Probably, let's see back one generation to grand, grandparents on my, both my mother [Carrie Lou Conenr] and my father's side.  My father [Roy O'Neil Peeples] migrated Harlan County to Lynch from Brighton, Bessemer,  Birmingham [Alabama]area as did many African Americans looking for, looking for work.  Brothers [Unclear] came to eastern to Kentucky to work in the coal mines.  His father I think was a coal miner and a farmer and in Brighton, Bessemer, Alabama.  My mother's family--I think her family mi--migrate--my mother was born in eastern Kentucky, but they migrated--I believe migrated from Alabama also.
Story_ID: 76731
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there are any stories that they pass down from, from the 19th century from Reconstruction or slavery days that you, that you have in your family?
Speaker 2: Wow.  Stories from slavery.
Speaker 1: Stories, situations or you know, if you [unclear] what, what plantation or what, what [unclear] home or if they were free.
Speaker 2: No, no I, I've never heard anything.  And I, I probably, you know inasmuch as I only knew both, both of my grandparents died when I was very young.  So I really didn't know them that well.  So not knowing them, I didn't know their--I didn't have much there.  My--I think I was in the third grade.  I remember I was going to the third grade when my grandfather died on my mother's side and not much older than that, or younger than that even when my father's father died.  And they--and, and grandmothers; I never knew my father's mother.  So--and my mother's mother, I was--she, she passed before I was four or five years old, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 76732
Speaker 1: Well can you tell us something about your father then?  Can you give us his, his name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My father was, was Roy O'Neil Peeples, Senior.  As I said a coal miner.  But there were--just want to say there were nine kids in my family.  My father worked in the coal mines of eastern Kentucky.  My father was my best buddy.  We, we fished and hunted together.  I started going fishing with Daddy before I, before I start--went to the first grade.  And we, we did that all our lives.  And one of my most pleasurable experiences is that I was you know, I remember going fishing with him during the years and we used to have to rent boats and I'd see other people, particular other white people have very nice boats and all that.  And I just wondered why we couldn't, or why we didn't.  But I still appreciated what we did have.  But one of the things that I was able to do at the year that my father died in '68 [1968], I was able to--no. The year that my father died, I was able to buy him a boat.  Bought him a boat on March 8th and he died September 8th that same year, but we had a great time that summer in that boat.
Speaker 1: What, what year was that?
Speaker 2: I miss dates, I said '68 [1968] is his--72 I think, about 72.  Some of, some of those kind of dates you kind of don't, you don't lock in on.
Speaker 1: You and your father was very close.
Speaker 2: Extraordinarily close.  He was--he--we just, we just liked, liked doing those kind of, those kind of things together.  And, and he died what I know now is a young age, you know when he died and I was like about twenty, twenty-three or twenty-four.  And he was sixty-one.  Seemed like he was old, but now that I'm fifty-seven, it doesn't, it's all relative.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, so what year was he born and what, what's his birthday?
Speaker 2: My father, my father--I know it was June of 1914 I think, and my mother I think was born in June of 1913.
Story_ID: 76733
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your mother's name and how, how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Mother's name is Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, L-O-U.  Her maiden Conner, C-O-N-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us about her.  What kind of person was she and what did she do?
Speaker 2: As, as, as all mothers were in my hometown, they were stay-at-home moms.  Raise, raise, raising their children.  They were the disciplinarians.  They--she was--my, my, my mother had a notorious left hand that, that, that, that dispensed the punishment.  She could, she could, she could hook you with it, she could, she could take a strap and reach out and get you with it, she was a--if, if it, if it meant taking care of some, some difference and some discipline immediately, it was like whatever was, whatever she could get her hands on.  So we, we, we had a, we had a lot of--we used to always laugh around our house.  We had a, a water dipper that kind of hung up above the sink.  And the dipper was always--it was always crumpled and bent at the bottom.  And that was a number of whacks across the head.  In the kitchen you mess up, that's usually what she reach for, she can grab that and pluck you across the head with it and--but as my sisters and brothers and all us get together now, those are some of our, our, our most fun times now to just laugh and talk about.
Story_ID: 76734
Speaker 1: Those times when diff--when we got--we were disciplined and, and got the whoopings and we, we, we laugh at one another how, you know, how each one of us would act when we--but a lot of that went on in my house.  There was a lot of it that went on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We lived in a three story house.  You know and the, the boys lived up on the third floor, the girls had a room on the second floor and my parents had a room on the second floor and then we had a living room, kitchen.  Went--we were--I guess we were--let's see how old was we?  Probably in high school before we got the indoor plumbing. But, but life was, you know--we lived in a coal--in a, in a coal mining town that was owned by United States Steel.  And you had, had some things that other people probably would have considered amenities.  Cause see United States Steel built the town, built the houses and you know the coal miners would rent them as opposed to probably some of the non-union towns where you just didn't have the nice houses like that.  You'd have the company store that [unclear] provisions.  And this United States Steel Company supplemented the, the budget for the, for the school.  So we, we had an independent school district that, that was, that was pretty well taken care of.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So no public money (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well there was--but with the supplement.  That, that, that put it a little bit above the county schools.  And be, before
Speaker 2: What's the name of the school?
Speaker 1: Well for eleven years I went to what was called West Main, and then other, the, the white school was East Main.  And we integrated my senior year.
Story_ID: 76735
Speaker 1: Now let me backtrack a little bit.  Did, did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Not, not that registers right off.  No. I know that my mother [Carrie Lou Connor]--they both had been married previously.  My mother's first husband was killed in the coal mines.  And my father [Roy O'Neil Peeples], you know divorced his first wife in Alabama and then came there.  And they both--each of them had a, had a daughter.  But I don't--I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well how, how many of you were there--having children?
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: Nine.
Speaker 2: Five boys, four girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you're number?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Number five, okay, right in the middle.
Speaker 2: Right in the middle, right in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 76736
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, can you reflect back and tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, you know, in, in the country there, Harlan County [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Well you know sights, you know we, we, we--our little community was right at the base of the--of what's called the Big Black Mountains, which was the highest peak in eastern Kentucky.  So, so you, you, when you look right out the door, you saw mountains on four sides.  And those mountains I guess they would be intimidating to other people, we played up and down those mountains growing up.  I guess I was an adult before I started to have a real appreciation of the splendor and the beauty of the mountains.  In fact I know I was before, before I really, you know--as an adult I found out the people would travel for miles to come to see, you know, Fall foliage and, and, hey, it was just a bunch of leaves fell off the trees, that's all.  But I didn't pay much attention to that.  We, we played in the creeks and learned to swim in the creeks.  They ran, they ran through the valley.  We learned to hunt with our fathers up and down those hillsides.  Narrow streets that, that meandered through the, through the, the town that sat down in the valley.  But still pretty--everything, everything was modern.  My dad [Roy O'Neil Peeples] always had a car.  My uncle, you know everybody you knew always had nice vehicles.  Life was--we were poor, but, but happy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Parents, parents [unclear] took good care of us.  Like a lot of parents they, they put a lot of value on education.  My brothers and sisters--we were still talking about the, the--the smells and the looks of the mountains.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: Could you smell the mines at all? Did they give off any kind of smell?
Speaker 2: Sometimes you could smell the sulfur water that ran out of them, but no, no the mines themselves didn't--some of the sounds growing up.  You would, you know where the mines would go back in and they would come out on the tracks.  You, you--in our town was the largest tipple in the U.S. [United States].  A tipple is where they--I may need to describe that.  Is when they bring the trains in under, and the coal is off-loaded into the big trains that haul the coal out of the mountains.  Now that was a noise.  We--you heard--we, you, you would hear that.  Or you'd hear the trains coming and going, bringing and taking the coal, coal out of the mountains.  But other than that, there were--the sounds, just pretty, pretty, pretty typical.
Story_ID: 76737
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well a lot of people haven't been raised in a, you know in the city, so things that you might take for granted--[unclear] folks that listen to this might want to hear it.
Speaker 2: Well you know and that was one of the things that was a blessing that I had growing up, that my parents provided for me and the rest of my brothers and sisters.  There was a tradition in my hometown that whenever you're of age to--fifteen, old enough to work, you would go--your parents would send you north for the summer and you'd live with a relative and you would work, make money, buy your school clothes and then come back home.  From the time I was fifteen until I graduated from college, I spent every summer with the exception of one summer, I spent every one of them in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] living with my older brother and, and then working at different jobs.  And that was quite an experience when you leave a, a town--Lynch, Kentucky.  Lynch, Kentucky popular on a, on a Saturday you catch the plane--a train and you go to New York.  You off-load at Penn Station in New York City.  And on Tuesday morning I'm working as a messenger boy mid-town, mid-town Manhattan [New York City, New York].  I, I had quite--I had some fantastic experiences. I worked--had been working as a messenger boy.  And basically what they would do is I worked for a printing company.  And my job was to carry the, the samples and the, the models from the, from the company--from, from where we printed them up to the--the company for approval.  And one of our larger accounts was like at Avon that was in, that was in Rockefeller Center.  So I--my area was 19th Street Park Avenue South up to Rockefeller Center area.  That was, that was, that was--people came from all over the world to see things that I saw just every day, 15 years of age, fantastic.  And I was young enough to not know that I was supposed to been intimidated by that, which was, which was good.  I worked--one summer I worked when Mayor [John] Lindsay was in, I worked at City Hall, I had a job at City Hall.  So I got a chance to see a lot of interesting things.  When I was in college, I worked with a special program that was designed for, for minority college students.  We worked as electrician's helper.  And what they'd do, they would pay us [unclear] journeyman's wages to assist us when we go back to school.  And then when you'd go back to school, I mean every day you worked they'd set aside some money for you.  When you go back to school, they would send you a check every month and that would go almost till about January or February.  That's good money coming, sixty dollar check coming when you're back in college.  But I got a chance working in, in New York [City, New York].  I was working at St. Luke's Hospital, and I actually got a chance to see the students when they took over the President's house at, at the college there.
Speaker 1: Now when, when was this, when you were [unclear]--
Speaker 2: It must have been at Columbia University [New York City, New York].  It must have been--I must have been about my junior year in college, so I must have been about '67 [1967].  I actually saw--I was there when, when they had the riots.  I saw some of Harlem [New York City, New York] when it burned, Newark [New Jersey].  I was there, I got a chance to see the New York World's Fair.  Just, just quite a few experiences I, I had that never would have had if our parents hadn't had that--they just did that for us to give us an outside exposure to the world.  So all of the black kids would leave, we would like come--the day school's was out, we'd look like Freedom Riders getting on the bus and going north to stay with relatives, but it was good growing up experience.  What that did for me when I came to UK [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] after being in the New York melting pot, coming to UK as a student when there was only about fifty blacks on campus, UK was a piece of cake to me.  You know I was not intimidated at all by that campus.
Story_ID: 76738
Speaker 1: Now let me backtrack a little bit, take you back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We, we, we got on the fast track going north, and having internships to the summer--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, sure.
Speaker 1: But what was the name of the grade school you attended?  I think you gave it before.
Speaker 2: Okay, it was called West Main School.  West Main, or--and it first was just called Lynch High, Lynch, Lynch, Lynch Independent School, Lynch School, Lynch East, then they changed it to West Main.  First grade I remember vividly Ms. Sweat, my first grade teacher.  Ms. Sweat was tough.  She was a sergeant, you talkin' 'bout disciplinarian, man.  In fact all of--I mean those, those teachers, those black teachers in those elementary schools were really, really regimented.  And they--
Speaker 1: This was all black school?
Speaker 2: I, I integrated my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah, one through eleven I had all black teachers.  Played sports at the black school and then integrated and participated in integrated sports my senior year.
Story_ID: 76739
Speaker 1: Now what were you interested in in school, in grade school especially right now (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I remember, I remember growing up I used to talk about want to be a policeman.  I don't know.  I don't know why.  Maybe it was the uniform (unclear).  But I, I guess when I really start thinking about a career, and I'm not so sure if I was, I was that clear on what the career was gonna be, but the need for a career or a vocation was, was going to New York [City, New York] in the summer and doing what I did and having a chance to see what options you have if you prepare yourself.  And that's what New York did for me.
Speaker 1: Six million people in Brooklyn [New York City, New York] as opposed to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Probably in Lynch [Kentucky] 'bout 1,200.  And see the other thing is every summer when I would go back to school, you know I would come back the next Spring and some of my friends and some or the some of the other kids I knew from the block had gotten--gone the way of drugs or other kinds of things and you know that helped, that helped me a lot with my focus about what I wanted to do with myself.
Story_ID: 76740
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the teachers that, that helped you, tried to mentor you?  Can, can you name some, some of them.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  I mean I, I can pro--I can tell you my, my teachers from one through 12.  I can give you every one of they names.
Speaker 1: Start with the first grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Sweat.
Speaker 1: This was special ones and then kind of, you know (unclear) made a big--
Speaker 2: Well I actually, actually the, the teacher that made the greatest impression on me was my sixth grade teacher, Ms. Jones.  And actually Ms. Jones was the first teacher that I had who, who challenged but didn't intimidate, didn't just scare the bejeebers out of you.  The other teachers, I mean man they was--well Ms. Dallas in the fourth grade probably wasn't as tough, but those others, man they were--but Ms. Jones, I, I really--I always had kind of a gift for, for, for making good grades.  In fact I made good grades until I got into junior high school and then I, then I wanted to be like the guys.  And I kind of, I kind of let it slip.  And then did just enough to get by.  But, but Ms. Jones was the teacher who, who, who I remember the most.
Story_ID: 76741
Speaker 1: I did mention that I let it slip in high school [West Main High School, Lynch, Kentucky], you know to be one of the guys.  But my light came on and I was really challenged, personally challenged when we integrated.  They had some little thing--I guess it was a custom that they did at the white school, a customary kind of thing where they at the beginning of the year they would do--and I guess it was supposed to be funny, it wasn't funny to me.  Where they would say like some--a teacher or someone would say okay, you're gonna be this and you, you know, tell you what your career is gonna be.  And I can remember them telling me that I was gone be a shoe salesman.  Not that that's not an honorable job.  But I took that personally because my thing was you don't know me well enough.  I just walked in this building.  You don't know me well enough to tell me what I'm gonna be.  So I just took offense at it.  And, and then I heard some of the things that they told some of the other kids they're gonna be.  And, and then I saw you were giving the white kids, you know, jobs that seemed to be more prestigious, and that bothered me.  And so I was challenged to, to really get my academic house back in order.  And, and I did my best work year in my senior year that I slacked off my, you know where I had slacked off ninth, ninth and tenth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 76742
Speaker 1: So did you have an idea of what you wanted to be in high school [West Main High School, Lynch, Kentucky]? Or in the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: At that time, no I didn't.  No I didn't.  By, by my senior year I know I wanted to go to college.  As I said, just by being in New York and some of the--I needed to go to college.  I wanted to go to college.  Even when I went to college, I wasn't exactly--I wasn't really sure, sure.  But I just knew that I, I'd heard people say whether you know what you gonna do or not, go ahead and get, get, get the, get the license, you know just get the license, get the union card.  And, and then, then if you don't know before you graduate, you, you'll come.  So that's kind of--and I was--there was also a blessing in that when I was in the ninth grade and the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] was going through the process of setting up these community colleges around the state.  And they opened a community college right in my hometown [Lynch, Kentucky], which made college very affordable, you know.  Family of nine, I'm not so sure that my mother [Carrie Lou Conner] and father [Roy O'Neil Peeples] could have sent me away to--but, but I could raise, I could save that kind of money in the summer easily.  I think tuition back then was like 120 dollars a semester.  That was, that was a piece of cake; I could do that.  I did, I did that my first month in, in New York, and put that in the bank.  Then when I came back to school, I was, I was fine. And plus I was staying home.
Story_ID: 76743
Speaker 1: Tell me so you went to the community college for--?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.
Speaker 2: Got a Associate Degree in the community college [Hazard Community College, Hazard, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: And are--what was your field of study?
Speaker 2: Elementary, by, by, by the time I was a ju--a sophomore, I decided I was gonna teach.  And I, I was--so I was gonna get my Associate Degree in ele--in elementary ed.  Came on to UK [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] and got a, got a BA [Bachelor's of Arts] and dually certified to teach.  I, I developed a relationship with a professor at UK called, named Dr. Levy.  And working with him, I, I decided to get a second certificate at special education, working with the slow learners.  He got me into that from when I did, you know, kind of an internship at one of the schools here.  I, I never--and after graduation I only taught you know, on a job I only taught for one semester.  But what special education does for you is it, it teaches you patience because you gone be working with kids who learn very slow.  And you also learn to appreciate the small gains that they make.  And it's almost, it was almost prophetic that that in my life now, that's what I do.  You know when you, when you in this Civil Rights work, change comes slow.  And you learn how to deal with that.  Learn how to not get frustrated when things don't go, don't, don't go.  So it was--while I never really used that degree in a classroom, I've used it every day in my life.
Story_ID: 76152
Speaker 1: I just wanted--before we leave your youth you know, I wanted to ask you about the significance of Harlan County [Kentucky] and the coal mines down in, you know the miner strikes and--and what, what I guess value it had for you coming up as a kid (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  You know most of us hear a lot of the, the, you know the stories of the real notorious days of the, of what, of what's called bloody Harlan County.  That was when they were really working to bring the unions and that preceded my lifetime, that's been '30's [1930's] or '40's [1940's].  But all during my, my time growing up, I, I can still remember my father [Roy O'Neil Peeples] and them having, having strikes.  But those strikes were usually around union contracts and those kind.  So they would, they would go out on strikes for, for periods of time.  But they, there were, it was without, it was without the violence.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your father ever talk about those days when they [unclear]?
Speaker 2: He, he wasn't there.
Speaker 1: He wasn't there? He was still in Alabama?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, he was still in Alabama.  So he wouldn't of--you just hear, hear the stories.  You hear the stories about bloody Harlan County just like you hear some of the stories about the old Hatfield, McCoys and--but I, I never knew anybody who was, who was really, really part of that.  Probably just read about some of it.  I didn't, I didn't know anything about that.  Do know that you know my father--he can remember--you know those were, those were tough days on the family economically when, when you would go out on strikes you know because that meant no income.  And then there were--there were no, no other options.  And, and, and there were--and as I recall, they probably didn't have any strike fund as I recall.  And so you, you, struggled.  So you--it took guts for those guys to walk out to get certain things in their union contracts, union contracts to, to do that.  Some other tough times I recall is that there were times when there would be layoffs in the minds because of, you know, steel mills weren't buying as much coal and there would be layoffs.  And I do remember my father [Roy O'Neil Peeples] being laid off from United States Steel for a couple of years one time.  And but he went to work in another--these non-union mines.  And they didn't--they probably made half the money.  Probably worked twice as hard and, and worked in conditions--I mean mining was very hazardous anyway.  And but United States Steel mines were highly mechanized and safer.  But then when you had to go work in these other mines, they were just--Dad didn't really earn the monies during, during, during those times.  I can remember what they call the one time and I--as I was old enough to realize what it meant for him to be out of work and us to be wanting for certain things was--that you, you would have to go and get what they called commodity foods.  Where, where they even gave you the cheese and the butter, welfare food.  And you know, you know I was, I was old enough to realize when I, when I went with my father where he had to stand in line and wait for that food that, that you know here's a man who has worked all his life and would be working today, would have been working, right.  And I just knew that, that bothered him to have to stand in line and get those handouts.  And you know human nature being as it is, some of those folks who were distributing, they--well you know some of them were, were not as friendly as they probably could have been, or they, they would kind of make you feel--I mean it was handing--kind of a demeaning fashion.  And that bothered me as young as I was to see my father have to go through in, in line and doing that, knowing that my father you know, was, was a hard working guy who, who would have been working [unclear].  It's one of those memories, one of those memories I have that--and I guess probably being that  probab, you know--my work ethic-I think all of my sisters and brothers, we, we took that work ethic from him.
Story_ID: 76153
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's get back to college now.  You're--when you finished your two years, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I transferred to the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  And you know, lived on campus, which was a totally new experience.  [unclear] during, during that time, sixty, '65 [1965], I mean no, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  Very few African Americans lived on campus.  It was during the era when University of Kentucky was, was pretty widely known for, for its segregated basketball teams under Adolph Rupp.
Speaker 1: It's funny how that worked worked as the--at one time all the basketball teams were white.  They slowly became blacker and blacker, and only all white one left pretty much was Kentucky, and they were a prominent team in the top twenty every year.  Always--usually in the top ten or, or if not the top ten.
Speaker 2: Which is why those of us who were African Americans living in the state of Kentucky were, were very, very proud and happy when, and I can't remember the year.  I, I hadn't been out of college--well no. When Texas Western [College, El Paso, Texas] with the all black team beat Kentucky.
Speaker 1: In that famous--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The famous--
Speaker 2: Yeah all of us rooted for Texas Western.  I also remember some years later when Western Kentucky University [Bowling Green, Kentucky] integrated and they had five African Americans from the state of Kentucky--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: and they beat--
Speaker 1: Clem Haskins.
Speaker 2: No, it was after Clem.
Speaker 1: It was after Clem?
Speaker 2: Clem was, Clem was one of the first to go to Western.  But this was Jim McDaniels--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Jim Rose, Clarence Glover--
Speaker 1: Glover, right.
Speaker 2: --and that group.
Speaker 1: Glover (unclear).
Speaker 2: Clem Haskins went to Western earlier.  But see it's guys like, it's guys like Clem, Clem--
Speaker 1: The Smith brothers (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --the Smith brothers and some of the guys from Dunbar here that Mr. Roach will probably talk to you, but from Dunbar, who were there for the pickings if, if UK [University of Kentucky] had wanted to integrate.
Speaker 1: That's true.  I remember that time.  Jim McDaniels was about seven feet tall and took the ball from the courner.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember they brought Jim McDaniels up for a visit. I was there when they brought him up for a visit.  I remember meeting him, but I'm not so sure if they were serious about recruiting him.  They finally recruited a guy named Tom Payne who was about seven feet tall.  And Tom came in with--on probation, with some issues and so forth.  And that ended up being a whole 'nother story.  I, I still say that if they, if they were serious, if they were serious about recruiting an African American as they were about recruiting the white kids, there would have been a lot of other kids out there who they could have gotten without the, without the baggage.
Speaker 1: Now wasn't Jack Gibbons, I mean, one of the first--
Speaker 2: Jack--what, the, the player here at UK.?  Yeah, yeah Jack and James Lee, they were on the nat--'78 [1978] national championship team, and they were from right here in town.  But the--Rupp then Joe Hall was coaching.
Speaker 1: Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: And [unclear] where Rick Pitino was here and Rick, Rick really did a lot in terms of playing the black players here.
Story_ID: 76154
Speaker 1: Now [unclear].  There's a story about I wanna get to when you get to the Urban League, so we wanna--let's backtrack, let's go back to University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky] as a student.  Now you started here in 1960--
Speaker 2: Right out of college, '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty nine, [1969], okay.  And, yeah how many black students were on campus?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I'm saying probably less than 100, probably about fifty or to 100 of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how were you treated?  I mean how, how did the students feel?
Speaker 2: And, and I'm not so sure if I, if, if I'm typical of how maybe some of the other kids felt.  See, there were three of us who came from eastern Kentucky here together at the same time.  Bill Turner, who's now, who just last week was named the interim President of Kentucky State University [Frankfort, Kentucky], Art Garner and myself.  And Bill had spent his summers in, in Newton, New Jersey with his relatives.  Art had spent his summers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I spent mine in Brooklyn [New York City, New York].  So I think the three of us coming to UK, it was no big deal because of those other experiences.  I think probably kids who probably came from smaller towns and getting here saw this as a big town, it, it probably was intimidating.  We came here as juniors also, which meant that we were a little older, a little bit more mature.  Yeah, you were going to classes and, you know you would sit down and people would move away from you, you had those kind of experiences.  You had the experiences where you would be walking the streets and yeah I used to say you'd be--you would wonder whether cars could talk because there was a lot of the N word that came out when cars would go past you.  And the dorms.  Sometimes you would have roommates who--it was no big deal.  But there--we also had times when they would move out soon as they move in.  I remember the, the fun thing I did one time.  I, I was a senior at this time so it was just--I just wanted to have a little fun.  But I came in that Saturday and I put my clothes in the room, and then I went out for the evening.  So when my white roommate came in, he was trying to draw some impressions from me by looking at, looking at my clothes.  And I guess he surmised it must have been a, a northern white boy when he saw those clothes.  So he--when I came in that night, he was in the bed.  So I got in bed.  So when I heard him getting up the next morning, I covered my head intentionally.  You can imagine what, what it was like for him that next--when he came out of the shower and realized he had slept in that room with me.  But then his first reaction was to call his parents, his parents were pretty prominent people in Louisville and talk about moving out and--but he didn't.  And he and I became, became pretty good friends.  But you, you had that, you had that kind of, had that kind of fun.  And then being in elementary education, I had a lot of classes with white females.  And I knew what I was there for; I was there to get an education.  So I, I just said my rule that I had, well I'm just gonna, I'm just gonna make my presence known.  Whenever I went into a class the first day, I didn't find a back row seat.  I made--found myself a prominent seat.  And the message was I'm here, teach me, I'm not going away.  That's just kind of the way I, the way I handled it.  And as a senior I was elected to a leadership role.  I was elected as President of the Student Council for Exceptional Children, which was pretty significant; certainly back, back, back during those days.  But I guess some of the--it, it was almost like there was a divine intervention in terms of some of the things I did then and, and how those kind of things just have kind of played out in the life I have to live now as Urban League CEO [Chief Executive Officer] 'cause we're, we are bridge builders.  We have to be mediators.  We have to be, you know diplomatic, but, but you know I, I know how to fight when I have to.  But you know I mean you don't, you don't fight every fight with an elephant gun when you--if it's a fly, you do--you use a fly swatter.  But UK [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] during that time we would go to basketball games, football games.  One thing we did a lot though, was we, we socialized with our friends over at Kentucky State [University, Frankfort, Kentucky], which was only twenty miles away.  That was, that was a way to get away.  Or you go over to Eastern [Kentucky State University, Richmond, Kentucky] where there were more African American kids.
Story_ID: 76155
Speaker 1: That's good.  Well, well what, what kind of a--what was the academic life like, you know, before you--and you were pursuing your, yeah pursuing a degree in education.  Did, did, did you find it easy work or was it--
Speaker 2: Well I, I don't know if I ever felt in, like any teachers made any difference in me and other students.  I, I just, I just felt like I had to apply myself.  I felt like I was on a mission; I represented my family.  I felt like I represented all of those African American teachers who had, who had taught me growing up.  I did not want to go back to Lynch [Kentucky] as a failure.  I did not want to have to face those people.  You know I was driven to, to succeed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In addition to my personal motivations that I'd learned just by being in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I wasn't asking anybody to give me anything.
Speaker 1: Well they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know just, just get out, don't, just don't get in my way.
Story_ID: 76156
Speaker 1: Well were there any particular professors that--or administrators here that took an interest in--
Speaker 2: Well you remember I mentioned Dr. Levy in special ed.  He would, he was, he was that one professor who, who I had a special relationship with.  I still see him now when I go to UK [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] for ballgames and Dr.--but Dr. Levy was like that to everybody.  He was, he was a, he was a, he was from, from Massachusetts and just a little different, cut from a little different bolt of cloth than a lot of the other professors on campus.  But also remember now as a junior when I came here, by that time you, you're more like--more or less specializing.  And you're only--you're spending your time with a select group of professors.  I, I don't, I can't speak to what it was like as a freshman and a sophomore when you're doing all your arts and science courses in those huge classes and all, so that--it may have been a diff--might have a been a whole totally world, different world.  I didn't know, I didn't know about that.  Going to community college I was still in a small setting.
Story_ID: 76157
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so when, when you graduated, did you know what you were gonna do career-wise, or did you have offers or no?
Speaker 2: I, I, I graduated in, like mid-year, December.  And I took a job teaching here at Douglas Elementary.  I taught the prim--inter--intermediate special education class from, from that spring semester, January to May.  And then that summer I, I worked for the Community Action Agency.  Now what had happened was the year before I was living--my last semester in college I lived at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] here in town.  And the Urban League opened here that summer.  And the guy who opened the office, opened it in the YMCA so he and I became friends.  He was from New Jersey.  So we just kind of, kind of hit it off and became friends.  So over that year we stayed in touch and after I finished that summer of working for Community Action, he asked me if I'd be interested in coming to work for the Urban League.  So I'd only taught school for one semester.  So I come to work with the Urban League, helping him set up some education programs--sure.
Story_ID: 76158
Speaker 1: I came to, came to work for the Urban League that September, and the rest is history.
Speaker 2: The rest of the story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It just--I was in the right place.  Met him, met him at the Y [YMCA].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what is his name again?
Speaker 1: Walter Brown.  He was my--he was the President--he opened this Urban League.  He was the President, CEO [chief executive officer] for year, and then he left.  And I was thrust into a, an acting president, active executive role, a CEO role for about a year and a half.  And you know at that age, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, I'm, I'm thinking I'm, I'm ready, you know.  They all--why--what they waiting for?  Why don't they go ahead and name me CEO?  But now that I look back on it, they did the right thing.  So I had to--but what I had to go through was some very, some humbling experiences that were good for me in that I'm here as the interim.  But I still had to be here when they brought in all these other people and interviewed them.  And I had to entertain them and I had to be--but that helped me, helped me grow up.  And I also think that probably, nobody ever told me, but I think the way I conducted myself during that, probably some of the guys who came in to interview who may have been of more--who were more seasoned and older, may have considered taking the job.  But I think, I think some of the guys probably didn't out of the relationship that we developed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So then after, after a year and a half, then I--they were--I was appointed CEO.  And at the time I was one of the youngest in the country.
Story_ID: 76159
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell me about Whitney Young.  I know you said you met Whitney Young at some point.  He was a, you know, director of the Urban League during the '60's [1960's]. (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Whitney, Whitney came here--this is one of those Urban Leagues Whitney took a personal interest in and coming here to, to see about getting it open.  Because Whitney was born and raised in Simpsonville, Shelbyville, Kentucky, which is probably eighty miles, less than eighty miles away from here.  His father was, was over the Lincoln Institute school down there, and so I, I, I got a chance to, to be around him a bit, but not, not a whole lot because it wasn't long into my tenure that Whitney, that Whitney drowned.  And but what I did do as I was telling you earlier, was when, when they buried him here, my, my predecessor was in the process of, of leaving.  So I was kind of thrust into the role of trying to handle whatever we had to handle on this end to carry out the, the burial of a, of a, of a, a person of his stature.  And you know there--you know President [Richard] Nixon came and [unclear], and the preparation for the President, you know the Secret Service come.  And so working with those guys was quite an experience.  You know when they--you had to meet them at the airport and work with them overnight and them getting set up and just watching them do what they do was, was, was remarkable.  And watching, you know them.  Then they, they came in and they had to set up the--set up this situation room in there for the Press Corp.  Because you know the national--international Press Corp that follows the President had to come.  And they had to set up in our office.  It was all happening so fast.  From, from a Sunday to a Tuesday, it was all happening so fast and then it was over.
Speaker 1: Now tell me, what was Whitney Young working on just before he died?  'Cause some have speculated he--it wasn't natural, or--and a lot of things.  But, but what is your, your thoughts on it?  What are your thoughts on it?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know what to connect it to in terms of motivation.  But I do know that those of us who knew Whitney, knew that he was an accomplished swimmer.  And there was still just, just some suspicions about, about that drowning.  And, yeah, many of us who still suspicious about the way that came off.
Speaker 1: Now just--don't have anything really to--
Speaker 2: No.  Just, just it doesn't feel right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: One of those things that just didn't feel right.
Speaker 1: Now Whitney Young was a, sort of a pioneer in using statistics to demonstrate inequity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Whitney Young was, was a social worker by, by training.  So Whitney, Whitney was one of those people who could--who was, who was very much at home in the board room, and that's what you needed at that time.  A guy who could, who could go at the higher levels and represent.  Eloquent speaker, you know just had a, had a persona, had a, had an aura about him and very, very, very well respected.
Story_ID: 76160
Speaker 1: Well tell me about some of the issues here in the Lexington Ur- Urban League that you had to face as you were--
Speaker 2: The very first one I had to face is, you know, Lexington [Kentucky] has in one sense a pretty--I mean probably a middle sized city, but the black community is very, very small.  And in the '60s [1960s] when I came here, you know black people were going--they had gone, they had gone to two schools, Douglass and Dunbar, and everybody knew everybody.  So when the Urban League opened, you had the outsider from New Jersey, and then after him we had this other outsider who nobody knew where he came from except that he came from UK.  So I had two--really in a sense, had two strikes against me.  I was an outsider and I was a UK person.  'Cause during that time there was not much love lost between the Lexington black community and the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  So, so that was a strike.  So I had to, I had to contend with that.  And, and I heard a lot about it because my first office that we had was a, was--we wanted to be in the community, so we had our first office on the, on the west side of town, Georgetown Street, in the plaza shopping center, which was right across from the housing project.  So if, if you could be in the community, we were there.  But we were still--some folks still saw us as bourgeois.  And we--and then that was--I'm not so sure that all that was incorrect, 'cause we did have some Urban Leagues across this country that were very, very, very--and that's why we were taught to open our office there as opposed to in a bank building downtown where a lot of Urban Leagues had set up.
Story_ID: 76161
Speaker 1: Now just, just as a point of, of reference here.  We been talking a lot about the Urban League, but how did that really begin?  Just to get your (unclear)--I guess.
Speaker 2: The movement?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well like the organization, how did the organization--
Speaker 2: As, as a--1910 as a result of the out migration of African Americans from the south to the north, you know thus, thus began, you know the, you know the ghettos and the various urban, urban centers.  Urban League sprung up as a, as an organization to speak to the needs of, of African Americans who were congregating in the cities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so settlement house--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then they started to deal with primarily house--I mean employment, employment needs of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just want to interject that--(unclear)--sometimes you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we know have grown where we're like you know incorporated, headquarters in New York and Urban League--and we're in 113 cities across the country now.
Story_ID: 76162
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the main emphasis of Urban League is jobs, am I right, or--?
Speaker 2: That, that initially when we first started.  But see, this Urban League, we do some job work, but our main emphasis are housing, affordable housing, community development and, and education.  We do, do some job training all tied to that, but each local affiliate is pretty much autonomous in that it can make its own determinations about its, its, its initiatives based on its own local assessments.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 76163
Speaker 1: So now, now what again were some, some of the issues here in Lexington [Kentucky] that you were dealing with before I interrupted you about the history of the Urban--?
Speaker 2: You're talk--some of the kinds of things that we're doing now?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  Historically I mean since you started and, and, and up to now.  What have been the major issues you've had to face.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah I was talking about me, you know, you know I had the, the struggle of, of, of actually being accepted as an outsider to run the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Alright. How did you finally break through that?
Speaker 2: Well you know I, I, I--one of the things that I did do was you know I didn't come in saying I'm king of the--I run the Urban League.  You hire people from the communities who people could relate to, who people trusted.  So that meant that I, that I had to be comfortable enough with myself to do that.  So there was some guys like [unclear], a good friend of mine who--who passed about five years.  Michael Rankins who was very well known, very well respected in the community.  He was one of my, one of my workers, worked with me for years.  Guys like him and some others helped me, you know get known in the community.  And it--and my philosophy was we wanted to get it done, it didn't matter who got the credit.  'Cause at the end of the day, the Urban League got the credit for, for, for, for--and if it meant I had to be in the background while someone else did something because the community trusted and knew them, it didn't bother me.  That's okay, you know.
Story_ID: 76164
Speaker 1: But as time evolved, you know then I, I established my own identity and, and I would, I would, you know not boasting, I would say that today I'm--I have a certain degree of respect and, and notoriety here in this community as, as an organization that's, that's responsible.  As an organization that, that lets--that's committed.  An organization that, that, that takes positions on issues, but it takes positions on issues based on facts.  An organization that, that, that, that prides itself in, in being you know, financially sound and, and, and then working with the kind of integrity that you have to have to keep the corporate support, you know which is very, very, very critical.  But it's also a very delicate area in that sometimes when you have to take public positions on issues, some of the same folks who you might need to go to for support are some of the same folks you might have to--that's why it's so important that you always have positions that are based on documented evidence, well documented.  That can stand whatever test because it will be tested.
Speaker 2: I'm sure, yeah.  Okay, we're gone change tape here.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 76165
Speaker 1: Yeah. I wanted to ask you about--we're rolling again.  I wanted to ask you about how the, you know, how the Urban League uses statistical information to inform the general public about the position of black America.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We just went through a scenario, a process that, that goes back to maybe June, what is this, 2002?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It goes back to June 2001.  One of the issues that we've always been concerned about was the academic achievement gap in, in the school district.  And, and then certain other issues like black kids being disproportionately placed in special ed, not being represented on cheerleader squads when the, when the athletes are ninety percent African Americans.  The number of--the, the declining number of black faculty, black teachers, black administrators, and all of those cases.  So those are some of the kind of issues.  But the main thing that we said is we wanted to make a point about the academic achievement gap.  So what we did was say that we're gonna call, declare all-out war on the district.  'Cause we had done several studies, we'd had research and looked at--basically what had happened is, you know, they would say looks good.  We'll, we'll look at it and don't call us, we'll call you, kind of thing.  But saying, declaring war, we said we're going to mobilize the community.  And for the first time in all the years I've been here, we were able to really get the African American clergy fired up to be a part.  And those of us who know our history, know that when you have real change in civil rights in America, it's--you have to have you know, the church involved.  I mean that's, that's just a given.  So we got some, some of the young ministers who we were able to show the data, get them fired up and get them involved.  So we had marches on the school board.  And we, we just, we just raised some hell for a while.  And ended up making the front page of the paper for about three or four Sundays in a row with this kind of stuff.  So it was by design that we wanted to prove--we wanted to create a period of chaos.  That period of chaos then started to get the attention of the Chamber of Commerce.  And so some of those kind of guys.  'Cause they were saying, you know they--is this the image we want of our community?  So--but, but when you get those guys to look at you and stop, pay attention to what you're talking about, you better have a business proposal.  A proposal that makes business sense.  So that's where the data become very, very critical.
Story_ID: 76166
Speaker 1: So we, we simpli--we took the data and we just simplified it where it showed while there was an academic achievement gap between black kids and white kids.  We just showed them how many white kids who, who truly were falling through the cracks too.  And then you, then you, then you figure out a way to put a dollar value to that.  And then you move from the anecdotal to the documented.  Now by this time--now we've got the attention of the Chamber of Commerce and, and the paper like that.  Now when you get their attention and get them on your side, then you can go back to the School Board and they're gonna listen.  So we've gone, we've gone full circle on, on that.  We've gotten legislation passed where, where they've--have to disaggre--you know here in Kentucky, we do a lot on the test scores.  And we got the--so we've got legislation passed last year where they have to disaggregate all of the data on the test scores.  Historically what they would do was just lump it all together.  And you couldn't tell the real story.  But when you disaggregate it by subgroups, and we got legislation passed where they had to disaggregate it by subgroups.  So then the picture became clear.  And subsequently, we started, started to make some strides.  So that's an exam--I just, I give you that as example of how we use data and, and example as of, as to how you can effectively use it if you wanna bring about, bring, bring about some system, systems change.  Subsequently, we were--you know we got enough attention whereas the Superintendent was removed.  And now we're getting ready to start--launch a new Superintendent search.  And the main criteria on this Superintendent--criteria that we're looking at in this community for the new Superintendent, is that he or she has been in the district where they have a demonstrated track record of closing the achievement gap.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was a very long process; took a lot of work, lot of arm twisting.  But, but, but data made the difference.
Story_ID: 76167
Speaker 1: Okay now what, what are some other issues that you're dealing with now here in Lexington?
Speaker 2: An issue and initiative that's Urban League has been involved in is safe, sanitary, affordable housing, neighborhood redevelopment.  Back during the Reagan era, most of us know that you know, nonprofit organizations were not looked upon too favor--I mean [unclear].  So, so we made a decision here at this agency is that if we're gonna survive, we gotta start doing some things that make us look and act more like the business world and still serve our, our constituents.  So we put in place a development corporation as a second 501(c)(3) attached to the Urban League.  And the development corporation has as its primary goal, economic development, community development and housing.  Now jobs has always been an emphasis for the Urban League.  So what we wanted to do was--the goal was to provide affordable housing for the first time home buyers, but also continue to, to do job training.  So we started to buy up old, dilapidated houses, we rebuild, re--rehab them, and in the process of rehabbing them, we were training African American men coming from prison in the housing construction industry.  Why housing construction industry?  It made more sense.  It certainly couldn't train them in banking industry, nobody's gone hire them there.  So, so after a few years we looked at our data and what it showed is that 90 percent of the people buying the houses were single, African American females raising kids.  And, and it worked for us, for us where African American men coming home from prison.  So we were meeting two needs.  Cause some brothers coming from prison, need it. And the sisters who stayed back hereraising their children.  And so--
Speaker 1: That's a growing problem na--nationwide.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: [Unclear] to the point where there's--I think there's 600,000 people being released into the neighborhoods that they came from every year out of U.S. prisons.
Speaker 2: As--
Speaker 1: They wanna do the same thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well if you don't have something for them to do.  And you know as we speak today, you know we have--we've been responsible for a little over eight million dollars' worth of real estate in single family housing.  That's about 140 homes that we've either--that we've either rehabbed or built from the ground up or financed.  As we--this building we did, the two across the street we did.
Story_ID: 76168
Speaker 1: Now, now this building is significant historically for what reason?
Speaker 2: Because it was, because it was a clinic built in 1920 by a young African American doctor, and it serviced the black community before the hospital integrated here in town.  When I, when I made the public announcement we were gonna rehab this, I received all kinds of calls and letters from African American seniors who had, who, who had had--received their medical services here, and thanking us for, for saving this building.  Back--at one time Deweese Street was the hub of Lexington's black community.  All of the black businesses were up and down Due East Street.  Then when urban renewal came through, it, it, it ended up--we end up with what, two blocks of Deweese Street.  So when I found out about this building and those across the street, I was personally challenged to preserve this as, as part of our history.  And I--we've done--so I put together a plan.  We went to the city; we had them come in and do the--redo the infrastructure.  I brought some corporate people in here, raised the money in a, in about a month to buy this building and to redo it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 76169
Speaker 1: So the, it was--those are the kind of things.  We're now involved in a, in about a 40 million dollar project across town.  We've got some apartment complexes right up the street that we're building.  We're heavy into community redevelopment as an, as an organization.  Now that's why I say that I wanted us to start acting more like the corporate world, like the business world.  So now when I go--'cause all Urban Leagues are funded through United Way.  Now when I go to the United Way for my annual--talk about my annual allocation, I talk about it not as a, as an allocation, I talk about it as an investment.  You invest 120,000 dollars in me, my agency right now is, is about a 1.8 billion dollar operation.  And I would tell 'em if I think anyone would, would say that's a good return.  You give me 120 and then I'm gonna net out up to one--that's a pretty good return on the dollar in addition to when, when I leave a neighborhood, we have impacted on the tax base.  'Cause you take a dilapidated unit or vacant lots and turn those into anywhere from 70, 80, 90, 100,000 dollar homes, you're impacting on the tax base.  And when you're doing that kind of stuff, you also develop more relationships in the business community and more friends in the business community who can help you when you deal with other--the other advocacy issues.  See you're not seeing it as, as just, just someone raising hell about, about something.  You're seeing it as a prominent component of this community who has a right--I mean even though everybody has a right, but who have earned a right.  It's unfortunate, but you've earned the right to stand up for the--so it--so those--our advocacy and our service components go hand-in-hand.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 76170
Speaker 1: Now--I don't know if I'm jump--jumping too far ahead.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: But you had something to do with the acceptance in Lexington of Tubby Smith as the new coach for the Kentucky Wildcats, right?  Am I, am I right about that?
Speaker 2: Well the jury's still out, the jury's still out--
Speaker 1: Community wasn't ready for him.
Speaker 2: No, but the jury's still out whether they've accepted it, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Well what's the sit--the situa--
Speaker 2: Because, because you know as, as we speak, you know and there's, there's, there's a ravenous group of folks out there who probably didn't want him to be here to begin with.  And every misstep he makes, they magnify it.  I mean if even if you win a game, like he beats North Carolina the other day by almost twenty, and they're people on the call-in show, you'd think he'd lost by twenty.  So there's some folks who will never accept him as being here.  But you know he, he, he put a plug in a lot of that by winning the national championship the first year.  But they don't wanna give him credit for that, 'cause he wasn't Rick Pitino's boys.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, and, and over the last few years, Tubby has, has, has done well.  He's won, he's won SEC championships, he's won SEC tournament championships.  But he has lost more games per year than Rick did during the time.  So that's what they hang they hat on.  But, but it's a whole different world than it was, in, in the '90's [1990's].  There's so much parody in basketball today that you still can--you still can be a good team and lose 89 games a year.
Speaker 1: That's true, it's always, there's always somebody.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But that's, but that's right now the one, barometer they'll tell you is against him is that he losing more games than--
Speaker 1: Than Rick Pitino did.  'Cause they want Rick Pitino back?
Speaker 2: They did, of course they did.  Then they didn't--they, they feel jilted by Rick.  They didn't want Rick to leave.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he won like how many championships?
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: Just one? okay.
Speaker 2: He won one and came up second in the next one, and then left.  And then Tubby came in and won a national championship.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 76171
Speaker 1: Alright. What are some of the--you know any other big issues here in Lexington that you, you're dealing with?  {Unclear] that you wanna share with us.
Speaker 2: Those are our big ones.  You know what I mean.  You know I'm kind of-one of those kind of people that, that keep it real simple, keep it manageable and, and make a difference rather than all over the creation.  And at the end of the day you look--all you got is a lot of tracks.  You know I, I like to be able to show--
Speaker 1: You like to be effective.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In those areas, right.  Okay.  Well tell me sir, how did--what are your personal hopes and concerns for the black community of Lexington?
Speaker 2: That, that politically we, we, we continue to grow in terms of our students and I'd say that's for, for the nation.  That we continue to learn more about how the economic system works.  Train our young people about how the economic system works because if there's ever gone be any true power, that's where it is.  Yeah, participation in the economic, in the economic system.  And the third one would be education, you know.  We just get to get our--keep our kids focused on the value of an education.  We just got--we got--there are a lot of issues with people who are not doing the right things in terms of educating our kids.  'Cause there's also a lot of issues we have our own in terms of not valuing education, parents and young people.  And we can't blame anybody for that but us.  So we've got to, we gotta keep working on that.  Parental involvement; we've got to make sure that parents are more involved in the education of our kids.
Story_ID: 76172
Speaker 1: That's right. Okay.  Tell, tell me what do you--what is the Urban League's position, or what is your position or if there's a difference, tell me the difference between them, on, on, on reparations.  You thought about that as a--
Speaker 2: The Urban League has taken and, and, and I'm not, I'm not sure if I've [unclear] I mean I'm--probably wouldn't be shamed to say that I have a--not, not, not to put a--not, not to be able to give you--to go on record--I would just rather not go on record with it [unclear] people that I like to be maximally responsible when I say and do something.  And I like to--
Speaker 1: You know on, on the surface does it seem like a good idea, idea?  I mean to--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean it's, it just do.  But it's, you know obviously if you, you know if you're gonna, you know to get something like that to a point where it actually becomes a reality, you know you've got to have a master plan.  I mean with politicians and everybody else to make it happen.  And that's what I'm talking about we got to understand the--we got to understand being involved in political system and all those kind of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, do you think the black community still suffers from slavery?
Speaker 2: From slavery as we knew it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think we still suffer greatly from discrimination, which is still--
Speaker 1: Kind of repercussion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh absolutely.  It, it just comes in different shapes.  It just--they dress it up differently and they--that's all.  It's, it's still, it's still the same.  You know I like to say in this community we, we do kind of a civil rights cha-cha where we--you know cha-cha goes ch, ch, ch.  Yeah we do that around here a lot.  Two steps forward and one back.  And then the net effect is you haven't gone far.  She's still in the same spot almost.
Story_ID: 76173
Speaker 1: Well this, this town has been described as one of the toughest towns racially in Kentucky.  I mean you know this is in an area historically been very--
Speaker 2: You know I--now this, this is one of my personals on that.  I think where, where you have the most progress of, say quote/unquote, the underclass in, in our, in our urban centers.  And, and when I, when I say underclass, I'm not talking about, you know, homeless.  I'm talking underclass in term--it's, it's where you've had the urban centers where you've had people to have had the opportunity through, through blue collar jobs to create some wealth and some influence, and have unions and all the--we never had any of that around here.  We never had blue collar, real significant blue collar at Toyota.  And Toyota is only, what, what, ten, 12, 15 years old.  So we never--and no unions.  Unions--I always felt like un--unions give, give the strength in union numbers.  Here, you never had anything like that so you can isolate and pick off folks.
Speaker 1: Why is that?  I mean no--Lexington kind of lacked-
Speaker 2: Lexington, Lexington was agricultural.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, and when Toyota came, there were folks who wanted to resist that.  There was folks who still want to fight the World War II, you know the Japanese and, and Toy--I mean and I hate to think where we would be as an economy today.  Because the things that we depended on was alcohol, tobacco and gambling.  All three which on, on the decline.  Can you imagine where we--
Speaker 1: Gambling's [unclear]--
Speaker 2: But can, can you imagine where we would be today if we didn't--if we hadn't gotten a Toyota plant?
Speaker 1: That's tough, that's--yeah.
Speaker 2: You take that out of our economy today, and, and see the average age, which what I love about Toyota, is the average age of the working, working class out there is like thirties.  It's about thirty years of age.  So, so you've got young folks who buying houses.  Who, who average income out there is probably 50 thousand.  You take that out of here, then what you've got is the service industry where, where it takes two families working to make up for one.  But that's what you had before that.  So that--you take that kind of population, that kind of population is easily controlled.  And that's what it's been about; it's been about control.  So that's why it's been a tough, tough place to--even today it's still a tough place to kind of, kind of mobilize 'cause every--I mean folks just don't--not willing most of the time to put something on, on the line.  They always think they've got something that, that they don't have and you know--anyway when it comes time to, to stand up for my family or stand up for what's right, you know, some of that stuff is, is irrelevant.  And you have to--sometimes you have to get to that point.  But I just don't think we ever had that around here.  And that's why I've always said maybe if we had some unions and some, some clout that comes from people mobilizing, I think we'd been better.
Speaker 1: It certainly makes it an unusual place to organize.
Speaker 2: Yeah, organizing is--organize--tough place, tough place.
Story_ID: 76174
Speaker 1: Tell me now, now looking back over all you've been able to do, and you're still young, relatively you know.  When you look over, over, over the body of work you've been able to accomplish since you got here, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I've been able to, to do it and still stay clear of--avoid the, the shots that people take at you.  You know whether they try to--you know it's--in an organization like this, there's always someone trying to, trying to prove that you've done something improper, immoral, you know those kind of things.  And that's, that's where they come at you.  And the, the fact that I've been able to, to weather those kinds of things, you know.  I've all--just always been able to stay one step ahead, but it's hard work.  Damn, it's hard work, you know, staying one step ahead and being able to, to, to fight it off when they come at you like that.
Story_ID: 76175
Speaker 1: Now I'm not--
Speaker 2: And what ways do they come at you?
Speaker 1: You, you manage federal money.  People come in to monitor you.  They looking for ways to say that you've, you've comingled or you've done this, you've done that.  You get accused of all kinds of things.  You have to work hard in making sure that, that your books and your documentation can stand that.  Or they can set you up by having you managing some federal projects and you know, if, if, if you're a--if you're my contact in Frankfort on a federal project, I mean you can, you can misplace some of my paperwork easily.  And, and for a month or two, I mean you can kill my cash flow and everything else, you know, all that kind of stuff.  When we first started building houses, we had all kinds of accusations 'cause see when you using that federal money like that, you don't supposed to be generating profit.  And you know we were accused of that until we showed them that it's all rolling right back in.  You know I remember one time [unclear] a auditor was sitting in my office and, and I saw this young guy--he was [unclear] busy, working and he all of a sudden got up and left.  And I asked did anybody know where he went?  So he had run back down to City Hall and he had come back in and he brought, brought his superior and somebody else, about an army of people in.  What's the deal?  He had discovered what he thought was flagrance.  All he had to do was ask a question and we could, we could have showed him.  'Cause I just have that kind of confidence in the way, way we manage our affairs.
Story_ID: 76176
Speaker 1: Other part of the legacy is I think, I think history will, will, will record us as being consistent.  And we weren't all over the creation, you know.  What we said we were gonna do, we did.  So, so you don't have to look far to find the Urban League here.  You know if it has to do with education, you gone find us.  If it has to do with community redeveloping and helping folks become homeowners; has to do with African American men coming from prison, you're gonna, you're gonna find us there.  I think as a result of the credibility of doing by, of doing things right for so long, I think the black community trust us.  I think they do trust us now and that's--and, and, yeah, yeah.  I think, I think they trust us.  I can just--just by the kinds of calls I get daily asking for advice and, and direction.  And I would say we're probably the organization in any black community now that gets more of those than, you know--we've developed a relationship where the, where the clergy feel comfortable in telling them folks that--that's [unclear].  Where you're a nonprofit [unclear].  So those are, those are the kind of legacy things I think, I think, that we, that we leave.  Operating under no illusion about my relationship with the white community 'cause I been, always been comfortable about--of, of interacting and relating to them.  But, but it--I've always been comfortable enough of myself that I'm not trying to simulate anybody over there.  I might be trying to learn the way you do some things over there and bring 'em back over here because they're effective.  But other than that, I'm not trying to be you.
Story_ID: 76177
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's significant.  That's significant 'cause people get those mixed up sometimes.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not trying to be you.  I just--I know you.  I know you doin' something over there that works.  You know, annually we have a--have something here in Lexington [Kentucky] called the, the Public Private Partnership Trip.  That's where the Chamber of Commerce and all major corporate heads, all the business industry leaders in this community, go to visit another city to see how they do something that we can bring here to replicate.  About eighteen years ago I learned about that.  And I started going.  Now during the time when I first started going, with the exception of if there were an African American on the City Council, when I first started going, I would be the only African American on the trip.  But I'm--you know something in my mind said if all those influential white people are going over there, that's--something's happening over there that we ought to know about.  So I fixed my budget so I could go on those trips.  And as a result of that, we now--every time one of those trips--we is going.  Every time I hear of one those trips, it may be twenty, twenty-five of us on there.  You know, African--from the African American community.  I also learned to develop relations--I'm a strong believer in relationships, networking.  You develop friendship--not friends or friendships, but relationships in those kind of settings that you bring back and you parlay for your community.  A lot of what happens in this community has to do with who you can pick up that phone and punch in those, those, those digits and get to.  Doesn't have as much to do with how well you can--how well you can word that proposal.  That proposal can be the best document, but if, if, if there's somebody who don't want that thing to make it, I don't care who wrote it for you.  And that's--
Speaker 1: Somebody that doesn't know you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's, that's, that's, that's a legacy I think I leave is, is I developed relationships.  And I've developed the relationships, but I have not lost any kind of sight about who I am or what I am as a black person.
Speaker 1: Now, that's important.
Story_ID: 76178
Speaker 1: Okay we're ready. We're rolling again. Now, now did your--did, did, did your parents get a chance to see you become a successful Director of the ur--of the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And then I'm, I'm--and I still don't think they ever knew what I did.  My dad [Roy O'Neil Peeples] just said--my dad used to tell me you don't have a job, boy.  You just got a position.
Speaker 1: Wonderful. I guess as hard as he, he worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he didn't, he didn't, he didn't see me doing anything, so--but yeah they, they did for, they did for a while.  And which was also one of the reasons that I was kind of comfortable with, with staying in the state of Kentucky, whereas my other sisters and brothers, most of--went farther away.  It was my--the relationship that I had with him and they were getting older, older in years at the time that I could, 'cause I could afford to be close to them and I wanted to, I wanted to do that.
Speaker 1: That's a good thing.
Speaker 2: That's, so that's--that was, that was a very special time for me.  And then I felt like I was, I was giving back to them what my other sisters and brothers--'cause they had given me by allowing me to come live on them every summer.  So it, it's just the right thing to do.
Speaker 1: So your family certainly, you know, taken care of one another.  Now you have children?
Speaker 2: I, I have--I'm in my second marriage.  I have one son, my marriage and he's--my son's thrity-five.  And my second marriage my, my wife has a, has a daughter who, who just graduated from UK [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] last summer.
Story_ID: 76179
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now, now this is the last question.  This is different from legacy, but--and you still have, still young.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As Urban League CEO, or as a person?
Speaker 1: Well as a, as a person I think.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to be remembered in, in both capacities the same; as a person and Urban League CEO.  As, as, as somebody who was a--who--you asked me about a favorite saying.  Who did the right things for the right reasons.  And, and believed, and then saw right prevail whenever I, whenever I had something to do with it.  As a person who respected everybody.  Who, who, who I hope by virtue of the way that I've conducted myself, was trusted and believed.  You know, as a person who, who had no, no, no qualms about--and no hesitations about being emphatic about what's right and what's wrong.  I don't care how close a friend or whatever you are, if, if you're talkin' about asking me to do something that, that's, that's not right with this profit--with this organization, then, then you in the wrong place.  And I don't care who it is, a board member, who, whoever, you know.  There were folks who gave of themselves for this whole Civil Rights Movement.  And we're a part of that.  And so people gave of themselves to make this happen.  So I don't have any kind of right to tinker or play games with that because those folks who gave their lives, they weren't playing games; they were serious.  And if I find myself in a position where I'm so fortunate as to, as to be entrusted with this, then I'm also very serious about, about, about how I manage it.  And that's, you know folks would say that, you know, PG worked hard at the Urban League.  He, he did the right thing for the Urban League.  He always kept people first.  I mean never abused any--and then I make a difference here.  I'm careful 'cause I always says may he never abuse any influence he had.  I, I'm under no illusion that this job has given me any power.  It's not power; I have no power.  I do have some influence, or some access to influence.  And you can take your access that you have to influence and make some things happen.  And I try to do that all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Sure, it's a pleasure, pleasure, pleasure.  You guys make, make that easy.
Speaker 1: That's good.
