Story_ID: 531773
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: State your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Maxie L. Patterson.  Maxie is M-A-X-I-E, L, as in Lynn, L-Y-N-N, Patterson, P-A-T-T-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: All right, and your date of birth.
Speaker 1: June 12, 1944.
Speaker 2: And your place of birth.
Speaker 1: Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 2: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm the executive director of the Texas Association of Public Employee Retirement Systems.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 1: In Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay and today's date.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's (laughter)--I just drew a mental blank (laughter).
Speaker 2: February--
Speaker 1: February the--
Speaker 2: Ninth.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the 9th, of 2007.
Story_ID: 531774
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna begin by me asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No particular color.
Speaker 1: All right.  What about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: It's usually the season--it's two: fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: About everywhere I go, if I had a choice, I probably would go down to the, to the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what do you like to eat?  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ribs, particularly if I make them.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: No, no particular saying or phrase.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about a bible verse--anything favorite?
Speaker 2: No, no one in particular.
Story_ID: 531775
Speaker 1: Now, let's begin by talking about your family, and I wanna start on your mother's side.  So, would you tell me your mother's name, and spell her name for me, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Hattie B. Howard, Hattie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mother?  Hattie?
Speaker 2: Oh, excuse me; that was my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother is Myra Howard Patterson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Century, Florida.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year?
Speaker 2: Let's see, it would have been 19--oh, let's see, she is--she passed away last year; she was eighty-six.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what about your--your grandparents?  Do you know your mother's, your mother's mother's name--or your grandmother, in other words?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Hattie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Hattie Howard.
Speaker 1: Hattie Howard, all right.  And do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: I, I'm not sure; I believe she was also born in Florida as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know anything about your grandfather [William Howard]?
Speaker 2: No, I only met my grandmother, never met my grand- grandfather.  I did visit the house that they grew up in.
Speaker 1: Did you know his name?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 531776
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father's side of the family.  What is your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father is Harry B. Patterson [Harry Patterson, Sr.], B for Beatrice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: And he was born in, in Arkansas. Camden, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know what year, or how, how old he was?
Speaker 2: Let's see, he passed away quite some time ago; he was fairly young--he was about sixty-two, and I was in college [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan] at the time, and off the top of my head I can't recall the actual year he was born (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  And do you have any information about his parents?
Speaker 2: Never met my grandparents on my father's side, and doing some little history, I know that--be my grandmother--was fairly light-skinned and--matter of fact, if you looked at a picture of her, you would probably say she was white.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And there's been some--lot of discussions in terms about the, the, the family and--going back in years, but I don't know any, any more than that, not off the top of my head.  I know we been doing some family research.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know their names at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 531777
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother [Myra Howard Patterson] and father [Harry Patterson, Sr.].  Do you--is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father came to Michigan looking for work, and there wasn't much work in the South and the automobile plants were really going strong, and so they heard that he could get a job in the automobile plants.  And my mother, originally when she came north, she came up into, I believe, New York State, and then up in Canada, in Windsor [Canada]--out of--just outside of Detroit [Michigan], and subsequently into Detroit.  And it was through distant relatives that she ended up in the, in Detroit.  And I remember talking about this recently with my other brothers [Harry Patterson, Jr. and Michael Patterson] and sisters [sic. sister, Laverne Patterson].  She was working in a hospital and through a friend of hers, who also knew my father, told my mother that she knew a good man for her, and that he had a good job and he would bring his check home, and that she should meet him.  And my, my father actually--the first time he met my mother, they didn't hit it off too well together.  I think he--as I recall, he--'cause he, he asked her to marry him almost the first visit, and she said that she didn't know; she needed to go back home and discuss it with her parents [Hattie Howard and William Howard] first, and so he told her, "Well, you might as well just forget it," and he left.  And so, a period of time went by, about several weeks or a month, and she thought about it and talked about it, and decided that, "Well, I think he's okay."  And, and she came back and she approached him and he reconsidered, and they ended up getting married (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So, where did they settle down?
Speaker 2: They settled down in Detroit 'cause my father was working at the--at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] in the automobile plant, and so he was living in the Detroit area in Detroit at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what year they got married?
Speaker 2: Dates--I hate dates (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you hate dates, okay (laughter).  That's fine.
Story_ID: 531778
Speaker 1: All right, tell me about, you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have one sister and two brothers.
Speaker 1: And tell me the order, and where you fall in.
Speaker 2: My sister--one sister--she's the oldest, and I'm sixty-two and my sister is three years older than me; that makes her sixty-five.  And then my older brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's her name?
Speaker 2: Laverne--Laverne Patterson.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then my older brother is Harry Patterson [Harry Patterson, Jr.]; he's a junior and he'd be two years older than me, so he's sixty-four.  And then my younger brother, Michael Patterson, and he is about five years younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You wanna tell me what they do?
Speaker 2: My younger brother--I go from bottom up now.  My younger brother, he's an attorney in Detroit [Michigan], and my, my other brother, he was an executive at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan]; he's been retired for some time and still living in the Detroit area. And my sister, she's retired from working for the City of Detroit, and she's still living in the Detroit area.
Story_ID: 531779
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your relationship with your mother [Myra Howard Patterson].  Tell me about your mother; just tell me what you want to say about your mother.
Speaker 2: Well, I was always described as a real quiet child and, and I recall spending considerable, or more time with my mother than my father [Harry Patterson, Sr.] 'cause, as I recall, my father, he was always working; he worked long hours--long shifts at the plant [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], and when he came home, he was either--I, I remember him as either working or sleeping, and so when he was on the day shift, he'd come home, we'd have dinner together and then a couple hours of TV and then he'd, he'd go off to bed.  But with my mother, I can remember following her around; I remember going to the store shopping with her.  I can remember going shopping on the weekend in--the big department store in Detroit [Michigan] was J.L. Hudson [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building] which was downtown, and when I first grew up in Detroit, it was on the, the west side.  My father owned a four family flat apartment, and we lived in one of the flats, and we stayed there until about the sixth grade, when we moved to the northwest part of Detroit.  My father bought a house.  But, getting back to my mother is--she taught me how to wash clothes.  I used to go down to the basement and, and help her, and so she showed me all the little techniques and everything you needed to do about getting them clean, and back in those days, you had the old tub and, and used as hot a water as you could use, and I remember using a stick to take, take the clothes out of one side of the tub and moving it to the other, and use the stick 'cause the water was so hot.  And she showed me how to iron clothes, iron shirts, how to fold them.  I used to go to the supermarket with her and shop and help her bring the groceries home and, and on the weekends when she went clothes shopping down to Hudsons, I'd go down there with her, and when there was a big sale, she would--we'd go down; my dad would drop us down, and I can remember (unclear). There--in downtown Detroit, there's an area called Grand Circus Park, and there were parking meters, and you could park at the parking meters and he'd park the car there, and there'd be a bench, and he'd sit on the bench and read the newspaper or a magazine, and me and my mother, we'd go shopping.  And department stores was Crowleys [Crowley Milner and Company] and Hudsons, and she'd be down there when the doors opened--first--stand in line, the doors open, and particularly the sales, and we'd go in, we'd shop, then we'd take stuff back to the car and we'd put the stuff in the car and then we'd go back and shop some more and we'd have lunch down there.  And I can remember one time when we came back, we were bringing some stuff back; we'd been down there a long time, and she says, "You know," she said, "it wouldn't be a surprise if your father is gone and left us."  And we got back and lo and behold, the car was gone (laughter).  And so we--carrying the bags and stuff, and got on the bus and we took the bus on how- on home, and, and did that a number of times.  And so we're fairly close.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fairly close.
Story_ID: 531780
Speaker 1: How much education did your mother [Myra Howard Patterson] have?
Speaker 2: My mother just finished high school down in Florida and, you know, I don't remember about my dad [Harry Patterson, Sr.], whether or not he finished high school or not, but my mother did make it through.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother work outside the home?
Speaker 2: She worked in other people's homes.  She worked for another--a number of people cleaning homes; she did that for quite a while, and then she was a nurse's aide at the hospital--big Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan] in, in Detroit [Michigan], and then--that was about the last job she had, and then as she got older, she was just at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What was another type of lesson learned from your mother?
Speaker 2: A lesson learned?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, something that you always remembered that your mother told you.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother used to emphasize, when she talked about my father, about honesty and being honest, and taking care of his family, and wanting us to get a decent education, and I heard that a lot.  And that was repeated a lot and, and it stuck; honesty and (background noise) taking care of your family.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so we were talking about your mother, and you were telling me about the, the lesson learned about your mother being--telling you about being honest.  I think that's where we left off.
Speaker 1: Yes.  I think I finished up.  You'd asked me the things that she had--that stuck with me, and I think I covered it.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.
Story_ID: 531781
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your dad [Harry Patterson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Entirely different relationship with him, and I think a lot of it was because he wasn't around a lot.  He was gone a lot--very serious, but I, I was--of the four of us, four kids, I followed him around more so than the other ones did 'cause I remember--what sticks in my mind, what I remember is on the--particularly on the weekends--on a Sunday, and he'd go and visit one of my cousins or uncles, and I would go along with him and, and he was a real quiet person and I figure I must have picked it up from him.  And we'd go visit somebody, and I'd sit there in, in the living room while they talk and they chat, and then there's long periods of nobody talking; we'd just sort of sit there and, and--but I would follow him around on that weekend, and I, I suspect, in thinking back, it's because he wasn't around, and so you grab at every opportunity to be around him.  I remember talking to my younger brother [Michael Patterson] once in the--'cause my younger brother was there after I had left the house, and he said one time his--oh, my dad came up to him and says, "You wanna come with me--go somewhere?"  And my younger brother made the mistake of asking, "Well, where we going?"  My father looked at him and he says, "Well, why don't you just forget it?"  (Laughter) And so he learned not to ask.  If you got an invitation to go, you just go (laughter).
Story_ID: 531782
Speaker 1: Now, you said your father [Harry Patterson, Sr.], of course, was a hard worker, and do you know how he saved the money?  You said that he owned the four family flat.
Speaker 2: I don't know where the money came for him to buy that; I mean 'cause at first, he lived there, and he knew the person who owned it before--the person he bought it from, and I think it was another relative, as I recall; I think it was another relative who owned it before he did, and they used to live in one of the flats, and we lived in one, and then they moved out, and there was an opportunity for him to buy it and he bought it from them.  Now, where he got the money, I have no idea--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but when he sold it, we were happy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Why?
Speaker 2: 'Cause we spent--it never failed that anytime over Christmas, a holiday or the summer, somebody moved out and we had to clean it up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then after we moved to the northwest side of town [Detroit, Michigan], we had to come back every weekend and cut the grass, and do upkeep and everything.
Story_ID: 531783
Speaker 1: So, how old were you when you moved from, from that address?
Speaker 2: I would have been around the sixth grade, so I would have been around eleven or twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to elementary school in this area.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about the community in which you lived.
Speaker 2: It was an integrated community; the school was integrated.  Thinking in today's terms, I would describe it as a middle income community, if you applied it to today, and it was elementary school [William T. Sampson Elementary School] in the Detroit [Michigan] public school system, and the one thing that sticks on my mind is--strangely enough--is the, the crossing guards.  In the Detroit Police Department, they assigned a policeman to the schools, and they had--the students would--could be crossing guards, and so you wore these belts, you know, safety patrol belts that--they call them safety patrol officers--that's what it was.  And the policeman that was assigned to that school was Officer Clark [ph.], and when we left that school and moved to the northwest and changed, Officer Clark coincidentally got assigned to that school [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] that we moved to.  And then when I went on to high school, Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], Officer Clark ended up at Mumford High School--pure coincidence. I'm sure he--I don't know where he is today, but it--you know, I never thought about it until you just asked me the question (laughter).  I'm almost curious now to wanna try and track him down, see if he's still alive (laughter).
Story_ID: 531784
Speaker 1: All right, so tell me what else about the community that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember a bakery, Awrey's Bakery; it was a big bakery, and I remember it because I--you could smell the fresh baked bread quite often, and it was only a couple blocks up the street [in Detroit, Michigan], and I can remember Halloween when we used to go out trick or treating, and it was safe enough you could walk the streets and parents didn't have to go with you, and it was so entirely different in those days where it was really a festive occasion.  And we would have these big brown paper shopping bags, and people gave you so much that you could fill them up, bring them home, drop it off and get another bag, and go back out, but you had to be careful because they would give you fruit, and the apples--apples and oranges were big, and so they would weigh the bag down, and sometimes they would split out the bottom.  But also, a lot of times, you would go to a house and they have a big tub of water in there, and apples would be floating in there, and you had to get on your hands and knees with no hands, and get the apple out with just your teeth.  And so it was just--I have positive, fond memories of the neighborhood and, and the friends that I had.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, there was a, a number of friends.  We didn't wander too far from the house; it was almost within almost like a half a block of my house in terms of the real close friends you could go over to visit.  I can remember my parents--probably more so my father [Harry Patterson, Sr.], very protective, and was concerned about we being back before it gets dark, and I remember a particular time when I didn't get back before it was dark, and I had my younger brother Michael [Michael Patterson] with me, and I was just really across the street visiting another friend, and before we realized, it got dark and we came back; there were some words to be had and some whippings to be had, and I remind my younger brother that he caused that whole problem (laughter).  But that's pretty much how I remember the neighborhood.  Going back today, it doesn't look any- anything like it was when, when I was living there.
Story_ID: 531785
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school that you went to?
Speaker 2: Halley Elementary School [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Halle, H-A-L-L--I wanna say--I think there's an A-Y in there; I don't think it's just L-L-Y, I think it's L-L-A-Y, or L-L-E-Y.  It was Halley Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you went to elementary school, do you remember a teacher that might have influenced you at all?
Speaker 2: Nope.  I don't recall that until high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were your teachers black or white?
Speaker 2: You know, I never thought about that, but as I'm thinking back, I wanna say the majority were white.  I don't recall any black teachers, matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell me about your years in elementary school.
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: At Halley?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember a whole lot.  I remember in the first grade; either in kindergarten or first grade, I remember that--what sticks on my mind is the fact that you, you had to take a nap, and I can remember they used to give us milk in cartons with a straw, and you forced the straw through a hole in the, in the carton and--'cause you always got this little carton of milk for, for lunch.  And that's about all that comes to my memory (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you remember? Okay.  Well, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I would say an average student, not--I didn't struggle but I didn't excel, it just--as my mother [Myra Howard Patterson] would say later on, I just coasted along (laughter).
Story_ID: 531786
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you?  Were you mischievous, were you--
Speaker 2: No, quiet (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Quiet?
Speaker 2: Always around the house; didn't go away.  I can remember there were some periods of times when I don't think things financially were, were that well off 'cause I remember--well, it's interesting because I suppose we would have some things that other poor people say we didn't have.  I remember the first time my dad [Harry Patterson, Sr.] got a TV set, this black and white TV set, 'cause before that, we used to listen to Jack Benny on the radio.  My dad used to like to listen to Jack Benny, and I remember listening to 'The Lone Ranger' on the radio, and there was the whole series of, I guess you call it episodes--program--you see it on TV now; back then it was the radio, and then it moved to TV--the black and white, and I can remember sitting around on Sundays with my dad watching 'The Ed Sullivan Show.'  He was a big fan of watching Jack Benny and, and things like that.  I remember in the neighborhood [in Detroit, Michigan]--I guess--as we keep talking, things start to come back--going to the movie theater.  The movie theater was close enough we could walk to it, and I remember paying nine cents on--to go to the Saturday matinee and, in addition to the movie, it usually be two movies, plus there would be cartoons added in.  But I also remember they always ran a series on Batman and Robin, and it was an ongoing series because at the end of every series, Batman would get in trouble and it looked like he was gonna die, and it was the end, you'd have to come back next Saturday to see the next episode, and then it would pick up where he left off and he'd miraculously come out of it, and the series just continued on and on, but--
Speaker 1: What did you like to read as a child?
Speaker 2: I wasn't a reader.  I don't remember really reading that much.  I remember looking at the funnies in newspaper and, and I can remember cartoons books--the kind you buy at the store.
Speaker 1: Comic books.
Speaker 2: Comic books.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd read comic books, but I don't--I never really got into reading like novels or books, or things like that.
Story_ID: 531787
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about elementary school.  So, you wanted to make a correction, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The more we talk about it, more things start to come back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Must be a function of age.  Halley [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] was the second elementary school I went to.  In the Detroit [Michigan] public school system back in those days, elementary schools were K through eight [kindergarten to eighth grade]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and I went to--Sampson [William T. Sampson Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] was my first school, and I went there from K through the fifth grade when we moved to northwest part of Detroit, and then I went six, seventh, and eighth grade at Halley--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and--where I graduated from Halley, and then went on to Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 531788
Speaker 1: And you were telling me about a band that you belonged to.
Speaker 2: It was the Trinity Youth Center band, and I started that sometime--me and my brother--my older brother [Harry Patterson, Jr.], when we were living on Moore Place, on the west side, and I think I did that for maybe two or three years; it was like a marching band, and had a uniform, and I played the clarinet and my brother played trumpet.  But I remember we had to go Downtown Detroit [Michigan] and play at some parade, and it was so cold and my fingers were freezing off, and I wasn't that good at playing it anyway, so I remember the band director told me, "Just fake it," (laughter).
Story_ID: 531789
Speaker 1: So now, tell me about Mumford High School [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Well, let me back up a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember much at Halley [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], but now--at Sampson [William T. Sampson Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], but when I was at Halley, I got involved in a little bit more activity because I can recall I received an award for being in the--I was asked to join the--a club, and it was the science club, and I can't recall at all what I did that, that caused them to ask me to do that, but it was--when we moved to northwest part of Detroit [Michigan], we were one of the first black families in that neighborhood; it was very heavy middle-class, and a number of Jewish families were there, and so at Halley Elementary School there weren't a lot of African Americans, but there were more than, than I recall at my other school but it, it was a, it was a small number.  And I was just looking at my graduation picture because we actually graduated in eighth grade, and I got a picture and I remember just about all the teachers were--I, I don't remember any African American teachers in school, but I remember getting along quite well.  I think I got along with everybody; I think it was just my nature, and it must've been something my family did--my parents [Myra Howard Patterson and Harry Patterson, Sr.] bringing me up--and then moved on from there to Mumford High School.  Most people can remember Mumford High school because of the movie 'Beverly Hill Cops' [sic. 'Beverly Hills Cop'] that Eddie Murphy was in, and he wore a Mumford High sweatshirt, and so that's how people can identify that's Mumford High School in Detroit, because one of the actors in that movie was actually a Detroit lieutenant--a lieutenant in the Detroit Police Department who portrayed Eddie Murphy's boss in, in 'Beverly Hills Cops,' and, and I met him--not Eddie Murphy but I met that, that lieutenant because he also served on the pension board, on the Detroit Police pension board.  And also I'll just add this little element, is the fact the, the character that he portrayed in the movie was in fact him (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right (laughter).
Story_ID: 531790
Speaker 1: What other activities at Mun- Mumford High [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In Mumford I, I got involved in Army ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and I did four years of ROTC there--the four years I was there, and I became a student assistant at the--with the driver education program.  In, in Detroit [Michigan], the--driver ed [driver's education] was a part of the high school, and in the front of Mumford High School they actually had a track, it was a pretty large track, it had stop signs, traffic lights, slight hills, inclines, and they had their own cars and a garage and, and when I went through the course, I was asked if I wanted to stick around and become a student assistant.  And most of that was parking cars and gassing them up, and I got good enough at it that finally they let me--started helping out and teaching students.  And, and I remember the, the teacher; his name was--Donald McNair [Donald R. McNair] was my driver ed teacher, and he's the one that asked me--he ran the program, and to this day we share a Christmas card.  Every Christmas I send him a card and he sends me a card, and we stayed in touch with each other ever since then.  But I went--did four years in ROTC.  My grades--I know you're gonna ask me about academics.  My grades, again, was marginal; nothing excelled, and I went all the way up through the enlisted grades in, in ROTC; I became a master sergeant, and I was--never made lieutenant because you cannot be an officer in ROTC and have a grade below a C, and I would occasionally get a D, or an F, and they could never promote me for that one reason, because I remember the, the instructor, who was a regular army sergeant, would have a conversation being about my grades, and he says, he says, "You know, I wanna promote you, but you gotta (laughter)--you gotta get your grades up."  And I never did, so I never made it any higher than a master sergeant.
Speaker 1: Did you ever play sports?
Speaker 2: My last year, I joined the football team, and I played football my senior year, which is somewhat odd, waiting 'til your last years, which means it's a little tough to really get on the field--get on the game field and start in your last year.
Story_ID: 531791
Speaker 1: How did you decide where and if you--or when did you decide that you wanted to go to college, and how did you decide what college you were going to go to?
Speaker 2: As I think back, mostly everybody was going on to college, and I think of the guys I knew in my neighborhood, there was about half a dozen of us that was fairly close, and most of them were African American, but there were several that were white, and some of them went off--that must've been right around the time of Vietnam [Vietnam War], and I remember a buddy of mine up the street, he ended up going into the [U.S.] Navy, and another one went in the [U.S.] Air Force, another one went in the [U.S.] Army, and I just wasn't ready to do that, and it wasn't a case where somebody was telling me to go; as a matter of fact, I--when I talked to my counsellor at the high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], she told me I was not college material, and in high school, there was two curriculums you could follow, a gen- what they call it, general ed, general education or college prep, and I could never get into college prep because she told me I wasn't good enough.  And so--I don't know what it was; I know there was this strong push from my parents, from my father [Harry Patterson, Sr.], to further my education, and my older brother [Harry Patterson, Jr.] had gone on to college; he went on to Arkansas A and M [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  And my sister [Laverne Patterson], older sister, had gone on to college.  And so I checked around and found out there was this school called Ferris State College [Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Fair?
Speaker 2: Ferris State College--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and they said--it was up north in Big Rapids, Michigan--north of Grand Rapids [Michigan], and they said all you needed was a high school diploma; if you had a high school diploma, they would admit you in, and that's it--no test, no nothing, just a high school diploma.  And so I said--matter of fact, my grades were marginal enough that I didn't graduate with my graduating class on time; I had to go one extra semester to make up a class, and so I never graduated.  I never marched in high school, didn't graduate with my class, and it was somewhat of a little letdown, not being able to do that.  Then, I didn't think much of it, but thinking back, sort of miss it.  And, and so I applied to Ferris and was accepted, and then I went off to Ferris State College.
Story_ID: 531792
Speaker 1: Now, was this the first time that you were away from home?
Speaker 2: No, actually--you know you asked me an earlier question and then I didn't answer it correctly; I was--did get involved in scouting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was in scouting all the way through high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan] and, and we went on camping trips and things like that, and I remember a scout leader was in the neighborhood.  And this was on the northwest side, not earlier, so my scouting activity really sort of started in high school.  And so, in terms of going away, it was really part of the troop, but other than that, I never went away by myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduated in 1961?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962]?
Speaker 2: I had to go that extra.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you pay for college?
Speaker 2: When I first went off--oh, that--when I didn't graduate on time, I worked that summer and, and I saved up money and, and so I was working during the summer, and then when I went off to college, I had some money saved up, and plus, my parents [Myra Howard Patterson and Harry Patterson, Sr.] helped me out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got a job right away, working at the, at the university.  And then the, the end of my first year--I can't remember if it was the second half of my freshman year or the beginning of my sophomore year I got a job as an RA, a resident assistant, and that helped pay for my room and board--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so then all I had to pay was tuition, and back in those days it was a whole lot cheaper.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your experience away from home on the campus.
Speaker 2: Actually, that's when I really started to get involved in a lot more activities.  I got involved in--I joined a, a fraternity; it was a, a national professional fraternity called Alpha Phi Omega [Alpha Phi Omega Fraternity], and I never got--almost joined social fraternity, but I never did.  They had--at the time I went--again, Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan] was predominantly white; there was a small number of African Americans there, and I think it was while I was there, they started a second black fraternity, and they had one already underway.  As a matter of fact, there was one black fraternity that was just local; it was--it wasn't affiliated with the national, with the Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and while I was there, they started up--I believe it was an Alpha chapter.  But I never joined any social fraternity; I looked at them, thought about it, but it just wasn't my thing.  And I got involved in student government and mostly dealing with the resident halls.  I got on the--I guess we called it the resident hall association, and I ran for that, and subsequently got elected as president of the resident hall association and, and actually, that really paid off because what--my involvement in, in, in that association, and subsequently becoming an RA, allowed me, or caused me to get involved in--with administration, and there was an advisor to the resident hall association, a guy by the name of Jack Sible [ph.], and I got to know him quite well; he was, he was the, the faculty advisor, and he was actually very instrumental in me completing my college education, and it didn't happen at Ferris, it happened later on.  But I was in that activity and--again, my grades sort of suffered; I really never really hit it off too well, never really could get focused on the academic side of things.
Story_ID: 531793
Speaker 1: And during the summer--at the end of the first year, I came home during the summer, and I went to work at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan].  My dad [Harry Patterson, Sr.] worked at Ford, and back in those days if, if an employee on the factory--or if their kids were in college, when they came home during the summer, they got a job right away 'cause I can remember coming home my first summer, and the very next day--my dad was working an afternoon shift, and he says, "Come on, I'll take you in."  And he--I drove in with him, and he dropped me off at the personnel office.  I can't remember how I was gonna get back home; I think I was taking the bus, or something, 'cause he was going to work.  And I went in, took the test, they sent me over for a physical, and they found a job for me and took me over, introduced me to the foreman, and I started work that day on the afternoon shift.  And the next summer--that happened three summers in a row.  And so I was making union wages for three summers, which helped me to save up a lot of money in order to--work--stay in college.  As a matter of fact, as I think about that--because I, I worked there three summers, and I only went to college two and a-half years the first time, so I had to have worked at Ford my very first summer before I went off to Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], and then the first summer in the break, and then the next summer afterwards.
Story_ID: 531794
Speaker 1: Now this was the early 1960s, and Civil Rights Movement was, was in full swing.  Do you remember whether you were involved as a student in any civil rights?
Speaker 2: No, and that wouldn't have happened at Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan].  There weren't enough blacks, minorities around, and Ferris was run pretty tightly.  And I can remember the dean of the students, Donald Rankin; Dean Rankin was the dean of students--gray haired guy.  And, and if there was any type of student demonstration or ruckus, the dean was out there, and if he got your ID card, you're gone the next day; you pack your bags and you're gone; if, if you were caught in town and got in trouble, you were gone; if you're caught drinking in the dorm, you're gone (laughter), and so, they never messed around.  And there were, you know, little demonstrations, you know--snowball fights and stuff like that, but no really major demonstrations.  None of that went on then.
Speaker 1: What about at home during the summer months?
Speaker 2: No, when I came home during the summer, I worked, and when I was working at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], most of the time was on the afternoon shift or, or--I think it wasn't 'til the last third summer that I ended up on a day shift, but mostly it was afternoon shift, and so I was going to work, and I was working eight, ten hour days, six days a week, and didn't have time.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fair enough, but did you have any thoughts about all that was going on during the '60s [1960s]?  You know, you have Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech, Kennedy is killed, Martin Luther King dies in '68 [1968].  Do you have any thoughts about, about that era at all?
Speaker 2: No, it--and, and it's--I can remember the events when they happened--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but I also remember not getting caught up in the emotion and in the crowd of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I'm--not necessarily know what I can attribute that to.
Story_ID: 531795
Speaker 1: I notice that--I went into the [U.S.] military and it would've been nineteen sixty--let's see, in '66 [1966] is when I left Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], and my last job was, was working at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] in---let's see, '67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969]; in, in--see, the latter part of '66 [1966], and so--and my draft status changed, and so I went down to enlist and, and then I subsequently went off in the military in the beginning of '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: In '67 [1967]?  Okay.
Speaker 1: And again--and I think the, the significant--two things happened that affected my life later on, and that is, one is when I--going back to Ferris--I, I actually flunked out of Ferris State College; I have to admit that.  I got called into the dean's office and he told--my grades were so low he says, "I'm gonna have to let you go, but," he says, "you're well liked."  As a matter of fact, when I was there and they did a dedication of a new resident hall, without me knowing it, they brought my mother [Myra Howard Patterson] up for the dedication of the hall, and it was a big--really big occasion for her.  But he says, "You're too well liked; everybody likes you--the faculty, everybody."  And he says, "If you would drop out all your activities--," and I also played football one year at Ferris.  He says, "I'll--we'll let you stay."  And I thought about it and I says, "No, I'm just not ready, not ready to study."  And so Jack Sible [ph.], who was the counselor, he says, "Stay in touch."  He says, "Whatever you do, when you're ready to go back to school," he says, "give me a call."
Story_ID: 531796
Speaker 1: And so I left Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], went back, got a job--Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan], and was working on the assembly line; I was working on the Mustang Cougar [sic. Mercury Cougar], final assembly line, putting parts on cars.  And I went down to the recruiter's office and figured I might as well go ahead and enlist rather than waiting for them to draft me.  And it was the recruiter that helped me out, and the recruiter saw that I had two and a-half years of college, and he says, "Oh, you're a college boy, huh?"  He says, he says, "I got the perfect--."  Well actually--let me back up here a little bit.  Actually, I tried to enlist in the, in the naval air program as a naval aviator, 'cause they had a two--you had two years of college, you could be eligible to enlist, and I went over to the, to the [U.S.] Navy recruiter and he said, "My quota's filled for the month--gotta come back next month."  But he says, "I got openings in the Marine air corps [U.S. Marine Corps Aviation]."  And I told him, I says, "No, I talked to some buddies who came outta the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]."  I say, "Marines ain't gonna get ahold of me; I'll never see a plane," so I said, "forget that."  And, and so then I went over to talk to the [U.S.] Army person about flying helicopters 'cause all you needed was two years of college and you could be an Army helicopter pilot.  And I took the test, passed all the tests--written tests, and then he says, "You gotta pass a flight physical."  And I said, "Okay," and he says, "There's two ways we can do this."  He says, "You can enlist now, and when you get your basic training, they'll give you a flight physical there, or you can wait, and I'll send you--you're gonna take it now, but" he says, "if you take it now, you have to go up to Selfridge Air Force Base [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan], which is what they call SAC base, a Strategic Air Command base.  And he says, "[U.S.] Air Force physicals are a lot different than the Army physical," and that's the reason I didn't leave right away; I was sort of enlisted in the latter part of '66 [1966], but I didn't leave until '67 [1967], and I was waiting for all these tests and everything, and I says, "Well, I'm not into trusting, you know; I want a guarantee before I go in."  And so he said, "Okay."  And so I went, took this test; they failed me miserably--physically unfit to fly.  And so I went back to see the recruiter, and he says, he says, "I got just the thing for you."  He says, "I'll take care of it."  And he came out with this MOS, called a military occupational specialty, and he says--it's called a counterintelligence special agent.  He says, "You go in, you get to wear a suit, you don't have to cut all your hair off."  He says, "It's perfect just for you, and it's one of only two what they call a controlled MOS, which means once you enlist in that, they cannot change your specialty; you're locked in."  He says, "That one and the other one is a criminal investigator."  He says, "Any other specialty besides those two, they could transfer you out, make you an infantryman, whatever."  And I says, "That sounds good; I'll sign up for that."  So, signed up for that and off I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Story_ID: 531797
Speaker 1: But, from that point on, and actually even before that, I sta- I started in leadership positions, and that started actually all the way back to high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan].  It started when my driver ed [driver's education] teacher asked me to be a students' assistant, and to a degree, that's sort of a leadership position, and then when I went off to Ferris State College [Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], being an RA [resident assistant] on the floor, was another leadership position, and being president of the resident hall association was another leadership position, and I became an officer in the fraternity [Alpha Phi Omega Fraternity] that I was in.  And then, they--the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] that I did in high school paid off because when I was reported with everybody down in, in Detroit [Michigan] in one of the few times that I got on a train in the United States (laughter), it was--we were there and all lined up and the, the person from the [U.S.] Army says, "Is there anybody here with any ROTC training?"  And I raised my hand, and he says, "Good."  He says, "You're in charge of this group," and he gave me the whole stack of folders of everybody.  And it was about thirty of us or so, and we all got on the train and took the train down to Fort Knox, Kentucky and got off at--the train and went into the receiving station at Fort Knox, Kentucky and, and then were assigned to our drill sergeant and asked again, "Anybody got any ROTC training?"  Raised my hand, he says, "You're in charge, you're a platoon guide," and--selected as a platoon guide and, and just--it's been one leadership position after another. All the way.
Story_ID: 531798
Speaker 1: Well, tell me, what was your job as counterintelligence?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the easiest way to explain it is the counterintelligence agents, those are the people who investigate anybody that requires a security clearance in the [U.S.] military, and they also--if there's any compromise of classified defense information, they do that investigation.  And so it's--our closest counterpart really becomes the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], on the civilian side.  And so it gets in a document--security physical security; later on, we got into computer security, and you get some physical security around installations and, and mostly that.
Story_ID: 531799
Speaker 1: I was gonna back up a little bit.  And I guess going back to my basic training time period is, I had a very unusual experience going through basic training at Fort Knox [Kentucky], is the unit that I was assigned to.  At the time, I didn't know this until later, is the fact--first off, is we didn't have a drill sergeant; there was a critical shortage of drill sergeants when I went in.  They were all doing tours of Vietnam, and so for over half my basic training, my platoon--there was four platoons in the company--did not have a drill sergeant, and I was the platoon guide, the lead person.  And we went through three temporary drill sergeants.  The first one we started out with, he was gone after a week; then another one came in for a couple weeks, he was gone, and then we ended up with a third one and, and I distinctly remember the third one 'cause he was, he was an African American and he was short and, and I actually got demoted from a platoon guide down to a squad leader, and the, the sergeant came up to me and he's telling me, he says, "Don't take it personal."  He says, "The problem is," he says, "is you're showing off too much and you're making the regular army drill sergeant look bad, and so they had to kick you down one, out of this position."  And it was--that was interesting.  And, and he told me that.  But we ended up in a show company, what they call a show company, at Fort Knox, and that means if you got any congressional dignitaries came through, they came through and showed off our company, and that meant we were in their barracks.  Platoon guides and the squad leaders all had private rooms that we shared; everybody else was in a bay.  We had--if--to eat, we didn't have to leave the building if the weather was bad; we stayed inside, so it was an entirely different experience.
Story_ID: 531800
Speaker 1: You were talking about while you were in the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let me back up a little bit in terms of--and then when I'm thinking about this and going back to my summers in Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] is--probably the one thing that kept me in college long as it did was going to work at Ford Motor Company working--one summer I spent at the specialty foundry, and one summer at the frame plant, hanging up car frames, and the third summer was on the final assembly line. And it was working in that environment I really had an appreciation for what my father [Harry Patterson, Sr.] went through.  My father passed away in--on Christmas morning in--while I was in college at Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], and I was home over Christmas holidays and he had just retired; finally got enough years in to retire, but his health had deteriorated to such a point that he, he never really got to enjoy retirement.  And, and, you know, some people think this is strange--I, I tell this story often; it's probably--the one thing that, that bothers me to this day is, at my father's funeral, is I never got to carry his casket and, and I can remember is--I wanted to do it and I told my uncle, one a my uncles, and he says, "No, no--can't have that."  And I went to complain to my mother [Myra Howard Patterson] and my mother says, "Just don't stir up the pot right now."  And so I just was the--complied with the request and went along with it.  And when I'm with my brothers [Harry Patterson, Jr. and Michael Patterson] and sisters [sic. sister, Laverne Patterson] now, and we are reminiscing or talking back, I always bring that up; it's just something, and I think it, it stems out that certain amount of dignity that certain people felt that was necessary in terms of things you should do or shouldn't do and, and, and I tend to rebel against that today, and there are no set rules to what you can or can't do, you know.  You do what you think feels right, and there was no reason in the world why I shouldn't have been able to do it.  Now, it's no big deal, you'll see it all the time; you'll see a, a kid carrying the casket of, of their parents, but my dignified uncles didn't allow that back then.
Story_ID: 531801
Speaker 1: But anyway, I'm getting sidetracked a little bit here. Working at the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] is--when I was--my last job there, they offered me a, a, a foremanship to go into foreman training, and I said, "There's no way."  I says, "This is not the life that I wanna live, coming here and working this plant."  I can recall African American supervisors coming to work with a white shirt and a tie, and by the end of that, that shift, the tie would be broken loose, pulled down, big grease spots across their white shirt.  I remember one day I left and the, the foreman's sleeve was ripped, hanging off his, off his shoulder; I mean all for what?  You know--to put parts on a car so--to get a car off the end of an assembly line? That's not what life is about for me; I really wanted more, and so that gave me the incentive to, to do better, do something more important.  And, and I can remember when I was putting car parts on a car and I almost caused a problem for the other workers because I was putting them on too fast.  As a matter of fact, I was reading a pocket book while I was working on the assembly line; I could speed up and put all the parts on 'til I bumped up against the next guy, and then I'd sit down and read this pocket book until it got all the way down, and I'd turn down the corner of the page, stick it in my pocket, and put parts on.  And they put a time study person on me and then they--the--one of the senior workers on line he says, "Man," he says, "you gonna cause a problem here."  And, and I didn't believe him.  I was a young guy, I didn't know; I was showing off a little bit.  And lo and behold, they speed up the line--I couldn't believe it; speed up the line and this senior worker came up to me, he says, he says, "You know," he say, "you must've been the sixth guy that they brought in here and put on here 'cause," he says, "they haven't been able to get anybody to put those parts on, and here you are--not only can you put them on, but you putting them on with such speed that they can't believe it, and so what they're doing, they speeding up the line."  So I quit; I quit putting--I slowed down, and then I--there wasn't enough time, so I'd just stick the parts in the car--I'd throw them in the car.  I wouldn't put the screws in, I was putting the side view mirrors on, I had to put the screws in and some pieces on the dashboard, and the foreman would come up.  He says, "You gotta put those parts on."  I says, "I ain't putting those parts on."  And I gave him the whole song and dance, I says, "You guys just speeded us up," and I said, "Hey, look, I'm leaving here; I'm going in the [U.S.] Army in three weeks, then what are you gonna do?"  He said, "Well, that's--that doesn't matter; you need to--."  I said, "I ain't putting them on."  And then, all of a sudden, the superintendent came down, then the general foreman came down, and I says, "I'll tell you what," I says, "I'll tell you where you can stick this line, but I ain't doing it."  And then they backed down--slowed the line back down.  And I finished off my three weeks, said goodbye to Ford Motor Company, and haven't been back since (laughter).
Story_ID: 531802
Speaker 1: In the [U.S.] military--another--you would never believe this.  The--when I was in basic training is where I had the opportunity to, to shoot--play my first game of golf, while going through basic training--almost unheard of.  They gave us a pass, a day pass, and at Fort Knox, Kentucky there's a big driving range there, and so went over and played golf one day (laughter), and so it wasn't too hard of a life.  But while I was going through basic training, and I think it's--certain events happened along the way that really could have really changed my entire life, and I don't know why it didn't happen.  I got called out of my unit at basic training, they says that, "We notice that you took these tests for helicopter pilot," and they said, "You scored pretty high, and we wanted to know if you're still interested."  I says, "Well, yeah, but I couldn't pass the physical."  And they says, "That wasn't an [U.S.] Army physical; we're gonna give you another physical."  So I took another physical and I passed it, and then I said, "Okay, I'll go."  And then they says, "Well, we don't have a training date yet, so you'll have to stay back here at Fort Knox, Kentucky and wait 'til we get the next class, and you're gonna have to sign this paperwork that's gonna waive your specialty that you enlisted for."  And I says, "I'm not going do that."  I says, "I'll do it when you give me a start date on my class."  He said, "Well, we can't do that."  I says, "Well, I'm not gonna sign it."  And so--I would've gone off in a entirely different direction, so I went on.
Story_ID: 531803
Speaker 1: And then I left Fort Knox, Kentucky and went on to Baltimore [Maryland] where the intelligence school [U.S. Army Intelligence School] was, and spent about--I guess then it would have been somewhere between sixteen and twenty-one weeks in intelligence school, and probably, I would say, if not probably some of the best training that I've had in my entire career in terms of, of report writing.  They teach you all--they start right from scratch and teach you the basics--how to type, typing class, report writing, proper grammar, sentence structure.  You had to be able to type a report with no strikeovers--no type-overs, no white out, none of that.  If it wasn't perfect, you start over and do it, and they got classrooms set up where you could stay there all night typing reports in order to get it right.  Interviewing, interview, interrogation--training where they brought in paid actors--professional actors, where you had to interview them and ask the right questions in order to get the right responses, one way glasses so that while you're doing that, the class could observe, and all of the different types of training that was necessary in order to do that training.  And then I finished that training and then got selected to go to language school, and I went off to Texas--El Paso, Texas, for a whole year, to study Vietnamese, and spent forty-six weeks, six hours a day, with Vietnamese instructors learning now to read, write, and speak Vietnamese.
Story_ID: 531804
Speaker 1: And then I got a thirty day leave before I went to Vietnam, and during that thirty day leave, along the way I had stayed in contact with Jack Sible [ph.] back at Ferris [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan].  And I can't remember how we communicated, but I do remember him saying, "While you're home on leave--."  Somehow, he found out I was gonna be home on leave.  He says, "While you're home on leave," he says, "I have since left Ferris," and he was now in admissions at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan]."  And he says, "If you're still thinking about going to school, stop by and see me."  And so while I was on leave, I went up to East Lansing [Michigan], stopped in, and he says, "Well, what are you gonna do when you get out?"  And I says, "I don't know."  I says, "By the time I get out, my tour will be up."  And he says, "Why don't you go back to school?"  And I says, "Well, I'd probably like to do that," I said, "but I'm not gonna get into school."  He said, "Well, you never know."  He says, "We look at prior military differently; there's something about being mature and ready," and he says, "I want you to go over to the student center, take the entrance exam."  And so he called up, and I went over there; I left his office, went over, took the test, came back to him, and he says, "When would you get back?"  And I says, "I'll get back in December of '69 [1969]," and he says, "You can start school here in January of '70 [1970], if you want."  And I said, "Well, I just took the test."  He said, "Don't worry, you passed the test."  And, and I says, "Okay."  He said, "January, '70 [1970] I'll be looking for you."
Story_ID: 531805
Speaker 1: And so I left and went to Vietnam December 12th of 1969--went over to Vietnam, and by that time I'd been promoted twice; I went over as a--there's another whole interesting career in Vietnam; I went over there as a, as a corporal--E-4; promoted twice, from E-4 to E-5 to E-6, but I never wore the rank for ten months.  While I was in the country, I wore the rank of a first lieutenant, and I worked in covert operations and did my tour there, and I worked in intelligence during the whole time there.  And I got to work with the state department [U.S. Department of State], knew states people, Vietnamese officials, worked on a very highly classified program--it's been declassified today. And saw a whole different side of the war [Vietnam War] that I don't think--has never been portrayed, or anybody could ever describe.  I went over there as a--I spent--I was assigned to the 1st Infantry Division, but spent most of my time working with the Military Advisory Command [sic. U.S. Military Assistance Command].  In my first two months, I was working at what they would call--I'm trying to avoid military terminology here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Why (laughter)?
Speaker 1: I, I was assigned with a counterintelligence team down there; they put a team--for each--I was with the 1st Infantry Division and a division has four brigades, and at each brigade they put a counterintelligence team, and so I was assigned with this one little team and there was three of us at this team, and I was there for two months, and while with the team, I was also--was pulled out and selected to be on the division inspector general team--division IG team, going around inspecting units while in combat, on proper classified documents, markings, and all of that.
Story_ID: 531806
Speaker 1: And then, there was a real (clears throat) there was a program underway in Vietnam called the, the Phoenix Program, which was a classified program then, and what it was designed to do was to identify the Vietcong and what they call was the Vietcong infrastructure, and to teach the Vietnamese, the South Vietnamese, on how to identify them and to help eliminate, or capture them.  And it was all part of a big intelligence side to it, and there was a critical shortage of intelligent [sic. intelligence] officers; they just didn't have enough.  And the training that a counterintelligence officer goes through is identical--almost identical to what an enlisted intelligence person would go through, with a very minor change.  And so because of that, you can almost interchange the two, and so I got called and said, "We need somebody to work on this special program, and do you wanna do it?"  And I said, "Sure."  And so I left the 1st Division [1st Infantry Division] and went down to the City of Bien Hoa [Vietnam] which is a suburb of Vietnam--a suburb of Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam], and I worked with their advisory team and worked with CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] agency personnel, and worked as a, as an advisor in training for the next, about nine months, or eight months, on that, and lived in a French villa--converted French villa, and with maid service and our own cooks, and I'd go to bed at night and take my clothes off and drop on the floor, and when I wake up in the morning, the--had a new set that was already washed, cleaned, and hanging on a hanger with the sleeves rolled up, and my boots shined and everything and, and the job was eight to five, Monday through Friday, and half day on Saturday, and right in the middle of a combat environment.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and the other thing that was unique about it is I also worked in an office building with secretaries, and I got sort of bored one time and had a chance to go on an operation, but I actually would leave that environment on a Friday, drive down to a small village, go on a--and spend the night there, and Saturday morning get up and go on what we call a sweep operation with a Vietnamese unit, and the only Americans be two or three, and it's all Vietnamese, and we go on this big sweep operation, walking through water and rice paddies up to your waist, and come back at the--toward the end of the day, and we'd jump in our jeep and we'd drive back to the city and I get in, take a shower and change clothes, put on fresh clean clothes, jump back in the jeep, drive into the City of Saigon, and be at a discotheque that night, and a rice paddy in your waist at noon, and partying at a disco by that night, and it, it had to be a strange environment for that to go on.
Story_ID: 531807
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you learned to speak Vietnamese very well.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the way the [U.S.] military operates they, they, they lessened it because when I got over there, they gave me an interpreter, and my interpreter was Vietnamese, and he didn't wanna speak Vietnamese, he wanted to learn English, and so I didn't get to use it as much as I really wanted to.  And then my last three months, my boss, who was up at division headquarters, called me up and says, he says, "I'm really--."  He says, "I hate to do this to you," and he says, "I won't do it if you tell me you don't wanna do it, but--," he says--he was located at the--what they call the division tactical operation center where you're working with--there's a two star generals there and, and, and in the intelligence section, there is usually him and he has a, a junior captain working underneath him, and a couple other people, and he says, "We're outta people.  I don't have any more officers up here," and he says, "I need you to help me; come back up and help me."  And he says, "I know you got a good deal down there" (laughter), "and I hate to pull you back," he says, "but I won't do it if you don't wanna come."  And I says, "Captain, I'll come, no problem."  And the guy's name was Captain Miles Cortez, and we have communicated to this day, and he actually took my daughter [Laurel Patterson] in for the summer while she was a student at Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado], 'cause he's an attorney in Denver [Colorado], and we have maintained the kind of relationship from that time way back in '69 [1969] to today.  And I came back up, went up to division headquarters, and we finished out three months there and--dodging incoming rounds underneath the table.  They had those old, metal, gray government tables, and when the rounds start coming in, you dive underneath the table until there was a break, and then you make a mad dash for the bunker until--and that was a, a daily routine you go through.  And so I managed to go through twelve months of Vietnam, stayed intact, never get shot at, and did some crazy, stupid things, and went on operations I didn't have to go on, and went up and down roads I didn't have to go on, and saw how the state department [U.S. Department of State] operates and how (unclear) operates and, and saw how political and how much the civilian side state department influenced the war [Vietnam War], compared to the military side.
Story_ID: 531808
Speaker 1: And at the end of my tour, I actually--and that whole time, I got about three decorations; promoted twice, as I told you, and right when I was finishing up, they offered me a--they wanted to know if I would put in for a direct commission to stay in, and I told them, "No, thank you," (laughter), and I came back in December--right around December 12th, December 13th in 1969, and started school at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in January of '70 [1970], and the two guys that were in the very first team, the counterintelligence team that I was assigned to in Vietnam, came back and were assigned to the civilian field office in Lansing, Michigan, and it's just, it's just amazing how people were just--follow each other around.  But--and I will tell you this, that the one thing that--a lot of the things have changed in [U.S.] Army intelligence is they don't do near as much as what they used to do in terms of--they used to be more--presence; they had a greater presence in U.S. cities that they no longer do because of a number of incidents that came up, and accusations about spying on different people, and so--because I can recall while I was going through the intelligence school in Baltimore [U.S. Army Intelligence School, Baltimore, Maryland], in some of my training, I actually was able to witness a lot of the demonstrations that were going on in Detroit [Michigan] during the big riots in Detroit, and where a lot of the--because they had intelligence--[U.S.] military intelligence and field officers scattered all over the United States, and they weren't really there to spy on anybody, but they were there to--they would do all these background checks on people going into the military, and if a person--in order to do a background check on somebody in the military, you had to go back to their home.  And so when I said that we check your background for security clearance before you got a top secret security clearance, we'd go back and verify, you know, schools you went to, we talk to your teachers, we talk to your neighbors, friends--it's no difference in you going for a job in the federal government where the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] goes around and do it today, and I used to tell kids when I interview them, I says, "I'm going find out more about you than you ever--that you've forgotten." And, and so that--their presence, and particularly what went on in the early '70s [1970s] when you had so many student demonstrations going on and you had military intelligence agents on these college campuses keeping tabs of what's happening, and that raised some concerns for a number of people, and so they pulled them outta the cities, put them back on a post, and left that up for the FBI to handle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're still being watched, it's just somebody else (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Somebody else, yeah, right.
Story_ID: 531809
Speaker 1: So, you go to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in 1970.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you graduate from Michigan State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started going to school there in January, '70 [1970], ran out of money real quick, and a, a local FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent actually helped me get my job in the university police department.  He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In where?
Speaker 2: The Michigan State University Police Department on their campus.  He found out about my background because he communicated with the two guys that I knew that came back from Vietnam who were still in intelligence working in the field office in Lansing [Michigan], and they coordinate very closely with the FBI, and he found out about me 'cause he actually tried to recruit me to come in the FBI and I says, "I don't wanna go in the FBI." Their image wasn't that great back then.  And so there was a black sergeant working for university police department, and word got to me that they were recruiting and--with my background, that I ought to apply; and so I applied and was hired, and I went to work on the university police department, which was good timing 'cause I ran outta money even though I was getting the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was gonna ask you about the G.I. Bill.  So, it didn't pay for everything you needed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was going to school there, and working on the police department at the same time, and did that for the next six years; got my undergraduate degree in public administration.
Speaker 1: You had a B.A. in public administration?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) And continued on and--to get my master's degree in public administration.  And Jack Sible [ph.] got me in the university, and I again got involved in activities; I was in--the public administration program is with, with, within the political science department, and I can't remember the name of the organization, but I joined an organization of political science--that was tied to political science, and somehow ended up on a committee, as a student representative on a committee, to help select the next head of the public administration department to interview, and so I get to sit in on the interviews and ended up participating in the selection of the professor that came in that was head of the, of the administration, and so when I finished my undergraduate degree, I had to--they--put down some references, and so he became one of my references for my master's degree.  And my other reference for my master's degree happened to be the president of the university because while I was on the police department, Clifton Warden [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] was hired as president of the university, and he was the first African American black that is--and may be the only one that has been president of Michigan State University.  And while he was there, I was assigned as his driver off and on, so I got to know him, driving him places, and then when him and his wife [HistoryMaker Dolores D. Wharton] went on an extended trip to Europe, he had two kids [Clifton R. Wharton III and Bruce Wharton], and the university provides housing for the president, and they were both in school, high school age, and they needed somebody to watch the house; it ain't necessary to watch the kids, just watch the house, and so they asked for a volunteer in the police department and I volunteered to do that, and so I lived in the president's house for about two weeks during that time period.  And it wasn't bad living either; I was working the day shift at the time.  I still had to pull my police duties, and it was--I still had the cook, so I had all my meals prepared for me (laughter), and maid service while in the president's house, and looked after the two kids while I was there; and so I got to know him quite well and, and when I graduated, he handed my undergraduate degree, and I asked if I could use him as a reference, he said, "Sure," put him down for my--to get into my master's and got my master's degree there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And that was an experience of itself because during that time period, a lot was going on in the early '70s [1970s]; Vietnam [Vietnam War] was still going on, a lot of student demonstrations, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] was big on campus, there was an attempt to try and burn Demonstration Hall [East Lansing, Michigan] where ROTC was located then, and we chased students, arrested students.  If it wasn't fighting with the students on the campus one year, it was demonstrations in the City of Lansing the next year and, and so police would go down to help the city do one thing, and back and forth.
Story_ID: 531810
Speaker 1: You're getting ready to--I think we were at the point where you were getting your master's [degree] from Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was almost ready, getting close to graduation--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and I had planned on career wise, going into higher education; that's what I wanted to do was work in higher education, and a friend of mine--I was also in a, in a [U.S.] military reserve unit; at the time I came back from Vietnam, I went in the [U.S.] Army Reserve, and it was a criminal investigation unit in Jackson, Michigan and a, and a friend of mine there said that there was an opening as a police chief in Albion, Michigan and I ought to apply for it, and I says, "I don't wanna be a police chief."  He said, "You should apply for it," and so, to make a long story short, he talked me into it.  And Albion is a small community, about four square miles, population twelve thousand.
Speaker 1: Spell the name of it.
Speaker 2: A-L-B-I-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most notably, if anybody knows about it, it's probably because Albion College [Albion, Michigan] is located there.  And so I applied for the job and--thinking that there's no way I--patrolman for six years, I'm not a sergeant, not a lieutenant, and I'm a, you know--but I went on ahead--they talked me into it and they said--the other element he had was they were looking for a, a, a, a minority as police chief.  And so as the process went along, I got a call from a friend of mine in Battle Creek [Michigan] who I had gotten to know while I was at Michigan State.  When I was at Michigan State, I used to work on what they call police community relation teams, and did a lot in the community, both on campus and in Lansing [Michigan], working on police community relations.  And the Battle Creek Police Department hired a civilian who was a retired colonel from the [U.S.] Army who was their police community relations person.  Back in those days, there was a need for police community relations because of all the issues going on between community and police.  And so he called me up and told me, he said, "I understand you're a candidate for the chief job," and I said, "Yeah, how do you know?"  And he says, "That's all right, don't worry about it."  He says, "I'm on the selection team."  And so, as we continued through the process, to make a long story short, what came down to three finalists, and I found this out after, after I was selected, he told me what had happened and, and basically he says, "When you got down to the three of you--."  He said, "The way you made it into the three is," he said, "we were making a short list of the finalists, and" he says, "I confronted the other members of the selection committee," he said, "because (unclear) it was all rigged."  He said, "There was a captain, and his lieutenant was one of the candidates," and he says, "that wasn't right."  And he says--so he confronted the guy and he said, "If your guy stays in then my guy stays in," so I was left in the pool.  And he said this whole thing about hiring a minority was just a ruse; they just wanted to make it look good. He said, "That's why they left you in the first place, 'cause they knew you wouldn't be selected 'cause you didn't have the supervisory."  He says, "But I highlighted all of your military training and," and he said, "that made you equally or more qualified than the other ones they were looking at."  And so we went in--the three of us went in; the third one was somebody from New York, and he dropped out after they shortlisted the three, and then the city manager picked the other lieutenant from the other department, and they gave him everything he wanted except when they went up to the city council to approve it, he had asked for a contract, and the city council said, "We'll give you everything but we're not giving you a contract."  And so he said, "Forget it, I don't want it," and so I got the job by default (laughter).  And so I went from patrolman at Michigan State University overnight, to a police chief in Albion, Michigan.  And I started out there, and that's about twelve thousand--population is twelve thousand, and they had a host of issues; they had a railroad track that went down the middle of town, they had a history of blacks being on one side of the tracks and whites on the other side of the tracks, the state had a welfare office in town, there was one high school; it had all of the demographics you would want--it had a sizeable Hispanic population, black populations, white; it went from very poor--as poor as you can get, to as rich as you can get with private street, big houses, and the police department, the previous chief had been fired--a number of incidents.  The--there was a state civil rights investigation going on, there was a couple of lawsuits against officer abuse that was underway, and it was an old community that went all the way back to the Roaring '20s [1920s] and still had red bricks in the middle of main street, so that's how I started out my career in--as a police chief, and was there for three years.  And it'd make another four hours just talking about what had went on there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 531811
Speaker 1: And after that I was there [Albion, Michigan] for three years, and then I took a chief's job in Windsor, Connecticut.  I moved from there to Windsor, and Windsor, Connecticut is a suburb of Hartford [Connecticut], and the city--the town manager who hired me was--pretty innovative type of a guy, and very progressive and, and I think there's something about my background training that impressed him, and he--I think he had made a commitment he really wanted to bring a minority in as well, and--because he had--another interesting thing, he had more women on, on that police department than any other department in the state, and based on its size--because they had about forty-six policemen, and so I took that job and I was there for six years and--I should slow down a little bit (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let you ask some questions.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, go ahead, you're fine.
Story_ID: 531812
Speaker 1: One thing I will mention is the fact that the--besides working, I started becoming involved in more and more activities along the way, and one of the things I started back in Albion [Michigan] was I got involved in community theater; it's a little side activity, and I can't remember--somebody talked me into doing it and I was approached, and it really paid off because when I did it, it really bridged a, a strong gap with the local community 'cause it involved teachers and kids, and when you involve kids, you involve parents.  And one thing I found that if, if you take care of people's kids, then they will like you.  And so my wife [Deborah A. Patterson] got involved as well, and they had an old vaudeville theater downtown that was fixed up, and that we did some of the productions in, and so that was one of the big side activities I started to get involved in.  And then in Connecticut--in, in Albion, the big issue was crime; they had serious crime problems, they had serious community relations problems, so the emphasis was really on fighting crime and trying to bridge the relationship between the city, the police department, and the community, and I spent time visiting churches and--on Sunday morning, and going around in people's homes and trying to create a relationship there.  Windsor [Connecticut]--just the opposite, but Windsor was pure middle--middle income, very little crime--very little serious crime; mostly, the crime was residential burglaries and stuff, but nothing at the magnitude that was going on in Albion; Albion, we had the homicides and all sorts of stuff.  And so it be--Windsor was more of a management challenge; Albion was a crime fighting and community building issue.  And, and at Windsor, really spent more time in terms of management type--trying to bring the police department along, and inspired them to better commit themselves to the community.  And I continue on with my community theater activities and enjoy doing that.  And another thing I started doing on the side is I started telling--I forgot about this until I was digging through some material and ran across it is--is telling Halloween stories on Halloween nights to local kids (laughter), and used to do that in the park up near the cemetery (laughter).
Story_ID: 531813
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your wife.  When did you get married?
Speaker 2: Oh, I skipped that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 2: I got married at--I did three things all within a short period of time of each other; I took the job as police chief, got married, and moved, all at the same time (laughter).  And so that was around March of--back in March of--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me how you met your wife, and--
Speaker 2: We met when I was working at the university police department [Michigan State University Police Department], and actually it was a blind date.  It was another policeman on the department, and his parents owned the insurance company and my wife Deborah [Deborah A. Patterson] was working at that insurance company, and he set us up on a blind date.  We dated and lo and behold, ended up getting married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I found out she grew up in Detroit [Michigan], but we never knew each other, and her house was probably within a few miles from my house; she was on the North End [Detroit, Michigan], too.
Story_ID: 531814
Speaker 1: So, now you talked about--you mentioned church, but you really didn't talk about it.  What is your involvement in the church?  What church?
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the Episcopal church and belong to St. Dunstan's Episcopal Church here in Houston [Texas].  And actually, before that, I grew up in the Baptist church in my younger days--belong to the Second Baptist Church [Second Baptist Church of Detroit] in Downtown Detroit [Michigan] which is actually, if I'm not mistaken, was the oldest black Baptist church--no, in Detroit; it might've been in the state, and it goes way back, and I think it goes all the way back; it was involved in the days in bringing blacks up during the--in the--that Civil War era when blacks were trying to escape out of the South, and the Second Baptist Church had a role in that, that whole process; and I'm not knowledgeable enough to articulate exactly, but I do know that much.  But I made the transition; I think it was probably with all the moving, moving from one location to the other and, and then when I went from Windsor [Connecticut] to--got down to Texas is when--joined the Episcopal church--made the move from, out from Windsor, Connecticut to Beaumont, Texas.
Story_ID: 531815
Speaker 1: So, when do you leave Windsor [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: I was at Windsor--let's see now.  I was at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] from '70 [1970] to '76 [1976], and from '76 [1976] to '79 [1979] was in Albion [Michigan], and then from '79 [1979] to '86 [1986] was in Windsor, and went to Beaumont, Texas in '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-nine [1989], and actually, during that time period when I was in Windsor is--I got involved in a lot more activities; got very much involved in state association.  Little bit of that started in, in Michigan as well--involved in the, the professional association of police chiefs; then, it was called the Michigan Association of Chiefs of Police, and got involved there--mostly dealing with juvenile issues.  And then in Connecticut, got involved on the legislative side--on the legislative committee, and end up chairing the legislative committee for a number of years while in Connecticut, and also--well, subsequently, got on the board of the chiefs association [Connecticut Police Chiefs Association] there.
Story_ID: 531816
Speaker 1: You moved to Texas in 1986, and what job do you take there?
Speaker 2: Well, prior to that move was I, I wanted to get out of law enforcement, and--but I really liked public administration, and I started looking around and a, a headhunter ended up trying to recruit me for a police chief job in Bellevue, Washington, and in going through that process with him, he really found out that I really did not want to be a police chief anymore, and that same consultant ended up helping the City of Beaumont [Texas] select a city manager, and he recommended me to him as the assistant city manager, 'cause at the time, Beaumont had gone through a big financial loss; they had gotten caught up in a big savings and loan scandal and had lost over $20 million, and as a result of that, there was a lot of turnover at city hall, so to speak.  And they hired a new city manager and I was hired in as assistant city manager.  And coming to the South actually, that was my big first trip down; I had been down to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Hattie Howard] in Florida, but not really living.  Now, some people may not consider Texas as south, but Beaumont is in the south; even if Houston [Texas] isn't, Beaumont is.  And matter of fact, Beaumont is a lot--almost like Louisiana; it's a lot of characteristics even from working in the City of Beaumont.  We had a lot of city employees that still could--that couldn't--their English was very poor; they couldn't read and write, they spoke in that French dialect that you get in Louisiana, better than they could do in English.  But I got hired as assistant city manager, and almost got dragged back into police work.  I was there for about a month, and the police chiefs was having problems in the local community, and he--my boss sent me over to investigate a citizen complaint against the police department, and as a result of that investigation, the police chief resigned and he left, and then the city manager stuck me over in the police department as the interim chief.  I told him I would absolutely, unequivocally would not take it, and I had to keep both my title as assistant city manager and interim police chief, otherwise I wasn't gonna do it.  And so he agreed, and I went over there for several months and--which was an interesting, interesting experience in and of itself because, I think, at the time, I also had not seen other than when I--I have to qualify this.  I saw what shotgun houses looked like when I went down to Florida, outside of Pensacola [Florida].  But I really thought they were gone until I got down to Texas and, and I couldn't--not only was I surprised to still see them, but I was surprised to see as many of them, and I was also surprised to see people living in them. And Beaumont really had some carry over still; a lot of things that went on in the days of--early days of the South and, and I remember putting my foot in my mouth; I was still young and cocky and, and the fact that--no one--the media didn't play up a whole lot about me being--coming in as assistant city manager, and being black, but when the city manager appointed me as the interim police chief, I think everybody went crazy, and the media caught me walking back across the street one day and they says, "Well, what do you think of Beaumont now that you've been here?"  And I think I'd been there maybe two, three months, and I said, "Well," I said, "when I think about Beaumont, I think about the movement--the Civil Rights Movement, as it went through the South, and as things were changing.  But when it got to the city limits of Beaumont, it sort of went around, and kept going."  And so that was the big story in the, in the media the next day (laughter).  So that didn't go over too well (laughter).   And just to give you an idea, when I went over to the police department, they still had spittoons in the building and, and it's--needless to say, I had them removed while I was there (laughter).  But it was a, a very interesting experience; I was there for three months, and my boss, the city manager, ended up moving to Houston.
Speaker 1: Three months, or three years? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three years, three years.  He went to Houston as the finance director of the City of Houston, and after about six months, he called me up and asked me if I would come on, go over to Houston as his deputy in the finance department, and so that's what got me from Beaumont to Houston--
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and I've been there ever since.
Story_ID: 531817
Speaker 1: In Beaumont [Texas], you worked with the city's affirmative action, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I was the affirmative action's officer in the city while I was in, in Beaumont.  When I had the title as the assistant city manager there, I was over personnel, and I was also responsible for affirmative action, and there some other departments; a lot of support departments came under me--building maintenance, and that sort of thing.  And, while I was there, the--there're a lot of poor people in Beaumont, and it was a population of about 112,000, so it was a good sized community, and it wasn't too far from Louisiana.  As you come across Interstate 10, over from Louisiana, shortly you would hit Beaumont.  And when they had the big loss, they had to lay off a lot of people, and so a lot of people were laid off, and one of the big complaints when--as things started getting better, a lot of people got laid off weren't getting hired back, and all of a sudden--but new people were getting hired back.  And so there was a strong feeling that something wasn't right.  And what the manager did when he appointed me as the affirmative action officer, he also instituted a policy that basically said if you didn't hire back somebody off the laid off list, you couldn't hire them back without my approval--the affirmative action officer's approval.  And so I guess it was easier for the guy out of town to, to carry out the manager's wishes rather than being local.  And a friend of mine, who I hired as a risk manager, now he jokes with me, he says--I was known as the city manager's heavy (laughter).
Story_ID: 531818
Speaker 1: You move on to, to Houston [Texas], and what's your job in Houston?
Speaker 2: I came in as the deputy director of finance administration, and mostly that in--I did initially in Houston was, was on the revenue collection side, overseeing a lot of permitting--permits, and tax collection, and it, and it, it varies.  Houston is a very different city in being a strong mayor; it, it, it, it changes, depending on who the mayor is, in terms of where the emphasis is.  I always describe it as a city with eighteen renegade departments where they're very autonomous with each other, and so--and the, the, the city's HR [human resources] department is really--it's not a strong department, and so it's, it, it's very difficult; it's, it's a struggle dealing with the other departments.  And so the finance administration department really was the mayor's department.  The mayor has two departments that are really strong and attached to the mayor; one is the city attorney's office, the other one is--they call it the F and A department.  And so, when I first went there, Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire] was the mayor, and very strong mayor, and she used the F and A department to do more than just finance, and they say it's sort of like it's an F and A department with a big A--administration.  And so, at one time period we had--the deputies had oversight responsibility to certain operating departments, and I had about five or six operating departments that I had to deal with in addition to the, the collection duties I had.  But those oversight duties were only crisis related stuff, so it was like anything that reached the mayor's attention, and it was always in the negative, then one of his deputies was assigned to look into it and see what was going on.  And so it was, again, a very interesting experience.  And probably, out of all the jobs I've had, except for being police chief in Albion, Michigan, I'd say the job in, in Houston--my original job--was the most difficult one.  Windsor [Connecticut] was a management challenge--different--and Beaumont [Texas] had its challenges, but in terms of really being tough, it was Albion--being police chief in Albion, the first one, and working in, in his--under a strong mayor.
Story_ID: 531819
Speaker 1: So you changed positions.
Speaker 2: While I was there [Houston, Texas], there was--another duty that we picked up is the--is responsible for the pension plans.  The city has three pension plans, one for police, one for fire, one for the municipal employees.  And the finance director by charter is also the city treasurer 'cause they have an elected city comptroller and so--but they had--it was really--is a holdover from the old days; they still had the city treasurer there.  And so while I was there, the finance director really didn't have time to devote attention to the pension plans along with the other responsibilities, so their--the ordinance was amended to allow him to appoint one of the deputies as the city treasurer, and I was the first appointed city treasurer over the city's three pension plans.  And, and that's what caused me to get into pensions and, and that job I had to learn on my own, from the ground up, with no help.  It was just sort of like, you got it, your responsibility, you do it.  And I learned that from the [U.S.] military (laughter); when you got assigned it, you took it on, you didn't complain, you learned how to do it.
Speaker 1: And so which, which pension plans were you over?
Speaker 2: I was the treasurer of the municipal plan, the police plan, and the fire plan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after I was with the city for about six or seven years, the executive director of the fire plan, she retired or left--took another job, and then when they went out to do a search, they hired me away from the city to take over that position at the fire pension plan, and so I left the city at that time and took the job as the executive director of the Houston firefighters retirement fund [Houston Firefighters' Relief and Retirement Fund], and did that job for a little over eight years, and then left that job and was thinking about probably maybe retiring, until I got another phone call to consider the job I'm currently in now, which is the director of the Texas Association of Public Employee Retirement Systems, where we represent about eighty-two--eighty-one or eighty-two public retirement systems throughout Texas where we put on training workshops and conferences, and we lobby on their behalf.
Story_ID: 531820
Speaker 1: You wanna talk about Enron [Enron Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Enron.  I don't know why everybody wants to talk about Enron (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well did it--
Speaker 2: Because I'm from Texas?  (Laughter) And Houston [Texas] more specifically?  (Laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, it has them pension plans, too.
Speaker 2: One thing about--I did have a, a, a close encounter with Enron and that is, before Enron collapsed, there was an effort to try and get the three pensions to invest in Enron, and we got the usual calls and--from both elected officials and other people, saying, "You should invest in Enron."  And so we went and looked, and I can remember at the time I was the executive director of the, of the firefighters pension plan [Houston Firefighters' Relief and Retirement Fund], and I sent my chief investment officer over, and I went and sat in on one meeting with--actually, the meeting I was in was with Ken Lay's son [Mark Lay] who, doesn't bother me to say, was not impressed with, and when my chief investment officer (unclear), he went to a couple meetings involving all the key players, and I can remember him coming back to my office and he says, "Max [HistoryMaker Maxie L. Patterson]," he says, "I wanna tell you," he says, "that company is like a house of cards."  And he says, "There's a huge conflict of interest."  He said, "They pointed it out, they didn't care, they didn't think there was a problem but," he said, "that company is leveraged to the hilt."  Two phrases I remember; he said, house of cards, and he said, leveraged to the hilt.  And he says, "I can't tell you if it's gonna fall tomorrow, or is it gonna be a year from now, and it was in--but I do not think we ought to invest."  And we felt so strongly about it that we called one of our energy managers and told our energy managers, who's located in Boston [Massachusetts], that--, "We'd recommend you stay away from that firm."
Story_ID: 531821
Speaker 1: Decided not to, not to invest in Enron [Enron Corporation], so--
Speaker 2: And it was--I can't remember exactly now, thinking back; it was either two or three years later, is when the big crash occurred and, and we didn't invest, and we told the police pension fund--we talked to them, said--they agreed with us, they wouldn't invest, and we talked to the municipal retirement fund and they came to the same conclusions.  All three of the pension funds, independently and collectively, after no more than two interviews, determined that this was not a company to invest in.
Story_ID: 531822
Speaker 1: So, tell me a little bit more about what you do in your job here now as the executive director of the Texas Association [Texas Association of Public Employee Retirement Systems].
Speaker 2: I've been in this job now less than a year; I started in March of 2007. March, 2006 (laughter); time is flying (laughter)--and it's three primary areas we concentrate on is--one is education training, so we put on educational and training workshops and/or conference for public retirement systems, and we do that twice a year, and we move around the state to do that, and we also publish a, a monthly newsletter and a quarterly publication in terms of more education, and then the third component is we lobby and we--most of the lobbying takes place in Austin [Texas].  We track pension bills, pension legislation that affects the public pensions system wide; we don't lobby for individual cities or individual retirement systems; it's more for an issue that may affect all, or a number of pension plans.  We also track pension bills, pension legislation in Washington [D.C.] that's going on in the [U.S.] Capitol, and we track pension issues at the SEC, the [U.S.] Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as GASB, the Government Accounting Standards Board [sic. Governmental Accounting Standards Board], and as issues come out related to pensions, we communicate that to our members through our newsletter publications, or through training and workshop.
Story_ID: 531823
Speaker 1: Now, you have some other activities, and you were talking about the church and that you became involved with the Episcopalian church here in Texas, and we talked about your theater, but you also sing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: The singing part?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it started--my original singing started years ago, way back when I first went in the [U.S.] military, and it started when I was in El Paso [Texas] going to language school, 'cause I was there for a whole year when--and me and another person, we started going to the church on post and then we joined the choir, and that sort of started it, and been doing it ever since in, in here, in Texas; joined the choir in the church--I sing in the choir.  But more recently and not currently in a church choir, me and my wife [Deborah A. Patterson] both joined, a couple years ago, a singing group called the Texas Master Chorale, and it's about eighty to ninety, I would say semiprofessional singers; it's all volunteers--don't get paid.  We practice once a week, two to three hours each time, and we put on three concerts a year, and it's just a group of people that enjoy singing.  And probably my biggest challenge is gonna be coming up later on this year when we're gonna go on tour to Italy and--'cause right now it's--we're waiting to confirm up an invitation to, to do a Mass at St. Paul's in--or St Peter's [St. Peter's Basilica] in the--at the Vatican [Vatican City].
Speaker 1: Oh, that's exciting.  So you really have a good voice, huh?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I tend to be more critical of myself.
Story_ID: 531824
Speaker 1: Now, you still have more volunteer hours that you put out.  Tell me about your organizations that you, the two that you volunteer for.
Speaker 2: I volunteer for the American Red Cross, and I think I covered all the church, the church activities; the, the part I didn't mention was the fact that I'm currently vice president of Province VII of the Episcopal church, which includes--Province VII covers most of Texas and the Rio Grande [Episcopal Diocese of the Rio Grande] and western Louisiana and Arkansas and Oklahoma and parts of Kansas, and so we cover the diocese in those areas.  And I also serve on the cultural (unclear) committee at the--for the Diocese of Texas [Episcopal Diocese of Texas] and--where we try and deal with issues of color.  It started actually a number of years ago when a previous bishop asked me to head up and chair antiracism taskforce to look at those issues within the Episcopal church, and that was an extension actually from the national church, where it became a, a, a mandate from the national church down to all Episcopal churches to start to address the issue of antiracism, and so that's been a big effort that's been going on, and I still have been involved in that.  And I sit on two boards of--one is a homeless ministry in Midtown Houston [Texas], and another one is an outreach clinic in Galveston Island [Texas], and I'm currently president on both those boards in those two loca- those two locations.
Story_ID: 531825
Speaker 1: And then there's the American Red Cross, which I more recently, within the last few years, volunteer to do volunteer work, and I oversee their damage assessment program, but I don't have to go to work there until, unfortunately, there's a big disaster--a flood or a hurricane comes to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, did you work during Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did work during that time period in the, in the Houston [Texas] office in--and working in damage assessment, and most of that involves--is sending out volunteers--they're all volunteers--volunteer crews to go out in the neighborhoods and inspect homes for damage, and we have to assess the degree of damage.  And the one thing that--and I never knew this before, until I really got involved in the Red Cross--when people talk about wanting to give--get financial assistance for their homes, is--until those damage assessments reports are done, those inspections are done by Red Cross chapters, that information is fed into FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], and it's that information that is needed before the first penny gets cut, and so it makes it real critical in terms of how fast we get somebody out to inspect the home and then get the reports written up and get them into the system so that people can start receiving a--and so--
Speaker 2: You think the Red Cross got a bad rap during Katrina?
Speaker 1: I think it did; it's sort of like--it was unfair.  The one thing a lot of people don't realize, but the Red Cross is just--it consists of volunteers.  There's very few paid people in the Red Cross, and--but the people who are doing the bulk of the work are volunteers, and they train to the best they can; they put in long hours, they get very little recognition for it, and it's, it's just people volunteering trying to do the best they can.  I think the system is sort of what--the way the system is set up, it gets so bureaucratic and it gets bogged down in its bureaucracy, and that's where the bad rap, so to speak, comes from.  I guess it, it, it still bothers me to this day to, to read a story or an article about what's still going on in Louisiana, and it just makes me wanna go out and, and slice through some of this red tape that it gets bogged down in.  And I think it, it stems to a lack of leadership, it's a lack of leadership from the top.  I learned that in plenty of organizations.  If the person at the top says, "Enough of this," and, "It is not gonna happen," then until that happens, it won't change.  And again, I learned that in the [U.S.] military, and it's real simple; either you get the job done, or you're fired and I'll get somebody else to do it.  And if that person can't do it, they'll be out of the way and I'll get another person to do it.
Story_ID: 531826
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you wanna talk about that we haven't talked about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my volunteer activities?
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: I didn't throw a football, did I (laughter)?
Speaker 1: That's right!  Tell me about football.
Speaker 2: That's a hobby, though; that's a long, old hobby.
Speaker 1: That's a hobby; okay, well that's a hobby, okay, that's fine.
Speaker 2: That's a hobby that started way back when--shortly after I moved to Connecticut, and I always had this aspiration that I wanted to be a football official but I never--I procrastinated and never had the time and--but when I moved to Connecticut, I happened to be talking to somebody and it turned out to be a football official in the room, and he was a former college official in a conference on the East Coast and who was--I think he's still doing some college in, in high school.  And he said, "You're interested?"  I said, "Yeah." So he dragged me to a meeting and got me started, and I've been with it ever since, and once I got to Texas, I got picked up as a college official on the SWAC, the Southwest Athletic Conference [sic. Southwestern Athletic Conference], which is a conference covering black schools in Texas--Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] over in Louisiana, and Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and a number of other schools.  And I was a, a--worked that job under one real tough black supervisor officials (laughter) and, and then I left that conference and joined Conference USA and worked at that conference for several years, and they covered school predominantly in the southeast quadrant going all the way up to the military academies and over toward mid- part of the Midwest, down into Florida and, and then retired from that a few years ago and--but still doing high school football to this day.
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the games that you officiated while in conferences?
Speaker 2: Well, probably my most memorable game was my very first game; I worked at Conference USA, which was University of South Florida [Tampa, Florida]; they played Wesleyan [Kentucky Wesleyan College, Owensboro, Kentucky], and it was played in Tampa [Florida], and it was played at Tampa Bucs' old stadium [Tampa Stadium, Tampa, Florida].  And it was my first game, but it was also the inaugural game for the University of South Florida, and over forty thousand people showed up for the game and I was the line judge at the time--head linesman--and it was, it was an amazing game, huge. A lot of people there.  And then I came back two years later and did another game in the new Tampa Bay stadium [Raymond James Stadium, Tampa, Florida], which was built right next to the old stadium, and in that game it was University of South Florida playing Southwest Texas [Southwest Texas State University; Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas], and that was a big game.
Speaker 1: And so now it's high school?
Speaker 2: Just high school (laughter).
Story_ID: 531827
Speaker 1: Now, I- I know I see pictures of children, so we kind of left that out, so tell me about your children.
Speaker 2: Well, our first child was adopted back in Albion--Albion, Michigan.  When me and my wife [Deborah A. Patterson] were living in Albion, we adopted our first child, and then when we moved to Connecticut, we adopted our second child, Aaron [Aaron Patterson], and he was born in Connecticut.  Jessica [Jessica Patterson], the first one, was born in, in, in Michigan, and then, lo and behold, our third child was natural born, and I helped to deliver her at Hartford Hospital in Connecticut [Hartford, Connecticut], and then when we moved to Texas we had one more that came along; the fourth one, the youngest one, Rachel [Rachel Patterson], and I helped deliver her, too, and she was born in a hospital in, in Beaumont, Texas.  And I say I helped deliver because I was there during the entire time period with my wife during the labor, and I was there when the child came out, and I clamped the cord and cut the cord (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are they doing today?
Speaker 2: Jessica is working here in, in Houston [Texas] and lives up near us in Spring, Texas and has a six year old that's very entertaining (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's the name?
Speaker 2: And that's Ashley [ph.].  And, and then the next one, Aaron--Aaron is in Chicago [Illinois], and he works for an IT [information technology] company doing IT--he works for a financial services company but he works in IT, but he works online because he's working--he's back in school up in the Chicago area; wants to get a advanced degree in psychology.  And Laurel [Laurel Patterson] just recently graduated from Colorado State University [Fort Collins, Colorado] and she's living in Fort Collins, Colorado, and she is a program coordinator over an Upward Bound program at the University of Northern Colorado [Greeley, Colorado].  And actually, she got that job by mistake; she was also an RA [resident assistant] and--while going to school at Colorado State and took on a job, a summer job, at University of Northern Colorado as an RA for the summer in the Upward Bound program, and they liked her so well, and she was finishing up her undergrad's degree, they offered her a full-time job to stay on and take over as program coordinator.  And then the youngest, the last one, is Rachel, who is a student at University of Houston right here in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 531828
Speaker 1: Now, if you would, talk about some of the awards and recognitions that you have received.
Speaker 2: Oh, over the years?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's hard to keep track of how many.  I guess the--one of the most memorable ones is when I was asked to come back to Connecticut and attend a ceremony that was before the Connecticut Supreme Court during Law Day, honoring people who had contribute, and it, it was tied into the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision over--
Speaker 1: Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]?
Speaker 2: Brown versus--
Speaker 1: The Board of Education.
Speaker 2: The Board of Education.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And it was right around the fiftieth anniversary of that, and so being one of the first black police chiefs in, in Connecticut, and my involvement in the various police associations in community, I was--had the honor of going back and being recognized for that, along with some other outstanding dignitaries.  Other recognitions--received a number of decorations in the [U.S.] military. And prob- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were in the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve], too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the reserve; was decorated a couple times in the reserve for duty performance.  Probably the one that sticks out the most in the military was a, a Bronze Star [Bronze Star Medal].  No, it wasn't a Bronze Star; I got three of those, but it was a, an Army Commendation Medal with a V for valor, and I got that when I was going to one of the southern districts of Vietnam, and there was a, a Cobra [Bell AH-1 Cobra] helicopter gun ship that had been hit and that came in, and it had been shot down, and me and a couple of other people, two Special Forces [U.S. Army Special Forces] troopers, went in and, and pulled them out of the helicopter and put them on another rescue helicopter coming in, in an area that probably most people wouldn't wanna be, be in and around and ended up being written up and being recognized for it.  Almost caused a problem trying to get the reward because I was--not many people knew my real rank, and they had to change a lot of the paperwork around so I can actually get it, and then I had to drive through some hostile area to get back up to the main base because where I was at, they didn't know my real rank so they couldn't give me the award, even though they'd put me in for it, and so--it was a long story, but I end up getting it (laughter).
Story_ID: 531829
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I think probably the, the, the, the one message, if there's a message here that comes out, is that, particularly, it's more for a younger person coming up, and it's that you don't give up, you know.  I look back at where I was in high school [Samuel C. Mumford High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I could have very easily given up; my grades weren't that great, and even one of--my first run at college [Ferris State College; Ferris State University, Big Rapids, Michigan], you know, I flunked out; I won't say I dropped out--I flunked out.  But I, I, I came back, and it--you never know who can help you, and it's maintaining relationships and, and staying in contact with people.  We can all help each other, and you should keep trying and never give up, and don't become--feel--get defeated.  I managed to make it through college and get two degrees I never thought I would get, and managed to go through a, a war [Vietnam War] for a year and, and come back and still be alive and go up and get the jobs that I've gotten as a result of, you know--part of--the big part is education; the degree definitely helps, and friends definitely help.  And having the commitment to stay and do the right job also helps, so just--you can do it.  You just have to have the mind and the will.
Story_ID: 531830
Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I wanna be missed.  I would say that would be it--I wanna be missed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, if that's all we need to talk about, we wanna thank you from The HistoryMakers for taking the time to sit down and do this interview, so thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you for asking me.
Story_ID: 531831
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, the description for the stadium, sir.
Speaker 2: The stadium is the game between University of South Florida [Tampa, Florida] and Wesleyan [Kentucky Wesleyan College, Owensboro, Kentucky] in 1990--
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 2: Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now, did you also wanna do the one above it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The one above it is of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The one above it is at the--again, it was University of South Florida playing Southwest Texas [Southwest Texas State University; Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas] at the new Tampa Bay Bucs stadium [Raymond James Stadium, Tampa, Florida] in 1999.
Speaker 1: So, that's you in the background.
Speaker 2: And that's me in the umpire's position in the background.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next. Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's position--a picture of myself in meeting former President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] when he attended the--or he was the speaker at a pension conference--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Year?
Speaker 2: --in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Estimate, if not.
Speaker 2: That would have been about one, two, three, four or five years ago, which make it about '02 [2002].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of a--of me meeting former President Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] at a pension conference in Florida, and that picture is--would have been back in about 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, that picture is with me and Governor O'Neill [William O'Neill] when he was signing a, a pension bill; legislation had been approved in the Connecticut legislature.  That was taken in Hartford, Connecticut in the governor's office.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Approximate date?
Speaker 1: There's a date on that one, I believe; up in the upper left hand corner is a date in there, or didn't he date on there?  That would have been--let's see, that would have been in 19--about 1981.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father [Harry Patterson, Sr.] in the upper left corner, and the rest of them are my uncles and aunts and--with my grandfather in the middle.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is a picture that was taken in the Blue Room of the White House [Washington, D.C.] when I concluded a three year program working on the Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program, and the three people with me are all Vietnam [Vietnam War] vets that had also worked with the program with me in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That picture is the first year of the--when I worked on the Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program, and it was taken with President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in the Rose Garden, and the other people in the picture were all Vietnam vets, highly more decorated than I was.  And one of those was Congressional Medal of Honor winner; I can't remember which one, though.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of my two brothers and my sister, and my youngest brother Michael [Michael Patterson] on the far right, and my older brother sitting next to my mother [Myra Howard Patterson] in the middle, which is Harry [Harry Patterson, Jr.], and my sister Laverne [Laverne Patterson], and my mother next to me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And--I don't know what year that picture is; that's a young picture of my mother.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of my grandmother on my mother's side, Hattie Howard.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of myself in the middle, flanked by my brother Harry and my sister Laverne, and I'm not sure how old I was in that picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a old picture of my mother and my father.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture that was taken with then-Governor George Bush [President George Walker Bush] at the Capitol in Austin [Texas State Capitol, Austin, Texas] when I was the executive director of the Houston Firefighters' Retirement Fund [Houston Firefighters' Relief and Retirement Fund], and he was signing a pension bill that we had gotten through the legislature that year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a darling picture of me when I was a baby (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --I like that picture.
Speaker 1: And that was a picture of me and my brother Harry when we played in the Trinity Youth Center band in front of my dad's car.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's just a picture of me by myself, leaning against my dad's car wearing the uniform and holding my clarinet.
